SANTA ANA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
CITY OF 
SANTA ANA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
ADOPTED, DECEMBER 1, 1969 
EFFECTIVE, DECEMBER 31, 1969 
OPERATIVE, DECEMBER 31, 1969 
____________ 
PUBLISHED 2007 BY ORDER OF THE CITY COUNCIL 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SANTA ANA, CALIFORNIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
LORIN GRISET 
Mayor 
____________ 
WADE HERRIN 
WALTER BROOKS 
VERNON S. EVANS 
J. OGDEN MARKEL 
JERRY M. PATTERSON 
RAY VILLA 
Councilmen 
____________ 
FLORENCE I. MALONE 
Clerk of the Council 
____________ 
WILLIAM L. MOCK 
City Attorney 
____________ 
CARL J. THORNTON 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
This Code is a revision and codification of all Ordinances of a general and permanent nature which were deemed advisable to be retained. 
This Code is an entire new ordinance, and, as expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, supersedes all previous ordinances not included herein or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. This Code contains only ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the city, rather than all of them or relating to special purposes, such as the ordinances levying special assessments, providing for bond issues, paving, vacating and opening specified streets, etc., are not included herein. For a more specific enumeration of the type of ordinances which are not included herein, see Section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. All the ordinances have been classified as to subject matter, edited, revised and in many instances completely rewritten. New words and phrases and even whole sections have been added to make this Code comprehensive in scope and lucid in meaning. 
As it will be noted, the chapters have been conveniently arranged under applicable titles and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Attention is also directed to the appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which also refer to relevant state laws. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 16 is 16-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections, that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5, is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2 and 4-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a fractional number after the chapter number, i.e., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12½. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
All historical citations of a section herein where such citation is to a section of the 1952 Santa Ana Municipal Code which has been amended, the section number changed by amendment, or the section added by amendment; the code section number indicated is the number assigned in the amendatory ordinance; e.g. "Code 1952, § 3317; Ord. No. NS-00", where an ordinance number 00 of the new series may have repealed a Section 3217 and enacted a Section 3317 in lieu thereof, the original section number 3217 is not indicated. 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the innovation of the looseleaf system of binding and up-keep servicing of the ordinances. With this new looseleaf system, the Code of Ordinances will be kept up-to-date continuously. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page affected reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting and deleting the obsolete pages. To each such amendment will be attached an editorial footnote explaining briefly the effect of the amendment on the section or sections amended and the derivation of such amendment. Each such subsequent amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof as provided in Section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintaining of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing the same, and in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The general index to the Code has been prepared with the greatest care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Time and effort have not been spared in the preparation of this Code and the publishers are most grateful to Joseph W. Fletcher, City Attorney, and Ms. Patricia E. Healy, Clerk of the Council, for their cooperation and untiring efforts during the progress of the editorial work. 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Specialist, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. 
This Code of Ordinances is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of Santa Ana. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
July 2007 
ORDINANCE NS-990 
Adopting and Enacting a Code of Ordinances for the City of Santa Ana, California, Which Code Shall Be Known as the Santa Ana Municipal Code, and Establishing the Same, Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein Except as Herein Expressly Provided, Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective and Operative . 
The City Council of the City of Santa Ana Does Ordain as Follows : 
SECTION 1: That this Ordinance, consisting of Chapters 1 to 41, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "SANTA ANA MUNICIPAL CODE" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances passed by the City Council prior to September 16, 1968, except such as by reference are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
SECTION 2: That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from the date this Ordinance becomes operative as hereinafter set forth, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Santa Ana, enacted on final passage on or before September 16, 1968, and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the operative date of this Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. No resolution of the City is hereby repealed unless specifically mentioned. 
SECTION 3: That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following types of ordinances: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the operative date of this Ordinance; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(4)  Any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the City Council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating or repairing any street or public way in the City; 
(6)  The annual appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(8)  Any zoning ordinance or any amendment to such zoning ordinance on file in the office of the Clerk of the Council; 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the City. 
Such repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. Each of the above mentioned ordinances shall in no way be repealed by this Code except as the same may be in conflict with the provisions of this Code. 
SECTION 4: Any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "SANTA ANA MUNICIPAL CODE" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
SECTION 5: A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk of the Council, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the Clerk of the Council may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the Clerk of the Council or someone authorized by her, to insert in their proper places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the City Council. Said copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of the City of Santa Ana, and any copy of such Code certified by the Clerk of the Council shall be the official SANTA ANA MUNICIPAL CODE at the date of such certification. 
SECTION 6: In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-8 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
SECTION 7: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Santa Ana to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
SECTION 8: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed as of the operative date of this Ordinance but shall remain in full force and effect until such date. 
SECTION 9: That this Ordinance shall take effect thirty days from and after the date of its adoption. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Santa Ana at its regular meeting held on the 1st day of December, 1969. 
ATTEST: 
/s/ LORIN GRISET 
Mayor 
/s/ FLORENCE I. MALONE 
Clerk of the Council 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ) 
COUNTY OF ORANGE ) ss 
CITY OF SANTA ANA ) 
I, FLORENCE I. MALONE, do hereby certify that I am the Clerk of the Council of the City of Santa Ana; that the foregoing Ordinance was introduced to said Council at its regular meeting held on the 3rd day of November, 1969, and was again considered by said Council at its regular meeting held on the 1st day of December, 1969, and was at said meeting passed and adopted by the following vote, to wit: 
AYES, COUNCILMEN: Herrin, Brooks, Evans, Patterson, Villa, Griset 
NOES, COUNCILMEN: Markel 
ABSENT, COUNCILMEN: None 
/s/ FLORENCE I. MALONE 
Clerk of the Council 
The foregoing instrument is a full, true, and correct copy of the original on file in this office. 
Attest: December 3,1969 
Florence I. Malone, Clerk of the Council, City of Santa Ana 
/s/ FLORENCE I. MALONE 
By ___________ 
Deputy 
(Seal)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Santa Ana Municipal Code" and may be so cited. 
Charter reference— Authority to codify ordinances, § 419. 
State Law reference— For authority of cities to adopt codes by reference, procedure for adoption and amending, see §§ 50022.1—50022.8, Gov. Code.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall obtain, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of California. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Orange, in the State of California. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Santa Ana, California" followed it and shall extend to and include its several departments, commissions, agencies, officers, agents and employees. 
Amendments. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto. 
City council. Whenever the words "city council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
City officials, boards, or commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions or other such bodies by title only, i.e., "clerk of the council," "personnel board," etc., they shall refer to the officials, boards, commissions, etc., of the City of Santa Ana. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
Code. Wherever reference is made herein to "the Code" or "this Code," e.g., in section 1-8 providing a penalty for violation of the Code, it shall include any secondary Code adopted by reference the same as though such secondary Code had been set forth in full in this Code of Ordinances. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Goods includes wares and merchandise. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any specific provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by this Code or any secondary Code adopted by reference, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Numbering system. The number to the left of the hyphen shall refer to the chapter number, and the number to the right of the hyphen shall refer to the section within the chapter. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Operate includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, co-partnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or land, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, co-partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals, including the officers of such associations, corporations, etc. 
Personal property includes every species of property except real property. 
Sale includes any exchange or barter. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
Street [1] includes all highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Code 1952, §§ 1300, 1304—1306, 1309—1317, 1319—1326) 
Charter reference— For rules of construction of terms used in the charter, see § 1502. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Definition of "streets and other public property in the city" as used in the punishment provisions, § 1-9; definition of "streets" for zoning purposes, § 41-154; definition for CATV purposes, § 15-250. 
 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1952, § 1301)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declare unconstitutional, invalid, illegal or unenforceable for any reason, by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to passage of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, is hereby amended to read as follows: …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Santa Ana Municipal Code, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: …" The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Charter reference— For requirement that amendatory ordinances set forth the new section in full, see § 418. 
Cross reference— For explanation of the numbering system, see the Preface.  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Santa Ana to be misrepresented thereby.  
Sec. 1-8. - Violations—General penalty; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonment; alternative enforcement. 
Unless otherwise specifically stated in this Code, it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided therefor in this Code, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this Code may, at his or her discretion, be prosecuted by the city attorney and cited by the issuing officer as an infraction. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
As an alternative enforcement method, violations of this Code may be addressed through the use of an administrative citation as set forth in sections 1-21.1 through 1-21.9. Use of sections 1-21.1 through 1-21.9 shall not prevent the use of other methods of enforcement or abatement as provided by this Code. Such methods include but are not limited to criminal and civil actions. 
(Code 1952, § 1200; Ord. No. NS-1799, § 1, 10-14-85; Ord. No. NS-2423, § 2, 4-17-00; Ord. No. NS-2674, § 2, 2-7-05; Ord. No. NS-2876, § 3, 3-13-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2882, § 3, 9-1-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2882, § 3, adopted September 1, 2015 , amended § 1-8 to read as set out herein. Previously § 1-8 was titled "Violations—General penalties; continuing violations; fines; alternative enforcement." 
Charter reference— For authority, see § 420; similar punishment for violating charter, § 1501. 
State Law reference— For authority to make and enforce local, police, sanitary and other regulations not in conflict with general laws, see § 11, art. 11, Const.  
Sec. 1-9. - Same—Labor upon public works. 
Persons confined in the city jail under a final judgment of imprisonment for violation of any ordinance may be required by the chief of police to perform labor on the streets or other public property or works within the city. 
For the purposes of this section the phrase "streets or other public property or works within the city" shall include, among other things, clerical and menial labor in the city jail, or in any camp maintained for the labor of such persons on the streets or other public property or works within the city. 
(Code 1952, §§ 1202, 1203)  
Sec. 1-10. - Same—Administrative provisions. 
The violation of any administrative provisions of this Code by any officer or employee of the city may be deemed a failure to perform the duties under, or to observe the rules and regulations of the department, office or board, within the meaning of the civil service ordinances and rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 1204)  
Sec. 1-11. - Same—Reference to acts or omissions within this city. 
This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. 
(Code 1952, § 1302)  
Sec. 1-12. - Same—Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, or suffering. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, the permitting, suffering, or concealing such act or omission shall each constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1952, § 1303)  
Sec. 1-13. - Same—Abatement as nuisance; special assessment; attorneys' fees. 
(a)  Public nuisance abatement. In addition to the penalties provided in this Code, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, uniform or adopted codes, or any provision of state or federal law that may be enforced by the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated as such by filing criminal or civil actions, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(b)  Recovery of attorneys' fees authorized. The prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance may recover its reasonable attorneys' fees, provided that the city elected, at the initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own attorneys' fees. In no judicial action or administrative proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the judicial action or administrative proceeding. A judicial action includes, but is not limited to, any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant, administrative proceeding, or appeal from an administrative proceeding. "Abatement" shall include any action taken by the city to cause or otherwise obtain compliance with this municipal code or other codes, as specified herein, even if the violation is ultimately corrected by the violator. Any recovery of attorneys' fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1952, § 1201; Ord. No. NS-2876, § 4, 3-13-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2876, § 4, adopted March 13, 2015, amended the title of § 1-13 to read as set out herein. Previously § 1-13 was titled "Same—Abatement as nuisance."  
Sec. 1-14. - Notices—Service. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit thereof in the United States mail, in a scaled envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Code 1952, § 1307)  
Sec. 1-15. - Same—Proof. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Code 1952, § 1308)  
Sec. 1-16. - Same—Imprisonment in county jail. 
Any person arrested for violation of a city ordinance and imprisoned pending trial, and any person sentenced to imprisonment for a violation of a city ordinance shall be imprisoned in the county jail of Orange County. 
(Code 1952, § 3805; Ord. No. NS-192, § 1, 7-2-56)  
Sec. 1-17. - Criminal conduct; issuance of licenses and permits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, conviction (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere) of an applicant, if an individual, or any officer or director or ten (10) percent shareholder of a corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any activity related to the business or occupation for which the license or permit is sought, shall be prima facie disqualification of an application for the following city licenses or permits: 
(1)  Bingo; 
(2)  Public dancing; 
(3)  Peep show; 
(4)  Massage establishment; massage technician; 
(5)  Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers; 
(6)  Charitable solicitation; 
(7)  Pool and billiard games; 
(8)  Companies and individuals engaged in operating vehicles for hire, including, but not limited to taxicabs and ambulances; 
(9)  Figure model; figure model studio. 
(b)  The city licensing authority, however, may disregard such conviction if it is found and determined by such licensing authority that mitigating circumstances exist. In making such determination, the city licensing authority shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The type of license or permit for which the person is applying; 
(2)  The nature and seriousness of the offense; 
(3)  The circumstances surrounding the conviction; 
(4)  The length of time elapsed since the conviction; 
(5)  The age of the person at the time of the conviction; 
(6)  The presence or absence of rehabilitation or efforts at rehabilitation; 
(7)  Contributing social or environmental conditions. 
(c)  The city licensing authority shall give notice of disqualification to an applicant disqualified under this provision. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered personally or mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application and shall specify the reason or reasons for disqualification, including, but not by way of limitation, the conviction or convictions deemed disqualifying by the licensing authority. An applicant who is disqualified for a city license or permit may appeal such determination of disqualification pursuant to the uniform hearing and appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(d)  Pursuant to Sections 11105 and 13300 of the Penal Code of the State of California, the following officers of the city are hereby authorized to have access to and utilize state summary criminal history information and local summary criminal history information: 
(1)  City manager; 
(2)  Assistant city manager; 
(3)  Chief of police; 
(4)  City attorney; 
(5)  Members of the city council; 
(6)  Hearing officers appointed by the city council. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall supplement those provisions of the Code requiring the licenses and permits set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1357, § 1, 5-24-77; Ord. No. NS-1437, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 1-18. - Fire department authority to issue citations. 
Fire department personnel have the duty to enforce the following provisions: 
(1)  The provisions of Chapter 14 of this Code, including, but not limited to the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended by Article I of said chapter; and 
(2)  The provisions of Division 11 (commencing with Section 12000) and Division 12 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and the regulations adopted by the state fire marshal pursuant to said divisions; 
(3)  The provisions of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with section 25280) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and Section 24800 of said Health and Safety Code as it pertains to said Chapter 6.7; and 
(4)  The provisions of Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and Section 24800 of said Health and Safety Code as it pertains to said Chapter 6.95; 
and are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C Title III of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
(Ord. No. NS-1689, § 1, 7-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1727, § 3, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-1774, § 1, 5-20-85; Ord. No. NS-1857, § 2, 7-21-86) 
Note— Ord. No. NS-1412, § 1, amended this Code by adding provisions designated as § 1-18 which provisions were redesignated by the city as § 1-20 inasmuch as § 1-18 had already been added to the Code by Ord. No. NS-1380, enacted Jan. 16, 1978.  
Sec. 1-18.1. - Planning and building agency authority to issue citations. 
The executive director of the planning and building agency, the planning manager, the building safety manager, community preservation inspectors, code enforcement inspectors, senior building inspectors, and building inspectors have the duty to enforce the following provisions of this Code: Chapter 8, 10, 16-18, 21, 26, 36, and Chapter 41. The above listed officers and employees also have the duty to enforce sections 27551, 27671 and 27672 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California with respect to sales of food from vehicles. The above listed officers and employees shall also have the duty to enforce permit parking districts established by the city. The above-listed officers and employees are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section, and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C, Title III, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.5). 
(Ord. No. NS-1689, § 2, 7-5-83; Ord. No. NS-2133, § 2, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2212, § 5, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2241, § 2, 10-5-94; Ord. No. NS-2251, § 4, 6-5-95; Ord. No. NS-2294, § 2, 11-18-96; Ord. No. NS-2440, § 3, 9-5-00; Ord. No. NS-2655, § 2, 7-6-04; Ord. No. NS-2701, § 9, 11-7-05; Ord. No. NS-2901, § 2, 6-21-16 )  
Sec. 1-18.2. - Public works agency authority to issue citations. 
The executive director of public works agency or his designee has the duty to enforce the provisions of sections 10-26, 10-27, 10-71 and 10-100, 16-1 through 16-4, 16-30, 16-31, 16-33 through 16-37.5, 16-39, 16-48, 18-17, 36-148, 33-30, 33-60, 33-62, 33-152, 33-157, 33-162, 33-188, 33-189 through 33-192, 36-45, 36-46, 39-24, and 39-106 through 39-111, chapter 17 and provisions of article IV of chapter 18 of this Code. The executive director of the public works agency or his designee is authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C, Title III, of part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
(Ord. No. NS-1689, § 3, 7-5-83; Ord. No. NS-2207, § 1, 11-1-93; Ord. No. NS-2328, § 27, 7-21-97; Ord. No. NS-2414, § 7, 12-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2440, § 4, 9-5-00; Ord. No. NS-2520, § 3, 1-6-03; Ord. No. NS-2670, § 3, 11-15-04; Ord. No. NS-2720, § 4, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2921, § 10, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 1-18.3. - Recreation, parks and community services authority to issue citations. 
The director of recreation, parks and community services and park rangers employed within the department of recreation, parks and community services have the duty to enforce the provisions of Chapter 31 and Article VIII of Chapter 10 of this Code where the director has maintenance responsibility, and are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of such provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, such officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C, Title III, of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
(Ord. No. NS-1689, § 4, 7-5-83; Ord. No. NS-2160, § 2, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 1-18.4. - Community development agency authority to issue citations. 
The executive director of the community development agency or designee has the duty to enforce the following provisions of this Code: sections 10-26, 10-27, 10-100, 10-141, 10-142, 16-1—16-6, 26-6, 36-130—36-138, and 41-1020—41-1040. The executive director of the community development agency or designee is authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section, and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the executive director of the community development agency or designee shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C, Title III, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.5). 
(Ord. No. NS-2644, § 2, 3-15-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2644, § 2, adopted March 15, 2004, amended § 1-18.4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 1-18.4 pertained to downtown development manager authority to issue citations and derived from Ord. No. NS-2179, § 1, adopted December 7, 1992.  
Sec. 1-19. - Time limit for seeking review of administrative determinations; cost of record. 
(a)  Limitations on action. Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision made pursuant to this Code relating to any right or entitlement allowed or authorized by this Code, including, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances, minor exception, code compliance certificate, certificates of appropriateness, interpretations of the planning manager, and each and every other permit, entitlement, revocation, or grant allowed or authorized by this Code, and decisions to change a district classification, or use or development regulation, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days and the board or final decision-maker is served within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of the decision or of the proceedings, acts, or determinations. Provided, however, that challenges to determinations made pursuant to the California Subdivision Map Act shall be governed by the provisions of Government Code § 65499.37, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Exhaustion of administrative remedies. Nothing in this section shall relieve a person desiring to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision or the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision from their obligation to exhaust their administrative remedies prior to commencing any action or proceeding. 
(c)  Limitations on issues. In an action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul a finding, determination, or decision made pursuant to this title at a properly noticed public hearing, the issues raised shall be limited to those raised in the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the city prior to, or at, the public hearing, except where the court finds either of the following: 
(1)  The issue could not have been raised at the public hearing by persons exercising reasonable diligence; 
(2)  The body conducting the public hearing prevented the issue from being raised at the public hearing. 
These limitations shall apply only if the public notice issued pursuant to this title contains substantially the notice set forth in Government Code § 65009(B)(2), or in any successor section enacted after the effective date of this section. 
(d)  Notice of determination. Notice of the decision-maker's decision and its written findings shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid and including a copy of an affidavit or certificate of mailing, to the applicant and any interested person. Such notice shall include direct notice that the time within which judicial review of the decision must be sought is governed by Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6. 
(e)  Cost of preparation. The actual cost of preparing the record, including, but not limited to, exhibits and transcripts, shall be borne by the person requesting the record. No written request for a record of proceedings shall be deemed filed with the city unless and until such person has deposited with the city the estimated cost of preparation thereof, as determined by the officer responsible for such preparation, with the difference, if any, from actual costs to be paid or refunded at the time of delivery of the record to such person. 
(Ord. No. NS-1391, § 1, 11-21-77; Ord. No. NS-1569, 3-16-81; Ord. No. NS-1676, § 1, 4-4-83; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 9, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 1-20. - Ownership of vehicles and vessels as prima facie evidence. 
(a)  In any prosecution for violation of section 41-1301 against the registered owner of a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the complaint was in violation of such section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the person who placed the vehicle or vessel at the point, where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. The foregoing provisions shall apply only when the notice procedure as established by California Vehicle Code Section 40200 et seq., as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended, is complied with. 
(b)  Any charge under section 41-1301 shall be dismissed when the person charged has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle or vessel and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser and has complied with the requirements of subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 5602 or subdivisions (a) or (b) of Section 9905 of the California Vehicle Code prior to the date of the alleged violation and has advised the court of the name and address of the purchaser, and of the date of sale. 
(Ord. No. NS-1412, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-2152, § 1, 12-2-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1412, § 1, amended this Code by adding provisions designated as § 1-18 which provisions were redesignated by the city as § 1-20 inasmuch as § 1-18 had already been added to the Code by Ord. No. NS-1380, enacted Jan. 16, 1978.  
Sec. 1-21. - Violations—Administrative citations.  
Sec. 1-21.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Responsible person. A responsible person is any of the following: 
(1)  A person who causes a Code violation to occur. 
(2)  A person who maintains or allows a Code violation to continue, by his or her action or failure to act. 
(3)  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a Code violation by its action or failure to act. 
(4)  A person who is the owner of, and/or a person who is a lessee or sub lessee with the current right of possession of, real property where a property-related Code violation occurs. 
(5)  A person who is the on-site manager of a business who normally works daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities of such premises. 
For the purposes of this section "person" includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity. 
(b)  Enforcement officer. Any police officer or city employee or agent of the city designated by the director of any city department which has the authority and responsibility to enforce provisions as set forth in sections 1-18 through 1-18.4 and section 5.2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00; Ord. No. NS-2484, § 2, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 1-21.2. - Use of the administrative citation. 
The procedures established in this section may be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code. The use of the administrative citation in place of other remedies shall be at the sole discretion of the enforcement officer. Issuance of an administrative citation shall not be deemed a waiver of any other enforcement remedies found within this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.3. - Fines. 
(a)  The amount of fines for violating provisions of the code shall be established and amended by resolution of the city council. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat code violations occurring within specified periods of time. 
(b)  Fines are due on the day specified in the administrative citation, or in the event of an appeal, as determined by the hearing officer. 
(c)  The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation may result in the matter being referred for collection which includes but is not limited to the filing of a small claims court action and/or a special assessment and/or lien on real property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00; Ord. No. NS-2845, § 3, 7-1-13)  
Sec. 1-21.4. - Waiver of fine. 
If an administrative citation is issued for a violation which is continuing and pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues and which does not create an immediate danger to health and safety, a reasonable period of time shall be given to the responsible party to correct the violation. If the violation is remedied prior to the expiration of the correction period no fine shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.5. - Contents of citation. 
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
(2)  The Code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s); 
(3)  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
(4)  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid; 
(5)  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; 
(6)  The name and signature of the enforcement officer issuing the citation; and 
(7)  If the violation is one which is continuing, an order to correct the violation and an explanation of the consequences for failing to correct the violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.6. - Service procedures. 
In any case where an administrative citation is issued: 
(1)  Personal service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
(2)  Service of citation by mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.7. - Satisfaction of the administrative citation. 
Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following: 
(1)  Pay the fine to the city within fifteen (15) days from the date of the citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the Santa Ana Finance Department. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge a failure to correct continuing violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
(2)  If the violation was one which pertained to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues and did not create an immediate danger to health and safety and was corrected within the time given no fine shall be imposed. If the responsible person fails to correct such violation all fines must be paid within fifteen (15) days of the correction date and subsequent administration citations may be issued for the same violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.8. - Appeal of the administrative citation. 
(1)  Time to file an appeal. Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Santa Ana Municipal Code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a "request for hearing" form and returning it to the city within fifteen (15) days from the date the administrative citation is served or deemed to have been served, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. Such "request for hearing" forms shall be made available at no charge by the planning and building agency. A failure to file a timely "request for hearing" shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the citation and to seek judicial review. 
(2)  Return of deposit. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. 
(3)  Hearing officer. The Santa Ana City Manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. 
(4)  Hearing procedure. 
a.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a timely "request for hearing" form has been completed and submitted, and, the fine has been deposited in advance. 
b.  After receipt of the "request for hearing" and fine deposit, a hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the "request for hearing" is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and be a bar to judicial review of the hearing officer decision based upon a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
c.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation of the municipal Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
d.  The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
e.  The administrative citation and any additional document submitted by the issuing officer/employee shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
f.  Upon request, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the issuing officer/employee when issuing the citation. In addition, if the issuing officer/employee submits any additional written reports concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of said documentation also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing. 
g.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the issuing officer/employee or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(5)  Hearing officer's decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may immediately issue a verbal decision or may issue a written decision within ten (10) days of the hearing. The decision shall include the reasons for the decision and such decision shall be final. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
(6)  Collection of unpaid fines. Failure to pay the assessed administrative fine within fifteen (15) days or such other time limit set forth in the administrative citation, and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely appeal as provided in section 1-21.9, this obligation shall constitute a special assessment and/or lien against the real property on which the violation occurred. The special assessment and/or lien shall be imposed pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 17, Article III of this Code. Alternatively, the matter may be referred for collection, which includes but is not limited to the filing of a small claims court action. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Sec. 1-21.9. - Right to judicial review. 
Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an appeal to be heard in the Superior Court of California, County of Orange within twenty (20) days of the decision or service thereof. Such appeal shall be filed in the Central Justice Center located at 700 Civic Center Drive, Santa Ana, California and shall be completed pursuant to California Government Code section 53069.4. The appeal filed with the court must also contain a proof of service showing a copy of the appeal was served upon "City of Santa Ana (Attention: City Attorney)." If the court finds in favor of the contestant the amount of the filing fee, not to exceed twenty-five ($25.00), as well as any fine deposit shall be paid to the contestant by the City of Santa Ana. No other fees or costs shall be paid unless ordered by the court. 
(Ord. No. NS-2423, § 3, 4-17-00)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Housing commission, Ch. 6; civil service, Ch. 9; funds, Ch. 13; health facilities financing, Ch. 19; special tax financing improvement code, Ch. 20; planning, Ch. 27; industrial development bonds, Ch. 28; taxation, Ch. 35. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2963 , § 2, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 2-1. Former § 2-1 pertained to city manager's authority and derived from Ord. No. NS-1294, adopted February 17, 1976; Ord. No. NS-1477, adopted April 16, 1979; Ord. No. NS-1682, adopted May 16, 1982; Ord. No. NS-2037, adopted November 20, 1989; and Ord. No. NS-2742, adopted May 7, 2007. Similar provisions can be found in § 2-748. 
Cross reference— City manager's authority re purchasing, § 2-801.  
Sec. 2-2. - Confidential matters. 
(a)  No city council member who obtains the private residential address or telephone number of any city officer or employee from city personnel records shall use such address or telephone number to advance the private interests of themselves or others, including, but not limited to, business or political purposes; provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit city council members from mailing holiday or greeting cards, invitations to social events or similar items to city officers or employees at their private residential addresses, regardless of the source of those addresses. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2055, § 1, 5-7-90)  
Secs. 2-3—2-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Uniform hearing and appeal procedure, Ch. 3. 
 
Sec. 2-100. - Council meetings, time and place; applicability of state law. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on such days and times and in such places established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  All actions undertaken regarding the scheduling or conducting of meetings of the city council shall be in accordance with The Ralph M. Brown Act found at Chapter 9, Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the California Government beginning with Section 54950, as existing now or as may be amended from time to time. Further references in this chapter to the Brown Act shall be in reference to such provisions. 
(Code 1952, § 2100; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1298, § 1, 2-4-76; Ord. No. NS-1454, 10-2-78; Ord. No. NS-1605, § 1, 11-2-81; Ord. No. NS-1800, § 1, 10-14-85; Ord. No. NS-1885, § 1, 1-5-87; Ord. No. NS-1971, 8-15-88; Ord. No. NS-2023, § 1, 8-21-89; Ord. No. NS-2071, § 1, 8-6-90; Ord. No. NS-2125, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2762, § 2, 3-3-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2762, § 2, adopted March 3, 2008, changed the title of § 2-100 from "Council meetings; time and place" to "Council meetings, time and place; applicability of state law." 
Charter reference— See § 409.  
Sec. 2-101. - Organization, selection of mayor pro tem and authority to execute contracts. 
The newly elected council shall convene as set forth in the Santa Ana Charter. The newly elected council shall proceed to organize, and the newly elected mayor shall immediately become the presiding officer. The council shall thereafter elect a mayor pro tem by a majority vote of the council. 
At any subsequent meeting of the council, in the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tem the clerk of the council shall call the council to order and call the roll of the members. If a quorum is found to be present, the council shall, by majority vote of those present, elect a chairman of the meeting to act during the meeting or until one (1) of the regularly designated presiding officers shall appear. 
The mayor pro tem shall have the same authority as the Mayor has to execute contracts on behalf of the City Council, even in circumstances when the mayor is not absent, but where the mayor cannot or will not execute a contract approved by the City Council due to legal or personal reasons. 
(Code 1952, § 2100.1; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 1, 8-15-88; Ord. No. NS-2716, § 2, 7-3-06; Ord. No. NS-2936, § 1, 1-16-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2936, § 1, adopted January 16, 2018 , amended § 2-101 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-101 was titled "Organization." 
Charter reference— See §§ 404, 405.  
Sec. 2-101.1. - Acting mayor pro tem—Appointment. 
The mayor shall have the right to appoint an acting mayor pro tem when, in his or her judgment, neither the mayor nor the mayor pro tem are able to attend to any public function requiring the mayor's presence, either in his or her official or unofficial capacity. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 2, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-101.2. - Same—Eligibility. 
Only duly elected and acting city councilmembers of the City of Santa Ana shall be eligible to be appointed as acting mayor pro tem. Appointments shall be made in a successive rotational order from a list composed for such purpose at the first meeting of the city council following any municipal election. The list shall be composed of the names of all the duly elected and acting members of the city council other than the mayor and mayor pro tem drawn in random order. The list shall be revised following each election of the city council to reflect such changes in the composition of the city council, which shall be accomplished by deleting from said list the names of those persons not reelected to office, and adding to the end thereof the names of such newly elected councilmen. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 3, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-101.3. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The acting mayor pro tem shall be the agent of the duly elected and acting mayor of the City of Santa Ana, and shall be the mayor's representative for the purpose for which he or she was appointed, and his or her duties and obligations shall be those assigned by the mayor with such limitations as the mayor or city council shall reasonably impose, including limitations on purpose and length of appointment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 4, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-101.4. - Same—Compensation. 
The acting mayor pro tem shall not be entitled to any additional compensation over and above that which is his or her normal and usual compensation as a councilmember for the City of Santa Ana. The acting mayor pro tem may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties as acting mayor pro tem. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 5, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-101.5. - Same—Designation. 
Once appointed by the mayor, the acting mayor pro tem may be introduced at all public gatherings as the acting mayor pro tem of the City of Santa Ana, and shall be afforded all of the rights and privileges usually afforded the mayor in similar circumstances. The acting mayor pro tem shall be provided with credentials, letters of introduction, or written authority wherever the same is required, in order for him or her to effectively act on behalf of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 6, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-101.6. - Same—Limitations. 
The appointment of the acting mayor pro tem by the duly elected mayor of the City of Santa Ana shall in no manner be deemed a permanent appointment of acting mayor pro tem, nor shall said appointment in any manner create any priority for future similar appointments. The acting mayor pro tem appointment shall be at the pleasure of the mayor and subject to recall by the city council. The appointment of an acting mayor pro tem shall be limited by the mayor in time and purpose, and in no circumstances shall extend beyond that time reasonably required to perform the designated appearance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1260, § 2, 6-16-75; Ord. No. NS-1972, § 7, 8-15-88)  
Sec. 2-102. - Agenda. 
The clerk of the council shall prepare an agenda for each regular and special meeting of the council as directed by the council by resolution or motion. The agenda shall comply with the Brown Act. 
(Code 1952, § 2100.2; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1206, § 1, 6-3-74; Ord. No. NS-1885, § 2, 1-5-87; Ord. No. NS-2094, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2762, § 3, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 2-102.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2762, § 4, adopted March 3, 2008, repealed § 2-102.5 in its entirety, which pertained to limitation on agenda items, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2094, § 2, adopted November 19, 1990.  
Sec. 2-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2762, § 5, adopted March 3, 2008, repealed § 2-103 in its entirety, which pertained to rules of order, and derived from the Code of 1952, § 2100.4; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, adopted March 15, 1965, and Ord. No. NS-1262, § 1, adopted July 14, 1975.  
Sec. 2-104. - Rules of procedure; decorum and order. 
(a)  The city council shall, by resolution, adopt a reference for rules of procedure. 
(b)  The city council shall, by resolution, adopt rules of decorum and order for its meetings. Such rules shall include time limits and other standards for debate and discussion by the city council and for the public's addressing the city council. 
(c)  The presiding officer shall have the duty of maintaining order at all times and may direct that any person disturbing the meeting, speaking without permission, violating the city council's rules of decorum and order, or otherwise acting in a disorderly manner, be removed from the place of meeting, and any peace officer present shall carry out such order. No person shall violate the order and decorum of a council meeting, speak without permission, or do anything which may interfere with the effective deliberation of the council. Any violation of this provision is declared to be a misdemeanor and any person violating the same may be prosecuted on a complaint signed by the presiding officer or any person acting under his direction. Any peace officer present in the council chambers or place of meeting shall arrest any person violating this provision if ordered so to do by the presiding officer or by a vote of the council. 
(Code 1952, § 2101; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-2762, § 6, 3-3-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2762, § 6, adopted March 3, 2008, changed the title of § 2-104 from "Decorum and order" to "Rules of procedure; decorum and order."  
Sec. 2-105. - Voting by members. 
No member of the council shall abstain from any vote unless disqualified, and no disqualified member shall vote. Any disqualified member shall openly state to the presiding officer the fact and nature of such disqualification and shall not be subject to further inquiry. Where no clearly disqualifying conflict of interest appears, the matter of disqualification may, at the request of the member affected, be decided by the other members of the council. A member disqualified by conflict of interest shall request and be granted permission by the presiding officer to absent himself from the room where the council is meeting during debate and vote on the matter. Any member having a remote interest in any matter shall divulge the same to the council before voting. 
(Code 1952, § 2102; Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65)  
Sec. 2-106. - Ordinances and resolutions; adoption. 
When the complete title of any resolution or ordinance has been set forth on the agenda so that any person in attendance at a council meeting may read the same, or if the complete title of any such resolution or ordinance is read aloud at any such council meeting, it shall not be necessary to read aloud the full text of such resolution or ordinance before the same may be passed for publication of title or adopted, as the case may be. 
When two (2) or more ordinances are being considered to be passed for publication of title or for adoption, or when two (2) or more resolutions are being considered for adoption, such action may be taken by one roll call vote and said vote shall be deemed to have been given to each ordinance or resolution in that particular group as if each had been voted upon individually. 
Whenever a motion is made to pass two (2) or more ordinances for publication of title or to adopt two (2) or more ordinances or resolutions, pursuant to the provisions of the foregoing paragraph of this section, any member of the council may request that one or more of such resolutions or ordinances be considered by the council separately, and such request shall be deemed a matter of right. In such event, the motion may be deemed to include passage or adoption of all such ordinances or resolutions, except as to that or those as to which separate consideration has been requested. 
(Ord. No. NS-786, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1445, 8-21-78) 
Charter reference— See § 413 et seq.  
Sec. 2-107. - Prohibited campaign contributions. 
No councilmember or any campaign committee controlled by the councilmember shall solicit or accept any campaign contribution or loan of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more from any person for a period of three (3) months following the date a final decision is rendered in any proceeding before the council involving a license, permit, or other entitlement, if the councilmember knows or has reason to know that the person had a financial interest in the proceeding. Financial interest, for purposes of this section, shall have the meaning it is defined to have in Title 9 of the California Government Code (the Political Reform Act). The mayor is a councilmember for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2304, § 1, 11-18-96) 
Editor's note— Prior to the provisions set out in Ord. No. NS-2304, § 2-107 was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1885, § 3, adopted Jan. 5, 1987. Prior to its repeal, § 2-107 pertained to the downtown development commission and derived from Ord. No. NS-1730, § 1, adopted June 4, 1984, and Ord. No. NS-1773, § 1, adopted May 6, 1985. 
Charter reference— Disqualification due to campaign contributions, § 425; campaign contribution limitation, § 1206.  
Sec. 2-108. - Disclosures from closed session. 
It shall be unlawful for any member of the city council or any officer or employee of the city or any other person present during a closed session of the city council to disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion which took place during such closed session on any matter legally authorized to be heard in closed session, unless the city council has authorized the disclosure of such information by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. NS-2067, § 1, 10-1-90)  
Sec. 2-109. - Participation in real estate incentive programs. 
(a)  No councilmember shall be eligible to participate in, or directly or indirectly receive any benefits from, any city-sponsored real estate incentive program, except as provided in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  City-sponsored real estate incentive program, for purposes of this section, shall mean any funding program managed by the City of Santa Ana, the redevelopment agency, the housing authority, or other agency which is administered or funded, in whole or in part, by the City of Santa Ana, and which provides loans, grants or other monetary or economic benefits to individuals or business entities to be used for the acquisition, construction, repair or improvement of real property. 
(c)  The prohibitions set forth in this section shall be inapplicable where they are in conflict with state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2305, § 1, 12-2-96)  
Sec. 2-110. - E-filing of campaign disclosure forms. 
It is the finding of the city council that an elected officer, candidate, committee or other person required to file statements, reports or other documents described by Title 9 Political Reform, Chapter 4 of the Government Code (commencing with Gov. Code § 84100) who receives contributions or makes expenditures totaling more than $1,000 in a calendar year shall file those statements, reports, or other documents online or electronically with the city. The city's online system can and will operate securely and effectively and will not unduly burden filers. By way of this finding, the use of online or electronic filing is hereby authorized and required for elected officers, candidates, committees and other persons filing statements, reports or other documents described in Chapter 4 of the Government Code. 
(1)  In any instance in which an original statement, report or other document must be filed with the Secretary of State and a copy of that statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the city, the filer may, but is not required to, file the copy online or electronically. 
(Ord. No. NS-2853, § 1, 2-4-14)  
Sec. 2-111. - Disqualification due to legal defense fund contribution. 
Neither the mayor, nor any councilmember, shall participate in, or use his or her official position to influence a decision to be made by the City Manager or the City Council if it is reasonably foreseeable that the decision will have a material financial effect, apart from its effect on the public generally or a significant portion thereof, on a recent legal defense fund contributor. As used herein, "legal defense fund contributor" means any individual or entity who or which has made a legal defense fund contribution totaling two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more to the mayor or a councilmember or to any campaign committee controlled by the mayor or the councilmember in the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the date of the decision. For purposes of this Section 2-111 any individual who has more than a ten percent (10%) equity or revenue interest in the contributing entity, or anyone who is a trustee, director, partner or officer of the contributing entity, shall also be deemed a legal defense fund contributor. 
( Ord. No. NS-2902, § 2, 7-5-16 )  
Secs. 2-112—2-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II.I. - PUBLIC ACCESS TO MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-150. - Meetings and agenda postings for city council. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 54953.7 of the Brown Act, the city is imposing the following additional requirements on itself to allow greater community access to its meetings: 
(1)  City council meeting agendas must be posted at least ninety-six (96) hours before any regular meeting of the city council. 
(2)  The city will make notices of the city council meetings accessible on the city's web site in various languages including Spanish through the use of free web-based translation application. 
(3)  Agendas will list future items on major projects. The list of "major projects" identified for the city council agenda will be compiled at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 3, 10-15-12)  
ARTICLE II.II. - PUBLIC MEETINGS FOR CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms have the following respective meanings: 
City-sponsored development project means any development project that has received or will receive public subsidy from the city. 
Community meeting means any meeting required pursuant to subsection 2-153(a) whose purpose is to provide input into the review of development projects. 
Public subsidy, as used in this article, means financial assistance provided by the city, including, but not limited to: grants; rent subsidies or reductions; loans; loan forgiveness; city-issued bond financing; a sale or lease of city-assembled land for less than its fair market value (i.e., a "land write-down"); a development agreement or disposition and development agreement; contingent obligations taken on by the city such as any guarantee or pledge of city funds; and any city fee or tax reduction or waiver. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 4, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 2-152. - Plan approval. 
Prior to the submittal of the application for discretionary approval which meets the criteria of subsection 2-153(a), the applicant shall meet all community meeting requirements as set forth in section 2-153. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 5, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 2-153. - Public input through community meetings prior to discretionary approval. 
(a)  Applicability. The requirements of this article apply to development projects requiring discretionary approval and that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  City-sponsored development projects; 
(2)  New residential projects containing twenty-five (25) or more units, except that the director of planning and building may exempt a developer from the requirements of this article if, in the case of affordable housing, the developer can show that it will be in jeopardy of losing tax credits; 
(3)  New non-residential projects (including additions to existing buildings) of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more and which are, in the determination of the city, subject to a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration or environmental impact report as defined under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
(4)  Development projects requiring a zone change, specific plan amendment, or general plan amendment. 
(b)  Number and timing of community meeting. For those development projects that meet the criteria listed in subsection 2-153(a), the applicant shall hold one (1) community meeting no later than twenty (20) days after submittal of an application for administrative site plan review. Should the applicant fail to hold the community meeting within this time, the completion of administrative site plan review shall be delayed until such time as the community meeting is held. 
(c)  Noticing. Notice of any community meeting held under this section shall be provided to all property owners, and at least one (1) occupant per dwelling unit having a valid United States Postal Service address within a 500-foot radius of the subject property. Said notice shall be mailed no less than ten (10) days prior to the community meeting. The notice shall also be posted on the development project site and published in a newspaper of general circulation no less than ten (10) days prior to the community meeting. The city shall then post the notice on the city's website. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to prepare and distribute this notice. 
(d)  Notice content. The notice shall include the time, place and date of the community meeting; a map depicting the location of the subject property, including the properties contained within the notification boundary; a brief description of the project; and the applicant's contact information. The notice shall be written in English and Spanish and include instructions as to how to request language interpretation services for those wishing to have interpretation during the community meeting in languages other than English. 
(e)  Community meeting time and place. The community meeting shall be held either on a weeknight during the early evening hours or on a Saturday. The meeting shall be held in any facility that is accessible to the public and that is no more than one (1) mile from the project site. Should there not be any such facilities available in the required area, the applicant may arrange, at their own expense and subject to availability, to use the next closest city facility. 
(f)  Community meeting language interpretation. Should the applicant receive a written request for language interpretation services no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the meeting, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to arrange for such services to be available at the community meeting. 
(g)  Community meeting format and content. During the community meeting the applicant shall give a presentation detailing the components of the proposed development project and a description of any impacts or benefits to the community, and provide contact information so that members of the public can contact them for further information. The applicant shall allow enough time for the attendees to ask questions and provide input. The applicant shall prepare detailed minutes of the meeting including a written record of the comments provided by the community members. 
(h)  Providing information to city after community meeting. Not less than four (4) days following the community meeting the developer shall submit to the city an affidavit under penalty of perjury that the required community meeting was held in compliance with this section and will submit copies of all notices, notification lists, site postings, advertisements, or other communications used to publicize the meeting. The applicant shall also provide to the city a copy of the minutes and the written record of, and response to, the public comments made at the community meeting. The public input will be made part of the public record and included as attachments to planning commission staff reports. 
(i)  [Notice.] Notice of planning commission public hearings shall be in conformance with the requirements provided in subsection 2-153(c), except that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide the director of planning and development services the mailing lists of the names and addresses of those entitled to receive notice under subsection 2-153(c). The noticing provisions contained subsection 2-153(c) shall supersede those contained in section 41-672. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 6, 10-15-12)  
ARTICLE II.III. - PUBLIC INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-154. - Access to contracts, bids and proposals. 
(a)  All initial city requests for proposals ("RFP's") shall be kept in a central repository and shall be made available for public inspection upon request. In addition, RFP's shall be placed in one (1) location on the city's website for a period from the date the RFP was issued to the date that the RFP is due and for a period of thirty (30) days after the RFP is awarded the city shall notice on the city website the name of the person or company awarded the contract, along with the second and third ranked persons or companies. 
(b)  Contracts, contractors' bids, responses to requests for proposals and all other records of communications between the department and persons or firms seeking contracts shall be open to inspection immediately after a contract has been awarded. Nothing in this provision requires the disclosure of a private person's or organization's net worth or other proprietary financial data submitted for qualification for a contract or other benefit. All bidders and contractors shall be advised that information provided which is covered by this subdivision will be made available to the public upon request. Immediately after any review or evaluation or rating of responses to a RFP has been completed, a ranking of the firms can be made available. Evaluation forms and score sheets used by persons in the RFP evaluation or contractor selection process shall be made available for public inspection after contract negotiations have been concluded. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 7, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 2-155. - Calendars of certain city officials. 
(a)  Members of the city council (including the mayor), the city manager, clerk of the council, city attorney, community development agency director, finance and management services director, parks, recreation and community services director, planning and building director, police chief, director of external affairs, public works director, deputy city manager, and any additional persons in management positions that are considered part of the city's executive management team shall maintain a monthly city calendar. 
(b)  The calendar shall include all scheduled city-related appointments, meetings, including regular and special city council meetings, meetings with developers, meetings with union representatives, meetings with consultants, meetings with lobbyists, regional meetings, and meetings of subcommittees or task forces. 
(c)  The calendars of the mayor, city council, and city manager, and other department heads listed in subsection (a) shall be a public record subject to inspection during normal business hours at the office of the clerk of the council and additionally available in electronic format on the city's official website. The calendar shall be made available on the tenth business day of each month and shall reflect the schedules of the previous month. 
(d)  Each city-related appointment must include the following information: name(s), title(s), and affiliated organization(s). The following information shall be exempted: 
(1)  Personal appointments, including personal business appointments; 
(2)  Information protected by the attorney-client privilege; 
(3)  Information about attorney work product; 
(4)  Information about city staff recruitment; 
(5)  Information about a personnel issue; 
(6)  Information about corporate recruiting and retention; 
(7)  Information about criminal investigations and security; 
(8)  Information about whistle blowers; 
(9)  Information about those who reasonably fear that public disclosure of the fact of their appointment will result in retaliation that will result in significant economic, physical or other tangible harm; and 
(10)  Information that is otherwise prohibited from disclosure. 
(e)  Any violation of this section relating to calendars shall not be a basis for any criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 8, 10-15-12; Ord. No. NS-2843, § 3, 6-17-13)  
Sec. 2-156. - Access to lobbyist information. 
The city shall provide access, and a link on the city's website, to the following forms: Recipient Committee Campaign Statement (Form 460), Behested Payment Report (Form 803), and Statement of Economic Interests (Form 700). These forms will be found on the city's website under the title of "Access to Lobbyist Information." 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 9, 10-15-12)  
Sec. 2-157. - Public meetings related to city five-year strategic plan and annual budget. 
(a)  City strategic plan—Creation and public hearings. 
(1)  Not later than the end of fiscal year 2013/14 and at least every five (5) years thereafter, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council a strategic plan setting forth the city's mission, core values, five (5) year goals, detailed measurable objectives and key performance measures. Prior to submitting the strategic plan to the city council, the city manager will conduct a public meeting to review a draft of the plan with the public and receive input from the public regarding the plan. 
(2)  Each fiscal year the city manager will conduct a public meeting to present the city's five (5) year strategic plan to the community. The purpose of the meeting will be to review the city's progress in achieving its plan and goals with the community and to gain public input on any issues related to the city's five (5) year strategic plan. 
(b)  Annual budget meetings. Each February and September, staff shall strive to host a community meeting in preparation of the annual budget, but in no event shall these meetings be held any later than the last day of March or October, respectively. If at least thirty (30) or more city residents submit a written request for additional meetings to discuss the budget, the finance director shall respond to the request and work with the a representative of the requesting group to establish a date, time and place for a meeting. 
(Ord. No. NS-2838, § 10, 10-15-12; Ord. No. NS-2843, § 4, 6-17-13)  
Secs. 2-158—2-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY SEAL AND CITY EMBLEM 
 
Sec. 2-200. - City seal—Designation. 
The city seal is the impression made by that certain instrument retained and used by the clerk of the council for the purpose of attesting documents as acts of the city council. The general design and the details of the impression made by the city seal, shall correspond to the city emblem as established in section 2-210 from time to time. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75; Ord. No. NS-2708, § 2, 4-3-06)  
Sec. 2-201. - Same—Use. 
The city seal, or any facsimile thereof, shall not be affixed to any document or writing, except by the clerk of the council or such assistants to the clerk as may be authorized by him, and except for the purpose of attesting the document to be an act of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-202. - Same—Omission, effect. 
No act of the city council or document in evidence thereof shall be invalid by reason of the omission of the city seal. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-203. - Same—Loss. 
In the event of loss of the instrument used for affixing the seal, the words "Seal, City of Santa Ana, California", written by the clerk of the council in attestation of a document, shall constitute the city seal. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Secs. 2-204—2-209. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-210. - City emblem—Designation. 
The city emblem is a design used for the purpose of symbolically representing the authority of the City of Santa Ana and the capacity of its officers, employees and agents as representatives of the City of Santa Ana. The general design and the details of the city emblem, excluding colors, shall correspond substantially with the following representation thereof: 
 
City Seal 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-211. - Same—Use in election campaign prohibited. 
No person shall use the city emblem, or any facsimile thereof, for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any city or other public office of himself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such city emblem on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writings issued by the City of Santa Ana pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-212. - Same—Use by person other than officers and employees. 
No person, other than an officer or employee of the City of Santa Ana, shall use the city emblem or any facsimile thereof for any purpose except to the extent he may be authorized to do so by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-213. - Same—Use for malicious or financial purposes prohibited. 
No person shall use the city emblem, or any facsimile thereof, for any malicious purpose or for the purpose of personal financial gain. 
(Ord. No. NS-1252, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 2-214. - Manufacture and sale of souvenirs and decorative items. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent a person from manufacturing or selling nondocumentary objects, such as souvenirs or decorative items, bearing the city emblem as part of the design, provided that such person undertakes such activity pursuant to agreement with the city, approved by the city council or by such officer as the city council may designate, containing such requirements and limitations as the city council or such officer shall deem appropriate to assure that such use of the city emblem is in good taste and in the best interests of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1566, 3-16-81)  
Secs. 2-215—2-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-300. - City officers and department heads. 
The following are officers of the City of Santa Ana: 
(1)  Members of the city council; 
(2)  City manager; 
(3)  City attorney; 
(4)  Clerk of the council; 
(5)  Assistant city manager; 
(6)  Deputy city manager for development services; 
(7)  Special assistant to the city manager; 
(8)  Police chief; 
(9)  Executive director of finance and management services; 
(10)  Executive director of public works; 
(11)  Executive director of parks, recreation and community services; 
(12)  Executive director of human resources; 
(13)  Executive director of community development; 
(14)  Executive director of planning and building safety. 
(Ord. No. NS-750, § 1, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-1443, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1612, § 1, 12-21-81; Ord. No. NS-1886, § 1, 1-19-87; Ord. No. NS-2452, § 2, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2647, § 2, 4-5-04; Ord. No. NS-2686, § 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. NS-2869, § 2, 7-15-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 2, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 2-300.4. - Powers and duties of deputy city manager for development services. 
All references in this Code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager or any board or commission of the city, or any agency or body controlled by the city, or in any document whatsoever, to the executive director of community development shall be deemed references to the deputy city manager for development services, and the deputy city manager for development services shall assume all powers and duties otherwise exercised by the executive director of community development. 
(Ord. No. NS-2718, § 2, 7-3-06)  
Sec. 2-300.5. - Executive director of planning and building safety. 
All references in this Code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager or any board or commission of the city, or in any document whatsoever that predates the effective date of this section, to the planning director, the building director, the director of building safety, the director of planning and development service, or the deputy city manager for development services, shall be deemed references to executive director of planning and building safety. 
(Ord. No. NS-2647, § 3, 4-5-04; Ord. No. NS-2686, § 3, 6-6-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2686, § 3, adopted June 6, 2005, changed the title of § 2-300.5 from "Executive director of planning and building" to "Executive director of planning and building safety."  
Sec. 2-300.6. - Executive director of recreation and community services. 
All references in this code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager, or any board or commission of the City of Santa Ana, or any document whatsoever, to the director of recreation and parks or to the executive director of recreation, parks and community services shall be deemed references to the executive director of recreation and community services. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 12-21-81; Ord. No. NS-1886, § 3, 1-19-87)  
Sec. 2-300.7. - Executive director of human resources. 
All references in the charter or this Code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager, or any board or commission of the City of Santa Ana, or any document whatsoever, to the executive director of personnel services or director of personnel shall be deemed references to the executive director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. NS-1886, § 4, 1-19-87; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 2, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 2-300.8. - Executive director of finance and management services. 
All references in the charter or this Code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager, or any board or commission of the City of Santa Ana, or any document whatsoever, to the director of finance shall be deemed references to the executive director of finance and management services. 
(Ord. No. NS-1886, § 5, 1-19-87)  
Sec. 2-301. - Peace officer standards and training—Desire to participate. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of chapter 1 of title 4, part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-927, § 1, 7-15-68)  
Sec. 2-302. - Same—Adherence to standards. 
Pursuant to section 13522 of said chapter 1, the city, while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. No. NS-927, § 1, 7-15-68)  
Sec. 2-302.1. - Corrections program standards and training. 
While receiving any state aid pursuant to article 2 (commencing with section 6040) of chapter 5 of title 7 of part III of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere to the standards for selection and training established by the board of corrections. 
(Ord. No. NS-2191, § 1, 4-5-93) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2191, § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 1993, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 2-302.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-303. - Certain reserve police officers to have powers of regular police officer. 
(a)  All reserve police officers of the City of Santa Ana who have been issued a Peace Officers Standards and Training Level I Reserve Officer Certificate prior to January 1, 1981, shall have the full powers of a peace officer, where the city manager, on the recommendation of the chief of police, has determined such reserve officer qualified to perform general law enforcement duties by reason of such reserve officers training and experience. 
(b)  This section retains in the chief of police the authority, control and command over the reserve police force and permits the adoption of rules and regulations limiting or designating the extent of authority of the various activities of the reserve officers. 
(Ord. No. NS-1562, §§ 1, 2, 2-17-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1562 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1, 2 herein as § 2-303 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-304. - Participation in real estate incentive programs. 
(a)  No member of a board or commission, city officer or employee, who in the course of his or her duties is required to participate in the formulation of policies for, or implementation of, any city-sponsored real estate incentive program, shall be eligible to participate in, or directly or indirectly receive any benefits therefrom, except as set forth in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  City-sponsored real estate incentive program, for purposes of this section, shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 2-109 of this chapter, as it exists now or as amended in the future. 
(c)  The prohibitions set forth in this section shall be inapplicable where they are in conflict with state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2305, § 2, 12-2-96)  
Secs. 2-305—2-309. - Reserved.  
Secs. 2-310—2-320. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1350, adopted March 21, 1977, repealed §§ 2-310—2-320, 2-325, relative to conflicts of interest. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1198, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 1974, and Ord. No. NS-1199, § 2, adopted March 18, 1974.  
Secs. 2-321—2-324. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-325. - Compensation for members of boards, commissions. 
The members of the following boards and commissions of the city shall receive the compensation as set forth herein: 
(a)  Community redevelopment and housing commission. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, three (3) meetings maximum per month, plus twenty dollars ($20.00) per month automobile allowance. 
(b)  Personnel board. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting. 
(c)  Planning commission. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, three (3) meetings maximum per month, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per month automobile allowance. 
(d)  Historic resources commission. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, two (2) meetings maximum per month. 
(e)  Board of recreation and parks. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, two (2) meetings maximum per month. 
(f)  Environmental and transportation advisory committee. Fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, two (2) meetings maximum per month. 
(g)  Youth commission. One (1) meeting per month, three (3) special meetings maximum per year with the compensation of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for regular commission members, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per meeting for alternate members, and ten dollars ($10.00) per meeting for associate members. 
(Ord. No. NS-1985, § 1, 12-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2157, 5-4-92; Ord. No. NS-2238, § 4, 12-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 1, 8-3-98; Ord. No. NS-2403, § 2, 9-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2407, § 2, 11-1-99; Ord. No. NS-2517, § 2, 11-18-02; Ord. No. NS-2732, § 3, 2-5-07; Ord. No. NS-2737, § 4, 3-5-07; Ord. No. NS-2795, § 2, 8-17-09; Ord. No. NS-2917, § 2, 7-5-17 ) 
Editor's note— Prior to its reenactment by Ord. No. NS-2363, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, subsection 2-325(d) was repealed by the city. Ord. No. NS-2238, § 4, adopted Dec. 19, 1984, abolished uniform code appeals board.  
Secs. 2-326—2-349. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-350. - Establishment. 
There is created and established a planning commission for the city pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of article IX of the city charter. 
(Code 1952, § 2510; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54) 
State Law reference— Area planning commission, § 65601 et seq., Gov. Code.  
Sec. 2-351. - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month in the city hall, at dates and times specifically set out and established in the rules of the commission. 
(Code 1952, § 2511; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-352. - Compensation of members. 
Each member of the planning commission shall receive compensation for each regular, adjourned regular, or special meeting of said planning commission which said member attends, in such amount and upon such terms as the council may establish by resolution. 
The council, by resolution, may authorize the payment, to commission members, of reasonable sums for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by them in connection with their official duties. 
In the event that the council determines that a member of the commission may be unable to fully discharge the duties of his office due to special circumstances, such as illness, the council may authorize a leave of absence for such member under such terms and conditions as the council shall deem appropriate. Such leave of absence may be authorized with compensation for the member, in which event the member shall be compensated to the same extent as if the member attended all meetings of the commission occurring during the leave of absence. 
(Code 1952, § 2517; Ord. No. NS-202, 8-20-56; Ord. No. NS-377, 6-1-59; Ord. No. NS-504, § 1, 2-20-61; Ord. No. NS-1190, § 1, 11-19-73; Ord. No. NS-1271, 9-2-75; Ord. No. NS-1318, 9-7-76)  
Sec. 2-353. - Committees. 
The chairman of the planning commission shall appoint as needed such temporary or standing committees for the study, investigation and report of particular matters as may be helpful in carrying out the responsibilities of the commission. 
(Code 1952, § 2512: Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-354. - Review of budget. 
The planning commission shall review that portion of the budget pertaining to the support of the planning commission and the planning department as prepared by the city manager, and shall after review prepare a written report indicating agreement or recommendations for changes therein. This report shall be returned to the city manager prior to the twentieth day of April and shall be included by him as a notation in his budget proposal to the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 2513; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-355. - Director's duties. 
It shall be the duty of the planning director as chief administrative officer of the planning department of the city to make or cause to be made such investigations, studies, drawings, maps and reports and recommendations as requested by the planning commission in the furtherance of its transactions. In addition, the planning director shall report to the planning commission all information and data available to him which can be of assistance to the deliberations of the commission and shall advise and recommend to the commission on all technical matters relating to city planning. 
(Code 1952, § 2414; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-356. - City administrative officials' duties. 
It shall be the duty of all officials of the city to furnish to the planning commission within a reasonable length of time any information available to such officials as may be requested by the commission and required by it for the effective carrying out of its responsibilities. 
(Code 1952, § 2414.1; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-357. - Submission of capital improvement plans. 
On or before the first day of March in each year each city officer, department, office, board, commission or other city agency whose functions include recommending, preparing plans for or constructing public capital improvements shall submit to the planning director, as the agent for the planning commission, a list of capital improvements proposed by such officer or agency for planning, initiation or construction during the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Code 1952, § 2515; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-358. - Report to council on capital improvement schedule. 
On or before the fifteenth day of May of each year the planning commission shall submit a report to the city council which shall contain any revisions recommended by it in the ten (10) year capital improvement program, as required by section 910 of the city charter, and shall also contain the comments and recommendations of the commission regarding the capital improvements proposed by the various officers and agencies of the city as provided for in section 2-357. 
(Code 1952, § 2516; Ord. No. NS-27, § 2, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 2-359. - Appeals from decisions of the building official. 
The planning commission shall also hear appeals from the decisions of the building official in accordance with section 8-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2238, § 1, 12-19-94)  
Secs. 2-360—2-369. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2.5. - HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-370. - Establishment. 
There is created and established a historic resources commission for the city pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of article IX of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2363, § 2, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 2-371. - Members. 
The historic resources commission shall consist of nine (9) members. Seven (7) members shall be subject to appointment and removal and shall serve terms in accordance with section 901 of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana. The remaining two (2) members shall be ex officio representatives from the planning commission and the community redevelopment and housing commission. Commission members should possess an expertise and experience in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning or other historic preservation related disciplines, such as urban planning, to the extent that such professionals are available in the community. 
(Ord. No. NS-2363, § 2, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 2-372. - Meetings. 
The historic resources commission shall meet quarterly at dates and times specifically set out and established in the rules of the commission. 
(Ord. No. NS-2363, § 2, 8-3-98; Ord. No. NS-2947 , § 2, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 2-373. - Director's duties. 
It shall be the duty of the executive director of the planning and building agency, as chief administrative officer of the planning department of the city, to make or cause to be made such investigations, studies, drawings, maps and reports and recommendations as requested by the historic resources commission in the furtherance of its transactions. In addition, the executive director of the planning and building agency shall report to the historic resources commission all information and data available to him or her which can be of assistance to the deliberations of the commission and shall advise and recommend to the commission on all technical matters to historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2363, § 2, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 2-374. - Powers and duties. 
The historic resources commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Consider all matters that may be referred to it by the city council or the city manager and shall render its recommendations, counsel and advice in regards thereto; 
(b)  Carry out those duties enumerated in chapter 30 of this Code regarding places of historical and architectural significance; 
(c)  Advise and make recommendations to the city council on applications for properties to be included in financial incentive programs participated in by the city for the preservation of historic resources; 
(d)  Advise and make recommendations to the planning commission, city council and other city boards and commissions regarding historical projects and property; 
(e)  Recommend to the city council policies and regulations regarding the protection, reuse and rehabilitation of historical property; 
(f)  Recommend to the city council programs for the protection, retention and use of historic resources including utilizing federal, state, local and/or private funding sources and mechanisms, such as Certified Local Government Program, Mills Act Contracts, and the state Historic Building Code; 
(g)  Recommend to the city council programs that confer recognition upon the owners of designated historic resources; 
(h)  Encourage public understanding and involvement in historic and architectural heritage. 
(Ord. No. NS-2363, § 2, 8-3-98)  
Secs. 2-375—2-399. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, adopted March 19, 1973, amended Div. 3, §§ 2-400—2-408, to read as herein set out. Formerly said division pertained to civil disaster protection and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 2310—2316, and Ord. No. NS-1010, § 1, adopted April 20, 1970. 
 
Sec. 2-400. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this division are to establish the emergency organization of the city; to provide for coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, organizations, businesses and private persons; and to provide for the preparation and implementation of emergency plans and procedures; all for the protection of persons and property in the event of a large scale emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-2916, § 3, 5-16-17 )  
Sec. 2-401. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
Emergency or local emergency — Means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of the city or county, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission. 
State of emergency — Means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "state of war emergency", which, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission. 
State of war emergency — Means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
Emergency services/emergency operations/emergency management — Used interchangeably, means the preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions necessary to mitigate, prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from large emergencies or disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological or human caused. 
Director or director of emergency services — Means the individual having primary jurisdiction and authority over the city's response and recovery to emergencies and disasters and is authorized to act on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-2916, § 4, 5-16-17 )  
Sec. 2-402. - Emergency organization. 
A.  City organization. All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them in an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of this title, charged with duties incident to the protection of persons and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
B.  Disaster service workers. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 3100 to 3109, all public employees are declared to be disaster service workers under law, and are subject to such disaster service activities as may be assigned by their superiors or by law, which may include assisting any unit of the emergency organization or performing any act contributing to the protection of life or property or mitigating the effects of an emergency or disaster. Private persons who register as emergency volunteers of the city are also deemed disaster service workers of the city. The city police department and the city personnel department shall develop policies and procedures for the registration, training and standards for employee and volunteer disaster service workers. 
C.  Director of emergency services. 
1.  Director, deputy director and line of succession. There is hereby created the position of director of emergency services, who shall have full authority over the operations and resources of the city during a proclaimed emergency, and this position shall be filled by the city manager. There is also created the position of deputy director of emergency services, which shall be filled by the chief of police. 
In the absence or the inability to act of the city manager, he/she shall automatically be succeeded as director of emergency services by the following officials in the order named: 
1.  Deputy director of emergency services/chief of police. 
2.  Deputy city manager. 
3.  Director of public works. 
4.  Director of finance and management services. 
5.  Director of planning and building. 
Additionally, the city manager may designate a specific official to act as director of emergency services based upon the circumstances of a specific emergency event. An official designated as director may appoint a subordinate with command or management authority to act as Director to accommodate schedule conflicts, shift relief or other required absence. 
2.  Director of emergency services—Powers and duties. The director of emergency services is empowered to: 
1.  In accordance with the provisions of Section 2-404A, request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency, if the city council is in session; or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session, 
2.  Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. (The County of Orange is also empowered to make this request on behalf of the county as a whole, and commonly does so), 
3.  Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this division, 
4.  Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, the services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise among them, 
5.  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided herein, or the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the governor's office of emergency services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is hereby empowered to: 
a.  Make and issue rules, regulations, orders or directives on matters reasonably necessary to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; or to suspend rules, regulations, orders or directives; provided such rules and regulations or suspensions are confirmed by the city council at the earliest practicable time, 
b.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, 
c.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment or other such properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to obligate the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
d.  Require emergency service of any city officer or employee, and to command the aid of the citizens of this community, 
e.  Execute all of the ordinary powers and duties as city manager, all special powers and duties conferred upon the city manager by this division and by the emergency operations plan adopted pursuant hereto, all powers and duties conferred upon him/her by any statute, agreement or other lawful authority, and in conformity with Section 38791 of the California Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police powers vested in the city by the constitution and general laws. 
3.  Deputy director of emergency services—Powers and duties. The deputy director of emergency services/chief of police is empowered, under the supervision of the director, to: 
1.  Represent the city in all dealings with public and private agencies on matters pertaining to any emergency as defined by this division, 
2.  Develop the emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, 
3.  Appoint and oversee an emergency operations coordinator in accordance with, and to further execute, the provisions of this division, 
4.  Carry out any other powers or duties as may be assigned by the director. 
D.  City council—Powers and duties. The city council is empowered to: 
1.  Enact such ordinances, resolutions or rules as may be necessary to prevent, prepare for, mitigate, respond to or recover from actual or foreseeable emergencies or disasters, 
2.  In accordance with the provisions of Section 2-404A, proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency, if in session; or to ratify such proclamation made by the director if not in session, 
3.  During a local emergency, pursuant to Section 415 of Article IV of the Municipal Code, city council may enact emergency ordinances on matters reasonably necessary to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency. City council may review rules, regulations, orders or directives or suspensions thereof issued by the director pursuant to subsection C.2. 
E.  Emergency operations coordinator. There is created the position of emergency operations coordinator, which shall reside in the city police department under the supervision of the deputy director of emergency services/chief of police or his/her designee. The emergency operations coordinator shall: 
1.  Coordinate all city activities related to emergency preparedness, prevention, mitigation, response and recovery; 
2.  Facilitate emergency and disaster planning for the city, encompassing governmental entities and resources, commercial and industrial resources, and private or non-governmental organizations necessary to support disaster operations; 
3.  Prepare and maintain the emergency operations plan for the city, and facilitate with city departments the preparation and maintenance of standard operating procedures and guidelines necessary to support disaster operations; 
4.  Prepare and maintain city supplies and facilities that support disaster operations; 
5.  Develop and coordinate emergency training and exercise programs as may be required for city staff, and an emergency preparedness community education program; 
6.  Coordinate emergency planning and interagency coordination with other local, state and federal agencies and with private or other disaster relief organizations; and serve as the city's representative member of regional emergency planning and interagency coordination committees and planning groups; 
7.  Recommend to the director of emergency services for referral to the city council matters of policy related to disaster planning or preparedness; 
8.  Recommend to the director of emergency services for referral to the emergency operations advisory board matters for consideration within the purview of their responsibilities. 
F.  Emergency operations advisory board. 
1.  Emergency operations advisory board members. The city emergency operations advisory board shall be composed of: 
1.  Director of emergency services/city manager, who shall be chair, 
2.  Deputy director of emergency services/chief of police, who shall be vice chair, 
3.  Executive managers named in the director of emergency services line of succession in subsection C.1.: 
a.  Deputy city manager, 
b.  Director of public works, 
c.  Director of finance and management, 
d.  Director of planning and building, 
4.  Orange County Fire Authority Division 6 Chief, 
5.  City attorney, who shall serve as legal advisor to the emergency operations advisory board, 
6.  City clerk, who shall serve as secretary to the emergency operations advisory board, 
7.  Any other department directors or staff requested by the director of emergency services, and 
8.  Emergency operations coordinator, to serve as staff to the emergency operations advisory board. 
2.  Emergency operations advisory board—Powers and duties. It shall be the responsibility of the city emergency operations advisory board, and it is empowered to, review and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency plans, policies and agreements, and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement such plans and agreements; to oversee the planning and preparedness activities of all city departments; to oversee the training of all city staff and employees; and to oversee the training and activities of volunteer programs of the city related to disaster roles and functions. The emergency operations advisory board as a body serves in a pre-disaster planning and preparedness role and as such body may not have a direct role in disaster response or recovery activities. 
3.  Emergency operations advisory board meetings. The emergency operations advisory board shall meet quarterly; and additionally as necessary upon the call of the chair, or in his/her absence from the city or inability, upon call of the vice-chair. 
G.  Emergency operations committee. The emergency operations committee is created as a standing and working sub-committee to the emergency operations advisory board. The emergency operations committee is composed of the emergency operations coordinator, who shall be chair, and managers or management staff from each city department appointed by the department director and who shall be able to speak on behalf of their department. The emergency operations committee will provide operational direction for implementation of programs and activities established by the emergency operations advisory board, develop and maintain city emergency plans and procedures, coordinate training and exercise programs for each city department and for the city as a whole, and shall constitute a core of emergency operations center staff. The emergency operations committee shall meet monthly and additionally at the direction of the emergency operations advisory board or upon call of the emergency operations coordinator. 
H.  Adoption of collaborative systems and standards. The city recognizes that a large-scale emergency or disaster may have the potential to overwhelm the commonly available resources and capabilities of the city and may require the combined response of numerous agencies, jurisdictions and levels of government. Therefore, the city participates in the Orange County Operational Area response and recovery organization as provided by California Emergency Services Act Section 8605 and is a signatory to the Orange County Operational Area Agreement. The city adopts the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) and the federal National Incident Management System (NIMS) as a basis for emergency plans and response. The framework of these systems includes use of the Incident Command System (ICS), multi-agency and interagency coordination, participation in the Master Mutual Aid Agreement and Systems of the State of California, and the Operational Area concept. The city will comply with the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act. 
( Ord. No. NS-2916, § 5, 5-16-17 )  
Sec. 2-403. - Emergency operations plan. 
The emergency operations committee shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of the city emergency operations plan (EOP) and related annexes or manuals. The EOP shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, and shall provide for the organization, duties and functions, and procedures and capabilities of the city's response to the emergency. Each city department will supplement the EOP with those standard operating procedures necessary to fulfill their role in an emergency under the EOP. 
The EOP shall comply with the principles of the Orange County Operational Area Agreement, the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) and the federal National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The emergency operations advisory board shall be responsible to review and recommend adoption of the EOP to city council, and to implement the requirements of the plan once adopted. City council shall review and adopt the plan by resolution as a policy of the city. Once adopted, the plan shall be mandatory upon city departments and agencies, employees and registered volunteer emergency workers and shall have the effect of law whenever an emergency has been proclaimed as provided in this division. 
( Ord. No. NS-2916, § 6, 5-16-17 )  
Sec. 2-404. - Emergency proclamations and measures. 
A.  Proclamations of local emergency. A local emergency, as defined by section 2-401 and by California Emergency Services Act Section 8558(c), may be proclaimed upon conditions of disaster or extreme peril, existing or imminently likely, so as to threaten lives and property, and by reason of its magnitude is or is likely to be beyond the control of the available services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city. 
The director of emergency services may request the city council to proclaim the existence of a local emergency, if the city council is in session, or may issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Such proclamation must be made within ten (10) days of the occurrence of the disaster or emergency. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council must, within seven (7) days from the date of the original proclamation by the director, approve a resolution ratifying the proclamation, or allow the proclamation to expire. City council shall review the need for continuing the local emergency at least once every thirty (30) days and shall terminate the emergency or allow it to expire at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. 
During a local emergency, the city council or the director of emergency services may promulgate ordinances, orders or regulations necessary to provide for the protection of life and property, including orders or regulations imposing a curfew within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve the public order and safety. Such orders and regulations and amendments and rescissions thereof shall be in writing and shall be given widespread publicity and notice. 
The city council shall proclaim the termination of the local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. Upon termination of the local emergency, any such rules, regulations, orders and directives or suspensions thereof prepared under the proclamation of local emergency shall terminate and have no further force or effect. 
B.  Initial emergency measures. All emergency measures taken by the director of emergency services prior to the issuance of an official proclamation of emergency, or prior to any decision by the city council not to issue such proclamation, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city and shall be legal and binding on the city. The director of emergency services shall be immune from any form of liability for all emergency measures taken pursuant to an official proclamation of emergency made by the director prior to a decision by the city council, even if the city council later decides not to ratify the director's proclamation of emergency. 
C.  Emergency expenditures. Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities under this division, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
The director of emergency services, during a proclaimed emergency, shall have the authority to approve contracts and waive normal purchasing requirements as necessary to support the emergency response under this division and to protect the life and property of the residents of the city. The director shall have the authority to enter contracts or make purchases for any supplies, materials, equipment or services when any such item is immediately necessary for the continued operation of city government, for the preservation of life or property, or when such purchase is required for the health, safety and welfare of the people, provided there is a present, immediate and existing emergency. 
The finance director shall maintain a detailed accounting of all expenditures made under this provision and shall submit upon termination of the emergency, a detailed report to the city manager, who in turn shall provide the report to the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-1718, § 2, 3-19-84; Ord. No. NS-2888, § 2, 12-15-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2916, § 7, 5-16-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2916, § 7, adopted May 16, 2017 , amended § 2-404 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-404 was titled "Director of emergency services-Powers and duties generally."  
Sec. 2-405. - Continuity of government. 
Disasters or large-scale emergencies may result in conditions causing the absence or unavailability of officers or officials of the city. The preservation and continued functioning of local government is of utmost concern in these circumstances. The city will take these minimum precautions to provide for the continuance of essential government services during times of emergencies: 
A.  City council. If, during a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency that has been proclaimed or exists under the provisions of the emergency services act, it has been determined that a majority of the city council seats have become temporarily or permanently vacant and a regular quorum no longer exists, the powers and authority of the city council, except for those duties prescribed to the city council in Article IV, section 403 of the City Charter, shall vest with the director of emergency services until a quorum of the regularly elected city council members is present, or until a sufficient number of vacancies that are determined to be permanent are filled under the provisions of Article IV, Section 403 of the City Charter. 
B.  Executive management lines of succession. For the purposes of this division, department directors shall appoint a three-deep order of succession of appropriate subordinate management staff to succeed to their position in the event that official is unavailable or unable to serve. The person who succeeds to each office under this provision shall assume all the powers and duties of the office succeeded to immediately upon such succession. The succeeding person shall serve until the appointing official resumes his or her office or until a permanent successor is appointed under the applicable provisions of the City Charter or this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-2916, § 8, 5-16-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2916, § 8, adopted May 16, 2017 , amended § 2-405 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-405 was titled "Same—Emergency powers."  
Sec. 2-406. - Enforcement. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, during a proclaimed emergency, to: 
a.  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by this division; 
b.  Engage in any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to an enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
c.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the Office of Emergency Services of the State of California or by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-2916, § 9, 5-16-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2916, § 7, adopted May 16, 2017 , amended § 2-406 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-406 was titled "Emergency plan."  
Secs. 2-407, 2-408. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2916, §§ 10, 11, adopted May 16, 2017 , repealed §§ 2-407, 2-408, in their entirety. Former §§ 2-407, 2-408 pertained to "Emergency services organization; composition," and "Violations," respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-1159, § 1, adopted March 19, 1973.  
Secs. 2-409—2-449. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - YOUTH COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2238, § 2, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing Div. 4, § 2-450, which pertained to "uniform code appeals board" and derived from Ord. No. NS-1596, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1981. Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, adopted Sept. 20, 1999 established a new Div. 4 concerning the youth commission, as set out herein, and consisting of §§ 2-450—2-457. 
 
Sec. 2-450. - Commission established; composition. 
There is hereby created and established a youth commission for the City of Santa Ana, having such powers as set forth in this division. The youth commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members, seven (7) alternate members, and seven (7) associate members, who shall be subject to appointment and removal in accordance with section 901 of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana. The alternate members shall serve on the commission in the absence of any regular member. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2737, § 2, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 2-451. - Requirements of membership. 
Each member of the youth commission shall be a student enrolled and attending school, as well as a resident of the City of Santa Ana. Regular members shall be ages sixteen (16) to twenty (20). Alternate members shall be ages fourteen (14) to eighteen (18). Associate members shall be ages eleven (11) to fourteen (14). Should any member cease to reside within the City of Santa Ana, cease to be a student enrolled and attending a school, or exceed the age limit for their respective class of membership, his/her office shall automatically be vacated. All prospective members under the age of eighteen (18) shall provide written proof of parental or guardian permission to qualify for appointment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2737, § 3, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 2-452. - Director's duties. 
It shall be the duty of executive director of the parks, recreation and community services agency, and/or his/her designee, to report to the youth commission all information and data available to him/her which can be of assistance to the deliberations of the commission and shall advise the commission on any issues on which they require assistance and/or guidance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 2-453. - Meetings. 
The youth commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month at dates and times specifically set out and established by the commission. The meetings shall be held in the city council chambers, unless the city council provides for another place of meeting. The commission may hold additional meetings at places other than the city council chambers to the extent deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 2-454. - Vacancies. 
A vacancy in the membership of the commission, other than one created by the expiration of a term, shall be filled by the alternate for such position for the unexpired portion of the term appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 2-455. - Compensation. 
Each regular member of the commission, or any alternate serving in the absence of a regular member, shall receive compensation for each regular meeting, and up to three (3) special meetings of the youth commission which said member attends, in such amount and upon such terms as ordained by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 2-456. - Organization. 
The commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson, each of whom shall serve in such position for the term of one (1) year. No member shall serve in the position of chairperson for more than one (1) term. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 2-457. - Responsibilities and duties of commission. 
The youth commission shall have the following responsibilities and duties: 
(a)  Provide the youth of the city with both the opportunity to make recommendations relative to policies that affect their lives, as well as a forum in which to exchange ideas and information while interacting within the environment of the municipal government; 
(b)  Recommend programs and plans intended to promote the full acceptance of youth in all aspects of community life without regard to race, religion, or national origin; provided, however, that all such programs and plans shall be subject to the approval of the city council; 
(c)  Make recommendations and provide assistance to those community agencies engaged in fostering mutual understanding and respect for youth; 
(d)  Recommend to the city council and various city departments and agencies changes in procedures, policies, and/or legislation for the purpose of improving the position of the youth in the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2403, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Secs. 2-458—2-549. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-550. - Establishment. 
There shall be created, constituted and established a Santa Ana Arts and Culture Commission. 
(Ord. No. NS-2856, § 1, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 2-551. - Members. 
The arts and culture commission shall consist of seven (7) members. Members of the commission should be persons who are concerned about arts and cultural issues in the city and should be persons who have professional expertise or substantial volunteer involvement in the following areas: Visual, performing or literary arts; architecture, design or urban planning; education; history; science; film; or arts and cultural institution management. The commissioners shall be subject to appointment and removal and shall serve terms in accordance with section 901 of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2856, § 1, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 2-552. - Meetings and compensation. 
The arts and culture commission shall meet at least one (1) time each quarter or more frequently as needed at dates and times specifically set out and established in the rules of the commission. Each commission member shall receive maximum compensation in the amount of $50.00 for attendance at one regular meeting per month. 
(Ord. No. NS-2856, § 1, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 2-552.5 - Duties of the city manager. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager or his or her designee to provide staff support to the arts and culture commission and provide data, materials and resources which can be of assistance to the deliberations of the commission and shall advise and recommend to the commission on all technical matters. 
(Ord. No. NS-2856, § 1, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 2-553. - Powers and duties. 
The arts and culture commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  The commission shall act as an advisory body to the city manager and the city council and make recommendations regarding but not limited to: 
(1)  Policies, priorities and plans for the development and improvement of arts and cultural activities in Santa Ana, and, in conjunction with other appropriate agencies, in the greater Santa Ana area. 
(2)  Coordinating with the private sector and other governmental agencies in promoting arts and cultural excellence as a tool for the encouragement of economic development, business relocation and tourism. 
(3)  Organizing and promoting activities which celebrate the city and its unique cultural heritage. 
(4)  Allocation and budgeting of funds for arts and cultural funding. 
(5)  Payments for the design, execution and placement of public art projects, within established appropriations for the art projects. 
(6)  Encouraging the use of local artists in city public art projects. 
(7)  Guidelines for accepting, selecting, purchasing, commissioning, placing and preserving art projects and other city art acquisitions, gifts or extended loans of art. 
(8)  Make recommendations to the city council on deaccessioning of artworks, when necessary; 
(b)  The commission shall also advocate for arts education, cultural diversity, the Sister Cities Program, and other initiatives that further the growth and sustainability of the arts and cultural community in Santa Ana area. 
(c)  In addition, the commission shall have such other powers and duties as may be appropriate in carrying out the purposes and goals of this division and as set forth in reports or recommendations adopted by the city council. 
(d)  Consider matters referred to it by the city manager or the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2856, § 1, 12-16-13)  
Secs. 2-554—2-599. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - LIBRARY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2001, §§ 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, adopted Mar. 6, 1989, repealed former §§ 2-602, 2-605, 2-606, 2-608 and 2-609 of Div. 6, pertaining to free use of library, contracts with county library, annual report, tax levy, and library fund, which derived from the 1952 Code, §§ 2323—2326, and Ord. No. NS-117, § 3, adopted July 18, 1955. 
Cross reference— Library fund, § 13-140 et seq. 
State Law reference— See § 27-301 et seq., Education Code. 
 
Sec. 2-600. - Established; use. 
A public library is established in the city for its inhabitants and nonresident taxpayers. The public library shall provide free basic library services, subject always to such ordinances and resolutions as may be made by the city council. Any person who violates any such ordinance or regulation may, in addition to any other penalty, be excluded from the privileges of the library. 
(Code 1952, § 2320; Ord. No. NS-2001, § 1, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 2-601. - Title to property; library may sue and be sued. 
The title to all property acquired for the purpose of the library, when not inconsistent with the terms of its acquisition or otherwise designated, shall vest in the city. The library, in the name of the city, may be sued and defended by action at law or otherwise. 
(Code 1952, § 23-27)  
Sec. 2-602. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to the title of this division.  
Sec. 2-602.1. - Interfering with or disrupting library activities. 
Any person who comes into any public library or onto the library's immediate adjacent grounds, including but not limited to the patio and parking areas, and whose presence or acts interfere with the purpose and peaceful conduct of the activities of such library or disrupts the library or its facilities or its staff or its patrons or its activities is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she remains there after being asked to leave the library by the library director or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. NS-1956, § 1, 5-2-88)  
Secs. 2-603—2-607. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2793, § 2, adopted August 17, 2009, repealed the former §§ 2-603, 2-604, and 2-607, which pertained to the establishment, scope of authority, and meetings of the library board, and derived from the Code of 1952, § 2321.1, Ord. No. NS-117, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 18, 1955; Ord. No. NS-1499, adopted August 20, 1979; Ord. No. NS-2001, §§ 3, 4, 7, adopted March 6, 1989. See also the editor's note to the title of this division.  
Secs. 2-608, 2-609. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to the title of this division.  
Secs. 2-610—2-615. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1149, adopted Jan. 2, 1973, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 herein as Div. 7, §§ 2-616, 2-617, was at the discretion of the city. 
Cross reference— Community redevelopment commission, § 2-621 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-616. - Need for agency declared; agency authorized to function in city. 
It is hereby found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the City of Santa Ana, and said agency is hereby authorized to transact business, and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1149, § 1, 1-2-73)  
Sec. 2-617. - Council designated redevelopment agency; rights, powers, duties, etc. 
The Council of the City of Santa Ana hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment agency, as provided in this division, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be and are vested in this body. 
(Ord. No. NS-1149, § 2, 1-2-73)  
Sec. 2-618. - City fee payment deferral. 
(a)  To the extent that the community redevelopment agency of the city has an obligation to pay city fees or charges (including development fees and administrative cost fees) for construction, demolition, or building site preparation work, the payment of such fees by the redevelopment agency, or by contractors performing such work, or by the subcontractors of such contractors, shall be deferred until such time as the city council may demand the payment thereof. The redevelopment agency shall be responsible for the eventual payment of all fees deferred pursuant to this section, including those which would otherwise have been paid by its contractors or their subcontractors. The redevelopment agency's obligations under this section shall constitute an indebtedness of the redevelopment agency to the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the redevelopment agency shall be deemed to have the obligation to pay city fees and charges for construction, demolition or site preparation work in private property only to the extent that the redevelopment agency has assumed such obligation in an agreement with a private developer for the development of such property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2112, § 1, 2-19-91)  
Secs. 2-619, 2-620. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2237, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, set out provisions changing the title of Div. 8 from "community redevelopment commission" to "community redevelopment and housing commission," while § 10 of the same ordinance repealed Ch. 6, "housing commission." 
Cross reference— Redevelopment agency, § 2-616 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-621. - Commission created; composition. 
There is hereby created the community redevelopment and housing commission consisting of seven (7) members, except as otherwise provided in section 2-626. The community redevelopment and housing commission shall serve both in the capacity of a community redevelopment commission pursuant to Sections 33201 and 33202 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and in the capacity of a housing commission pursuant to Sections 34291 and 34292 of said Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1150, § 1, 1-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2237, § 2, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-622. - Appointment, removal of members; filling of vacancies. 
The members of the community redevelopment and housing commission shall be appointed and may be removed and vacancies filled, as provided in section 901 of the City Charter, except as otherwise provided in section 2-626. 
(Ord. No. NS-1150, § 2, 1-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2237, § 3, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-623. - Term of members. 
The terms of the members of the community redevelopment and housing commission shall be in accordance with section 901 of the City Charter, except as otherwise provided in section 2-626. 
(Ord. No. NS-1150, § 3, 1-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2237, § 4, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-624. - Commission members prohibited from acquiring interest in property included within project areas. 
No member of the community redevelopment and housing commission shall acquire any interest in any property included within any project area undertaken by the community redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-1150, § 4, 1-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2237, § 5, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-625. - Members to disclose financial interest in property included within project area. 
Each member of the community redevelopment and housing commission who owns or has any direct or indirect financial interest in any property included within a project area as designated by the community redevelopment agency, shall immediately make a written disclosure of it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1150, § 5, 1-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2237, § 6, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-626. - Tenant commissioners. 
Two (2) tenant commissioners shall serve on the community redevelopment and housing commission at such times as that commission is acting in the capacity of a housing commission, and at such times the number of members of that commission shall be increased to nine (9). The tenant commissioners shall serve for terms of two (2) years, from the date of their appointments, and their successors shall be tenants. Successors of tenant commissioners shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. If a tenant commissioner ceases to be a tenant, he shall be disqualified as a commissioner and another tenant shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. NS-2237, § 7, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 2-627. - Prohibited interest of commissioner. 
(a)  No member of the community redevelopment and housing commission shall acquire any direct or indirect interest in any housing project or any property included or planned to be included in any project, nor shall (s)he have any direct or indirect interest in any contract or proposed contract for materials or services to be furnished or used in connection with any housing project. If (s)he owns or controls a direct or indirect interest in any such property, (s)he shall immediately make a written disclosure of it to the housing authority and such disclosure shall be entered upon its minutes. Failure so to disclose his/her interest constitutes misconduct in office. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section or any provision of the Housing Authorities Law shall be construed as precluding a tenant of the housing authority from serving on the community redevelopment and housing commission, provided that the fact of such tenancy is disclosed to the housing authority in writing and entered upon its minutes immediately upon assuming office; nor shall any provisions of this section be construed as in any manner prohibiting the right of such tenant commissioner to exercise his full powers vested in his/her office. 
(Ord. No. NS-2237, § 8, 12-19-94)  
Secs. 2-628, 2-629. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-630. - Purposes. 
The California Industrial Development Financing Act, as set forth in Title 10 (commencing with Section 91500) of the Government Code of the State of California, has established an industrial development authority of this city for the achievement of specified public purposes. The public purposes are the increasing of opportunities for useful employment or otherwise contributing to economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority in the achievement of such purposes is based upon findings that industry requires the new and alternative method of capital finance that such authorities can provide in order for it to undertake the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities the use of which will serve those public purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1559, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 2-631. - Findings. 
There is a need in the City of Santa Ana for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for the use of industry which will increase employment opportunities or otherwise contribute to economic development, and further, the new and alternative method of capital finance that industrial development authorities can provide will aid in satisfying that need. 
(Ord. No. NS-1559, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 2-632. - Declarations. 
(a)  Need. There is a need in the City of Santa Ana for an industrial development authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in accordance with state policy as set forth in the California Industrial Development Financing Act. 
(b)  Organization. The industrial development authority of this city established by the California Industrial Development Financing Act is hereby declared organized and shall function under the name "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Santa Ana," and be authorized to transact business and exercise of all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by such act. 
(Ord. No. NS-1559, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 2-633. - Board of directors. 
The city council of the City of Santa Ana is declared to be, ex officio, the board of directors of the industrial development authority of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1559, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 2-634. - Meetings. 
The time, place and manner of the regular meetings of the board of directors of the industrial development authority of the City of Santa Ana shall be established by bylaws adopted by such board. Until such time as bylaws are so adopted, the regular meetings of such board shall be held at the hour of 2:00 p.m. on the first Monday in the months of March and September in each calendar year, in the city council chambers of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1559, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Secs. 2-635—2-640. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2237, § 9, adopted Dec. 19, 1994, established a new Div. 10, which had previously been repealed by Ord. No. NS-1705, enacted Dec. 5, 1983, and which had previously pertained to the architectural review board and derived from Ord. No. NS-1568, § 1, adopted April 20, 1981. 
 
Sec. 2-641. - Council designated housing authority. 
The city council hereby declares itself to be the housing authority pursuant to Section 34290 of the California Health and Safety Code, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Housing Authorities Law in such authority shall be and are vested in said body. 
(Ord. No. NS-2237, § 9, 12-19-94)  
Secs. 2-642—2-659. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2678, § 2, adopted March 7, 2005, repealed division 11 in its entirety, which pertained to the cable television advisory board, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1671, § 1, adopted February 22, 1983; Ord. No. NS-2025, § 1, adopted September 5, 1989; Ord. No. NS-2488, § 2, adopted February 4, 2002. 
 
Secs. 2-660—2-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SURPLUS, SCRAP AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 2-700. - Personal property report—Required; contents. 
Whenever the head of any department of the city shall determine that any personal property in his possession or under his jurisdiction is surplus and that there is no present or prospective use to which the city may put said property, he shall report that fact to the director of finance. The report shall contain a statement of the kind, nature, condition and quantity, and a brief description of such surplus property, shall state the location at which such property may be viewed, and shall give the names and addresses if possible of prospective purchaser if such information can be obtained by the department head. 
(Code 1952, § 2610; Ord. No. NS-1288, § 1, 1-5-75)  
Sec. 2-701. - Same—Filing; notice of sale to interested persons. 
Said surplus personal property report shall be kept on file in the office of the director of finance under the caption "Surplus Property Reports" and shall be open to the public for inspection. Any person interested in the purchase of any such property who leaves his name and address with the office of the director of finance shall be notified by mail of any sale of said property at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such sale. 
(Code 1952, § 2610.1; Ord. No. NS-1288, § 2, 1-5-76)  
Sec. 2-702. - Same—Approval of department heads. 
Said reports of surplus personal property shall be made available for review by any department head of the City of Santa Ana, and no such sale shall be had if any other department of the city expresses a desire or need for such property for a city purpose. 
(Code 1952, § 2610.2; Ord. No. NS-1288, § 3, 1-5-76)  
Sec. 2-703. - Disposition of surplus personal property. 
Whenever the director of finance shall determine that sufficient surplus property, including scrap property and animals, has accumulated, he shall determine the method of disposition of said property, including using said property as a trade-in, accepting sealed bids for said property, sale by public auction, or any other method of disposition deemed acceptable by the director of finance. All such surplus property shall then be accumulated at a central location unless the director of finance grants an exception to this requirement and therein designates the property so excepted. Notice of such disposition shall be given by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed, published and circulated in the city, and by sending written notice to all persons who had requested notice and to all persons suggested by the department heads as prospective bidders, such notices to be published and mailed at least ten (10) days prior to date of sale. 
(Code 1952, § 2611; Ord. No. NS-1288, § 4, 1-5-76)  
Sec. 2-703.1. - Disposition by public auction. 
If the director of finance determines that such surplus property shall be disposed of by auction, he shall designate the person to conduct the auction and the person to act as clerk, to make a record of bids and payments during said auction. The director may employ professional auctioneers and clerks who shall receive compensation solely out of the proceeds of the auction. All sales shall be for cash and the purchase price shall be paid forthwith upon the sale being declared by the auctioneer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1288, § 5, 1-5-76)  
Sec. 2-704. - Sale of scrap, etc. 
Items of scrap, metal, paper, wood, etc., that have no value for the purpose for which they were originally designed but are useful only as salvage or scrap, may be sold by the director of finance at any time without public auction, upon the designation of said property as scrap by the head of the department possessing such material. 
(Code 1952, § 2611.1; Ord. No. NS-1288, § 6, 1-5-76)  
Sec. 2-705. - Disposal of unclaimed property. 
Whenever unclaimed property found, recovered or held by the police department shall accumulate to the point where the chief of police desires to dispose of the same, it may be sold after complying with the provisions of Section 2080.4 of the Civil Code of the state as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and provisions of this section shall not prevail insofar as they may be inconsistent with state statutes. 
Such property must be held by the police department for at least three (3) months. After property has been held for the period prescribed above and accumulations are deemed adequate in number of items for the conduct of an auction, the property may be transferred to the purchasing division for sale to the public at public auction. Notice of such auction sale will be given by the purchasing and property control officer at least (5) days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in the newspaper publishing city legal notices. 
After said notices are given, the sale shall be conducted by the purchasing and property control officer or, with the approval of the city manager, some other city employee or employed professional auctioneer. Property for which no bid is made at such sale may be given to a nonprofit charitable organization or destroyed as the purchasing and property control officer may direct. 
If the purchasing and property control officer determines that unclaimed property transferred to his jurisdiction for sale is needed for a public use, he may retain such property and dispense with the provisions of this section pertaining to sale. The purchasing and property control officer shall thereafter account for such property as though it had been acquired by the city through regular purchasing procedures, with the exception that accountability for the use and disposition of unclaimed property transferred back to the police department for official public purposes shall become the responsibility of the chief of police. 
(Code 1952, § 2612; Ord. No. NS-255, 6-3-57; Ord. No. NS-704, § 1, 1-6-64; Ord. No. NS-1251, § 1, 3-10-75; Ord. No. NS-2119, § 1, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 2-705.5. - Donations of unclaimed bicycles and toys for the prevention of juvenile delinquency. 
Any bicycles or toys, or both, in the possession of the police department which have been unclaimed for a period of at least sixty (60) days may, instead of being sold at public auction to the highest bidder pursuant to section 2-705, be turned over by the chief of police to the probation officer, to the welfare department of the county, or to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2247, § 1, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 2-706. - Sale of real property—Procedure. 
After authorization by the council of the sale of a parcel of real property, a sale shall be scheduled and conducted by the director of public works or by his designated deputy. All sales shall be made to the highest bidder subject to final confirmation by the council. Notice that such sale is to be conducted shall be given by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation printed, published, and circulated in the city and by sending written notice to all persons who had requested notice and to all persons suggested by department heads as prospective bidders, such notice to be published and mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale. 
Sealed bids may be required or oral bids may be provided for. Sealed bids or written offers to purchase must be accompanied by a deposit of one (1) percent of the amount of the minimum bid in the form of cash, or by cashier's or certified check. If oral bids are permitted, after any sealed bids are opened and any written bids are announced, any person present may submit an oral bid provided that any bid may be disregarded which does not exceed the highest bid theretofore made by at least one (1) percent of such highest bid. 
The successful bidder must deliver immediately following the declaration of sale, a written statement of his bid signed by the bidder, together with an initial deposit of ten (10) percent of the amount of his bid. The deposit may be in the form of a personal check provided such check is replaced before the close of business on the following business day by cash or by cashier's or certified check. Failure to deposit such written statement of bid or said ten (10) percent of the bid price in the manner stated may be considered a withdrawal of the bid. If a personal check is not replaced as required, a forfeit of one (1) percent of the sales price, as stated in the written statement of the bid, shall be required. The purchase of the property may then be offered to the second highest bidder of record. 
(Code 1952, § 2613; Ord. No. NS-128, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-1265, § 1, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 2-706.1. - Same—Sale only to owners of adjoining property. 
Upon the written recommendation of the city manager, the council may determine that the property being offered for sale can have real value only to a certain owner or owners of adjoining property and could be used by other persons only for the purpose of nuisance value to such owners of adjoining or abutting property. After such determination has been made as next hereinabove provided for, the council may by direct negotiation, provide for the sale of the real property covered thereby, without compliance with the auction, public sale, or method of payment requirements in this article provided for. 
(Ord. No. NS-1265, § 2, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 2-706.2. - Same—Method of payment. 
Sales of real property shall be on an all cash basis with the following exception: Upon written recommendation of the city manager and approval by the council, a parcel of surplus real property may be sold on such credit terms as are deemed to be necessary in each case. After the required down payment has been made, the balance of the purchase price shall be secured by a note and deed of trust. The credit payment period shall not exceed fifteen (15) years from the date of execution of the trust deed. Interest shall be at the prevailing rate in the community allowed by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) as of the date of the public sale, but shall not include any FHA mortgage insurance premium. 
(Ord. No. NS-1265, § 2, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 2-707. - Same—Broker listing; maximum commission; nonliability of city agent. 
The city council, when it determines that any real property owned by the city be disposed of, may authorize the director of public works to execute a written listing contract to find bidders with a licensed real estate agent or broker, and may specify that said property be placed in multiple listing. Said listing contract shall specify the maximum commission to be paid if the property is sold, which said commission shall in no case exceed six (6) percent of the sale price on property improved with a habitable building and shall in no case exceed ten (10) percent on unimproved property. No personal liability shall attach to any agent of the city who signs any such contract on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 2615; Ord. No. NS-256, § 1, 6-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1082, § 1, 6-21-71; Ord. No. NS-1265, § 11, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 2-708. - Same—Payment of commission; division of commission. 
In the event an agent covered by the contract, as set out in section 2-707, procures a bidder who submits the highest bid and to whom the sale is made and completed in due course, the commission provided in said contract shall be paid to said agent. In event an agent covered by the contract submits the highest written bid which conforms in all respects to the city's invitation to bid and the provisions of section 2-706, and an oral bid conforming to said requirements is made by a different bidder and results in the sale being made and completed to said different oral bidder, then one-half (½) of the commission originally fixed shall be paid to the listing agent who procured the original highest written conforming bid. If the successful oral bidder was procured and is represented by a licensed real estate agent or broker and the sale is made and completed, then the other one-half (½) of said commission shall be paid to such agent or broker. 
In cases where no listing contract exists and the successful bidder is represented by a licensed real estate broker, upon approval by the council, a full commission will be paid to such broker under the following conditions: 
(1)  The buyer's written or oral bid must be submitted by the broker, 
(2)  The broker must be designated as such in the buyer's purchase offer or in the written statement of his bid, and 
(3)  The sale to the buyer must be consummated. 
(Code 1952, § 2616; Ord. No. NS-256, § 1, 6-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1265, § 5, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 2-709. - Exceptions. 
The provisions in this article regulating the sale of surplus city personal property or the sale of city real property shall not apply to any sale of such property made to any city, county, city and county, state or federal government, or any political subdivision of any of them, or to any nonprofit public benefit corporation formed or controlled by the city, or to any sale which is exempted from such provisions by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the city council after a duly noticed public hearing, and such sales may be made upon a basis of direct negotiations without the necessity for public auction or competitive bidding, when the authority to so negotiate has been granted by the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 2614; Ord. No. NS-128, § 2, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-1006, § 27, 4-6-85)  
Sec. 2-710. - Exchange of real property. 
Upon written recommendation of the city manager, the council may authorize the exchange of any parcel of city-owned real property which has been declared to be surplus to the city's needs for any other real property, whether publicly or privately owned, for which the city has a public need. Upon such authorization, an exchange may be concluded by direct negotiation without compliance with the auction or public sale requirements in this article provided for. 
(Ord. No. NS-1265, § 6, 8-4-75)  
Secs. 2-711—2-739. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STADIUM 
 
Sec. 2-740. - Applicability of article. 
All use, rental occupancy and control of that certain property belonging to the city, located upon the west side of Flower Street between Sixth and Civic Center Drive West, known as the Eddie West Field-Santa Ana Stadium, which includes the stadium and the area surrounding the stadium to the fenced boundary thereof, shall be under the terms, conditions and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1952, § 2620; Ord. No. NS-749, § 1, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-1160, § 1, 4-16-73; Ord. No. NS-1465, § 5, 12-4-78)  
Sec. 2-741. - Permits; deposits. 
Permits for use of the stadium will be issued by the recreation and parks department. A cash deposit of fifty (50) percent of the total basic fee payable upon execution of an agreement will be required with applications filed by other than school users. Applicants must agree to comply with the rules and regulations issued by the recreation and parks department with the approval of the city manager. Cash deposits will not be refunded. School users shall account for their sales, shall not be required to make a deposit for use of the stadium, and shall render final accounting and remit payment within ten (10) days after each event. Other users shall be required to render final accounting and balance of payments within three (3) working days after each use. 
(Code 1952, § 2621; Ord. No. NS-749, § 1, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-1160, § 1, 4-16-73; Ord. No. NS-1465, § 6, 12-4-78)  
Sec. 2-742. - Rental rates. 
Rental rates and incidental fees for the use of the stadium pursuant to permit issued by the recreation and parks department, and the manner of payment thereof, shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 2622; Ord. No. NS-749, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-889, § 1, 8-7-67; Ord. No. NS-1160, § 1, 4-16-73; Ord. No. NS-1280, § 1, 10-6-75; Ord. No. NS-1292, § 1, 2-17-76)  
Sec. 2-742.5. - Use pursuant to contract. 
The provisions of sections 2-741 and 2-742 apply only to permits issued by the recreation and parks department. For a series of commercial events, the city council may permit the use of the stadium pursuant to contract for such periods of time and upon such terms regarding rent, fees, deposits, and time and manner of payment as it shall deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. NS-1292, 2, 2-17-76)  
Sec. 2-743. - Liquor. 
No intoxicating liquor shall be sold or consumed upon the premises known as Eddie West Field-Santa Ana Stadium except with the express written consent of the executive director of cultural, recreation and community services. The executive director of cultural, recreation and community services may grant such consent, but only for the sale and consumption of beer for adult events. An event may be deemed an "adult event" if the predominate age of the audience can reasonably be expected to exceed twenty-one (21) years. No consent shall be given whenever: 
(1)  The sponsor of the event does not desire the sale and consumption of beer at the event; or 
(2)  The event is sponsored by any school; or 
(3)  The event is in the nature of a youth event, including, but not limited to, concerts and youth athletic events where the predominate audience age is less than twenty-one years or the predominate age of athletes and other participants is less than twenty-one (21) years. 
For purposes of this section, the term "school" is defined to be an educational institution from the level of community college downward. Any university or four-year college, state or private, where the predominate campus population may reasonably be expected to exceed twenty-one (21) years, which has been proven to attract large numbers of alumni and public over the age of twenty-one (21) as attendees to its sponsored function(s), and which specifically makes written request for the sales of beer to the executive director of cultural, recreation and community services, shall be considered exempt from the provision of subparagraphs (2) and (3), above, and shall assume the same status as any other "adult event" under this section. 
(Code 1952, § 2623; Ord. No. NS-749, § 1, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-1292, § 3, 2-17-76; Ord. No. NS-1465, § 7, 12-4-78; Ord. No. NS-1508, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1798, § 1, 10-14-85) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage warning signs. 18-551 et seq.  
Sec. 2-744. - Concessions, etc. 
The city reserves to itself the exclusive right at the stadium for the vending or renting of merchandise or the granting of concessions therefor, of broadcasting, televising, transcribing or recording all exhibitions, games, performances, speeches, entertainments or programs, and no person may do any of the things or exercise any of the rights herein reserved exclusively to the city, without first having obtained from the council a permit in writing therefor. 
(Code 1952, § 2624; Ord. No. NS-749, § 1, 8-17-64)  
Sec. 2-745. - Insurance, responsibility for damages. 
Any person using the Eddie West Field-Santa Ana Stadium shall be responsible for any damage or injury to the structures or facilities maintained by the city therein, caused by such person or by the exhibition, performance, game or act. All users of the stadium shall obtain and file with the clerk of the council prior to such use, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or policies, approved as to form by the city attorney, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to conduct business in the State of California. The City of Santa Ana, its officers and employees shall be named as insured or additional insured on said policy or policies. The policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall be not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) personal injury and two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) property damage. Said policy or policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation, or change of coverage of insured or additional insured shall be effective until after twenty (20) days notice thereof has been given in writing to the clerk of the council. 
(Code 1952, § 2625; Ord. No. NS-749, § 1, 8-17-64; Ord. No. NS-1465, § 8, 12-4-78)  
Secs. 2-746, 2-747. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CITY MANAGER'S CONTRACTING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-748. - City manager's contracting authority. 
(a)  Non-public works contracts. 
(1)  The city manager is authorized to bind the city to any one (1) or more written non-public works contract, per vendor, in an amount or amounts not exceeding the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). For purposes of this section, a non-public works contact shall mean any contact not deemed to be a public works contract under subsection (b)(1). 
(b)  Public works contracts. 
(1)  The city manager is authorized to bind the city to any one (1) or more written public works contract, per vendor, in an amount or amounts not exceeding the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). For purposes of this section, a public works contact shall be deemed to mean a project for the erection, improvement, and/or maintenance, inspection, testing and repair of public buildings, streets, drains, sewers, or parks. 
(2)  The city manager is authorized to bind the city to any one (1) written contract for emergency public works construction in an amount not exceeding the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(3)  The city manager is hereby authorized to bind the city on change orders to any one (1) public works contract, per vendor, without previous city council approval when such change order for any one (1) public works contract, together with any previously approved change orders for said contract, do not cumulatively amount to an increase of the city's expenditure obligation under said contract of more than ten (10) percent of the original contract amount, or the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), whichever is the greater. 
(Ord. No. NS-2963 , § 5, 3-19-2019)  
Sec. 2-749. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII.I. - LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 2-750. - Contractors' insurance requirements. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Santa Ana Municipal Code, each person, firm or association who or which contracts with the city to perform any services to, for, or on behalf of the city shall provide to the city evidence, in form acceptable to the city attorney, of liability insurance which protects the interests of the city in at least the following minimum limits of liability: 
(1)  As to each such person, firm or association who or which provides to, for, or on behalf of the city vehicular transportation services for persons: Not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and occurrence for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each occurrence for property damage, or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit, or such other limits as the city council may specify in any such contract. 
(2)  As to each other such person, firm or association who or which provides other services to, for, or on behalf of the city: Not less than the limits of liability which the city council may specify by resolution. 
(Ord. No. NS-1500, 9-4-79)  
Secs. 2-751—2-799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII.II. - PURCHASING RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-800. - Purposes of purchasing system. 
These purchasing rules and regulations are hereby adopted in order to: 
(1)  Establish efficient procedures for purchasing of materials, supplies, labor and equipment; 
(2)  Secure maximum quality goods, services or performance at minimum cost for the city; 
(3)  Exercise positive financial control over the city's purchases; and 
(4)  Establish the necessary procedures for the selection of providers of all ranges of goods and services so as to avoid favor or prejudice. 
(5)  To simplify, clarify, and modernize the law governing procurement by the City; 
(6)  To provide for increased public confidence in the procedures followed in public procurement; 
(7)  To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system of the City; 
(8)  To foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise system; 
(9)  To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity, and 
(10)  To obtain in a cost-effective and responsive manner the materials, services, and construction required by City agencies in order for those agencies to better serve the City's businesses and residents. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, 7-1-02; Ord. No. NS-2742, § 4, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 2-801. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2963 , § 3, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 2-801. Former § 2-801 pertained to city manager's authority to approve change orders and derived from Ord. No. NS-2502, adopted July 1, 2002 and NS-2717, adopted July 3, 2006. Similar provisions can be found in § 2-748.  
Sec. 2-802. - Definitions 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Agency shall mean the executive director of the city agency or department which has responsibility for awarding a contract for services. 
Agreement or contract shall mean a legal contract which complies fully with the provisions of Section 421 of the City's Charter and this article. The words agreement and contract may be used interchangeably in this article. 
Electronic shall mean electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other similar technology. 
Local business shall mean a business certified by the state department of general services as a small business, which has a substantial presence through either a headquarters or branch office within the geographical boundaries of the city, and which headquarters or branch office was established prior to the city inviting bids for the respective procurement. Said business must possess a current business license and certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this article, a post office box address within the city shall not qualify as a valid business location. 
Materials, supplies, labor and equipment shall mean those goods or services, but excluding services and public works construction, that are readily ascertainable and measurable by an objective standard in terms of quantity or quality so as to be susceptible to competitive bidding. 
Orange County business shall mean a business certified by the state department of general services as a small business, which has a substantial presence through either a headquarters or branch office within the geographical boundaries of Orange County, and which headquarters or branch office was established prior to the city inviting bids for the respective procurement. Said business must possess a current business license to perform work in Santa Ana. For purposes of this article, a post office box address within the county shall not qualify as a valid business location. 
Public notice shall mean the distribution or dissemination of information to interested parties using methods that are reasonably available. Such methods can include publication in newspapers of general circulation, electronic or paper mailing lists, and web site(s) designated by the city and maintained for that purpose. 
Purchasing manager shall mean that city employee or official so designated by the city manager and authorized to carry out the responsibilities under this article, including the promulgation and enforcement of administrative procedures. 
Purchase order (PO) shall mean that standardized contract developed pursuant to subsection 2-803(j) issued to the vendor of materials, supplies, labor and equipment. 
Services shall mean the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. Services are of an advisory nature, provide a recommended course of action or personal expertise, have an end product comprised of a transmittal of information, written or verbal, and that is related to the governmental functions of administration, management, program management or innovation. The product may include anything from answers to specific questions to design of a system or plan, and includes provision of workshops, seminars, retreats, and conferences for which expertise is necessary. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. This term shall not include contracts for the construction, alteration, improvement, repair, or maintenance of real or personal property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, 7-1-02; Ord. No. NS-2742, § 5, 5-7-07; Ord. No. NS-2828, § 3, 3-19-12)  
Sec. 2-803. - Powers and duties of the purchasing manager. 
The city manager is directed to establish and maintain a centralized purchasing system, and in connection therewith, the city manager shall designate a purchasing manager for the city whose duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Act to procure for the city the needed quality in materials, supplies, labor, and equipment, and services including professional services, at the least expense to the city. 
(b)  Recommend execution of contracts. 
(c)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases. 
(d)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products. 
(e)  Establish rules and procedures governing the purchase of materials, supplies, labor, equipment and services, for the city through the preparation and adoption of an administrative code which shall provide for the review of such alternative sources of supply or performance as may be available in competition with one another and selection therefrom on the basis of obtaining maximum quality at minimum costs. 
(f)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this article. 
(g)  Keep or cause to be kept an inventory of all municipal property in his or her custody. 
(h)  If required by federal, state or other law, cause notices inviting bids to be published. 
(i)  Endeavor to establish standards in the variety of articles, materials, supplies, labor, and equipment, commonly used by the various departments and agencies, as will make possible uniform purchases, when consistent with efficiency. 
(j)  Prepare, with the approval of the city attorney as to form, a pre-printed purchase order to be utilized in contracts for materials, supplies, labor and equipment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, 7-1-02; Ord. No. NS-2742, § 6, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 2-803.1. - Local preference in contracts for materials, supplies, labor and equipment. 
Except for those contracts for which the Charter of the City of Santa Ana prohibits the provision of a local preference, and/or those contracts funded through programs or partners which prohibit the use of a local preference, the city council authorizes the purchasing manager to extend a preference to local business and Orange County business as set forth herein. 
(a)  In the procurement of material, supplies, labor and equipment involving expenditures between five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), the purchasing manager shall extend a preference to each local business and each Orange County business, which preference shall be applied to the bid which provides maximum quality at minimum price. Said preference shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  If the bidder submitting the maximum quality at minimum cost bid is not a local business or an Orange County business, and if a local business or an Orange County business has submitted a responsive and responsible bid, and with the benefit of the applicable preference, the bid submitted by local business or Orange County business is equal to or less than the original maximum quality at minimum cost bid, the contract shall be awarded to the local business or the Orange County business at its submitted bid price. If two (2) or more low bids received are equal after the application of the preference, the contract shall be awarded in the following order: 
(1)  To a local business. 
(2)  To an Orange County business. 
(3)  To the bidder submitting the maximum quality at minimum cost bid. 
The city shall reserve the right to reject any or all bids. 
(c)  In order for the preference to apply, a bidder must certify under penalty of perjury, that the bidder qualifies as a local business or Orange County business. The preference is waived if the certification does not appear on the bid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2828, § 4, 3-19-12)  
Sec. 2-804. - Reporting requirements 
The city manager reporting requirements mandated by Section 421 of the City Charter shall only include contracts let that exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), all other contracts let by the city manager under five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be provided to the city council if requested by a councilmember. 
(Ord. No. NS-2742, § 7, 5-7-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2742, § 7, adopted May 7, 2007, amended § 2-804 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 2-804 pertained to procurement of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment under five hundred dollars ($500.00), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, adopted July 1, 2002.  
Sec. 2-805. - Procurement of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment between five hundred dollars ($500.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(a)  For those agreements exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the city manager may bind the city on contracts for materials, supplies, labor, and equipment in amounts not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5000.00) in any one contract or in the aggregate with any one vendor or service provider. These contracts can be entered into administratively without the need for informal or formal bidding. 
(b)  Unless exempt from bidding pursuant section 2-807, all contracts involving an expenditure between five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for materials, supplies, labor, and equipment shall be let on the basis of obtaining maximum quality at minimum cost in accordance with procedures established by the purchasing manager. Those procedures shall provide for at a minimum the following: 
(1)  There shall be a written or verbal invitation for bid which shall include the following information: A general description of the things to be purchased or project, the time and place for bid opening when applicable, bid instructions, and the terms and conditions of the bid and any resulting contract. The purchasing manager shall make a good faith effort to notify all businesses engaged in providing such materials, supplies, labor, and equipment located within the boundaries of the city of the opportunity to bid. 
(2)  Where required by state or federal law or regulations, or upon request by a bidder, the bids shall be opened, if sealed, and declared in public at the time and place stated on the "Invitation for Bid." 
(Ord. No. NS-2742, § 8, 5-7-07; Ord. No. NS-2828, § 5, 3-19-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2742, § 8, adopted May 7, 2007, amended § 2-805 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 2-805 pertained to procurement of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment between five hundred dollars ($500.00) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, adopted July 1, 2002.  
Sec. 2-806. - Procurement of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
Unless exempt from bidding pursuant to section 2-807, all contracts involving an expenditure in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for materials, supplies, labor, and equipment shall be let on the basis of obtaining maximum quality at minimum cost, in accordance with procedures established by the purchasing manager. Those procedures shall provide for at least the following: 
(a)  Public notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the things to be purchased and the time and place for bid opening. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids, in accordance with regulations established by the purchasing manager. To the extent that public notice is by way of publication in a newspaper of general circulation, such publication shall be for at least two (2) days, the first of which shall be at least ten (10) days before the date set for opening bids. 
(b)  Invitation of bids shall be mailed or transmitted by other means established by the administrative code but not recited over the telephone or in person. Any interested bidder may obtain an invitation for bid. 
(c)  All bids shall be submitted sealed in accordance with the instructions contained in the "Invitation for Bid" form. 
(d)  The bids shall be opened in public, at the time and place stated on the "Invitation for Bid." All bids shall be publicly declared. 
(Ord. No. NS-2742, § 9, 5-7-07; Ord. No. NS-2828, § 6, 3-19-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2742, § 9, adopted May 7, 2007, amended § 2-806 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 2-806 pertained to procurement of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, adopted July 1, 2002.  
Sec. 2-806.1. - Acquisition of goods and services by reverse auctions; posting on Internet; registration and requirements; inapplicability to construction contracts. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the bidding provisions of this chapter, reverse auctions may be utilized for the acquisition of goods and services. The reverse auction process shall include a specification of an opening date and time when real-time electronic bids may be accepted, and provide that the procedure shall remain open until the designated closing date and time. 
(b)  All bids on reverse auctions shall be posted electronically on the Internet, updated on a real-time basis, and shall allow registered bidders to lower the price of their bid below the lowest bid posted on the Internet. 
(c)  The purchasing manager shall require vendors to register before the reverse auction opening date and time, and as part of the registration, agree to any terms and conditions and other requirements of the solicitation. The purchasing manager may require vendors to be prequalified prior to placing bids in a reverse auction. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, "reverse auction" means a competitive online solicitation process for fungible goods or services in which vendors compete against each other online in real time in an open and interactive environment. 
(e)  The reverse auction process may not be used for bidding on any construction contract that is subject to Section 422 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2742, § 10, 5-7-07)  
Sec. 2-807. - Non-bid purchases. 
The following contracts may be exempted from competitive bidding through an open market purchase by the purchasing manager, and confirmed by the city council in the case of contracts for over twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), but shall nevertheless be entered into only after compliance with the rules established by the purchasing manager, which shall include the review of such alternative sources of supply or performance as may be available in competition with one another and selection therefrom on the basis of obtaining maximum quality at minimum costs: 
(a)  Purchases of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment whenever it shall appear that there is only one (1) reasonably available source or where solicitation of bids would for any reason be an idle act. 
(b)  Purchases of materials, supplies, labor, and equipment necessary for the preservation of life, health or property, following the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster in the city. A full written account of emergency procurements made during the declared emergency or disaster shall be submitted to the city council within thirty (30) days after their procurement. 
(c)  Situations where no bids are received or all bids are rejected and the city council determines, upon the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its members, that the materials, supplies, labor or equipment can be obtained at a lower cost. 
(d)  Purchases from vendors whose names are on current established lists and have been awarded the same type of purchase contract by a federal agency (including the general services administration), a state agency, county, city or other public agency after a competitive bidding process determined by the purchasing manager to be substantially equivalent to that prescribed by this article. 
(e)  Contracts for services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 3, 7-1-02; Ord. No. NS-2742, § 11, 5-7-07; Ord. No. NS-2770, § 3, 8-18-08)  
Sec. 2-808. - Local preference in contracts for services. 
Except for those contracts for which the Charter of the City of Santa Ana prohibits the provision of a local preference, and/or those contracts funded through programs or partners which prohibit the use of a local preference, the city council authorizes the agency to extend a preference to local business and Orange County Business as set forth herein. 
(a)  Contracts for services shall be awarded on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary to for the satisfactory performance of the services required. In evaluating proposals for service contracts in amounts up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), proposers which qualify as local business or Orange County business shall be eligible for preference points. The preference shall be added to the proposal to reach a final score in determining the most advantageous proposal. Said preference shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  A non local proposer associating with a local business or Orange County business, shall be eligible for the local preference if a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the contract value will be performed by the local business or Orange County business. 
(Ord. No. NS-2828, § 7, 3-19-12)  
Secs. 2-809—2-814. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-815—2-850. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - GIFTS TO PUBLIC OFFICIALS 
 
Sec. 2-851. - Purpose; meaning of terms; interpretation; citation. 
(a)  The city council finds that the receipt of gifts by public officials from persons who do business with the city erodes public confidence in the impartiality of decisions made by those officials. The purpose of this article is to prohibit the donation and receipt of specified gifts, thereby eliminating, to the extent possible, such loss of confidence. 
(b)  Unless otherwise expressly defined, the terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in the California Political Reform Act (Title 9 of the California Government Code) and regulations issued by the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to the authority of the political reform act, as the act and regulations shall be, from time to time, amended. 
(c)  This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "City of Santa Ana Gift Ban Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. NS-2201, § 1, 7-19-93)  
Sec. 2-852. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article: 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  City officer shall mean every person who is elected or appointed to an office of the city which is specified in Section 87200 of the California Government Code. 
(c)  Designated employee shall mean every employee of the city who is designated in the city's conflict of interest codes to file a statement of economic interests and every member of a city board or commission required to file such a statement. 
(d)  Doing business with the city shall mean: 
(1)  Seeking the award of a contract or grant from the city; or 
(2)  Having sought the award of a contract or grant from the city in the past twelve (12) months; or 
(3)  Being engaged as a lobbyist or lobbyist firm, as defined in this article, from the time of such engagement until twelve (12) months after the award of the contract grant, license, permit, or other entitlement for use, which was the subject of the engagement; or 
(4)  Having an existing contractual relationship with the city, until twelve (12) months after the contractual obligations of all parties have been completed; or 
(5)  Seeking, actively supporting, or actively opposing the issuance, by the city, of a license, permit, or other entitlement for use, or having done any of these things within the past twelve (12) months. 
(e)  Gift shall have the meaning it is defined to have in the California Political Reform Act, and the regulations issued pursuant to that act, except that the following shall not be deemed to be gifts: 
(1)  Meals, beverages, and free admission at any event sponsored by, or for the benefit of, a bona fide educational, academic, or charitable organization, and commemorative gifts from such organizations with a cumulative value, from any single source, of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less during any 12-month period. 
(2)  Flowers, plants, balloons, or similar tokens which are given to express condolences, congratulations, or sympathy for ill health, or to commemorate special occasions, provided that gifts made or received under this exemption shall not exceed a value of fifty dollars ($50.00) from any single source in any calendar year. 
(3)  A prize awarded on the basis of chance in a bona fide competition not related to the official status of the public official. 
(4)  Gifts from any agency of a foreign sovereign nation, provided that such gifts are unconditionally donated by the public official to the city within forty-five (45) days of receipt, and the public official does not claim any tax deduction by virtue of such donation. 
(5)  Food and beverages consumed by a public official that total less than five ($5.00) per occasion. 
(f)  Lobbyist shall mean any individual, including an attorney, who is employed or contracts for consideration, other than reimbursement of reasonable travel expenses, to communicate directly with any city officer for the purpose of seeking, actively supporting, or actively opposing the award of a contract or grant from the city, or the issuance, by the city, of a license, permit, or other entitlement for use. An attorney shall not be considered a lobbyist when performing activities which can only be performed by a person admitted to the practice of law. 
(g)  Lobbyist firm shall mean: 
(1)  Any business entity, which is employed or contracts for consideration, other than reimbursement of travel expenses, to communicate directly with a city officer for the purpose of seeking, actively supporting or actively opposing the award of a contract or grant from the city, or the issuance, by the city, of a license, permit, or other entitlement for use, or 
(2)  Any business entity of which any member or employee is a lobbyist. 
(h)  Principal shall mean any individual or business entity which employs or contracts with a lobbyist or lobbyist firm for any of the purposes stated in subsections (f) or (g). 
(1)  An individual or business entity shall be deemed to be employed or contracting to communicate directly with a city officer if it is reasonably foreseeable that in the course of employment or in the course of performing the contract the individual or an employee of the entity will have a telephone conversation or a discussion with any city officer, outside of any meeting governed by the Ralph M. Brown Act (which is codified in the California Government Code commencing with Section 54950), for the purpose of seeking, actively supporting, or actively opposing the award of a contract or grant from the city, or the issuance, by the city, of a license, permit, or other entitlement for use. 
(2)  An individual lobbyist who is an officer, partner or employee of his or her principal shall be deemed to be "engaged" within the meaning of this section on the first occasion on which he or she engages in a telephone conversation or discussion described in subsection (h)(1). A lobbyist firm, or an individual lobbyist who is not an officer, partner, or employee of his or her principal shall be deemed to be "engaged" within the meaning of this section upon the completion of an agreement, oral or written, to provide the services specified in subsection (f) or (g). 
(i)  Public official means every city officer and every designated employee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2201, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2472, § 2, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 2-853. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person who is doing business with the city shall make any gift to any city officer. 
(b)  No person who is doing business with the city shall make any gift to any designated employee, who, by virtue of his or her city employment, could make a governmental decision, participate in making a governmental decision, or use his or her official position to influence a governmental decision regarding the pending business of the donor, or who has done any of the above during the twelve (12) months preceding the donation. 
(c)  No city officer shall solicit or accept any gift from any person whom he or she knows, or has reason to know, is doing business with the city. 
(d)  No designated employee shall solicit or accept any gift from any person whom he knows, or has reason to know, is doing business with the city, when such employee by virtue of his city employment, could make a governmental decision, participate in making a governmental decision, or use his or her official position to influence a governmental decision regarding the pending business of the donor, or has done any of the above during the twelve (12) months preceding the donation. 
(e)  No public official shall accept any gift when the identity of the donor is not known to the public official. 
(Ord. No. NS-2201, § 1, 7-19-93)  
Sec. 2-854. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Any city officer who violates section 2-853 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any designated employee who violates section 2-853 shall be subject to discipline for such violation, including, in appropriate cases, termination of employment. 
(c)  Any member of any city board or commission, other than a board or commission established by the constitution or a statute of the State of California, who violates section 2-853, shall be subject to removal from office. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsection (a) or (b) of section 2-853 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  These enforcement provisions are in lieu of the penalty provided in section 1-8 of this Code, are cumulative, and are not mutually exclusive. 
(Ord. No. NS-2201, § 1, 7-19-93)  
Secs. 2-855—2-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL CLAIM REQUIREMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-901. - Application of article. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to local public entities by California Government Code Section 935(a), this article applies to all claims for money or damages against the City of Santa Ana and any public entity for which the city council is the governing body, which are excepted by Section 905(i) from Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of the California Government Code and which are not otherwise governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-2310, § 1, 12-16-96)  
Sec. 2-902. - Presentation of claim required. 
A claim to which this article applies must be presented to the city as a prerequisite to any suit being filed thereon. 
(Ord. No. NS-2310, § 1, 12-16-96)  
Sec. 2-903. - Time limits for filing claim. 
All claims to which this article applies shall be filed within the time limits established in California Government Code Section 911.2. 
(Ord. No. NS-2310, § 1, 12-16-96)  
Sec. 2-904. - Retention of original claim. 
The original claim shall be retained by the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2310, § 1, 12-16-96)  
Chapter 3 - UNIFORM HEARING AND APPEAL PROCEDURE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City council; 2-100 et seq.; uniform code appeals board; 2-450 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Scope of this chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in other provisions of this Code, the procedures of this chapter shall apply to specified hearings, whether on matters of initial application or on appeal from the decision of city officials, boards or commissions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 2, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 3-2. - Request for hearing. 
(1)  Initial application. Whenever an applicant is entitled by this Code to apply for initial determination of a matter, he shall submit his application in writing to the clerk of the council. The clerk shall determine that the application is in complete and correct form and may refer it to any appropriate city department for advice and assistance in making such determination. Thereafter, the city manager or designee shall appoint a hearing officer to consider applications in specific types of matters and fix a time and place for a hearing to be held not less than five (5) nor more than sixty (60) days after receipt of the application. The clerk shall notify the applicant by mail at the address provided by the applicant of the date on which the matter will be heard. 
The hearing officer may but need not be a city employee. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this Code. 
If any provision of law requires that public notice of the hearing be given, the clerk shall cause such notice to be given so that the hearing may be scheduled within the time required by this section. 
(2)  Appeal from action of city official, board or commission. Whenever an applicant is entitled under this Code or any other provision of law to appeal from an adverse determination in a matter made by a city official, board or commission and desires to so appeal, he shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of that determination, submit a notice of appeal to the clerk of the council and a copy thereof to the person or the chairman of the body whose decision is being appealed. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the clerk of the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the official or body whose decision is appealed, the date of any original and amended applications or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested and the name and address of the appellant. 
Thereafter, the city manager or designee shall appoint a hearing officer to consider appeals in specific types of matters and fix a time and place for a hearing to be held not less than five (5) nor more than sixty (60) days after receipt of the appeal. The clerk shall notify the appellant by mail at the address provided by the appellant of the date on which the matter will be heard. 
The hearing officer may but need not be a city employee. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2165, § 1, 7-6-92; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 3, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 3-3. - Administrative fee. 
By resolution, the council may require the payment of a fee to cover the administrative costs incurred by the clerk of the council in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2165, § 2, 7-6-92)  
Sec. 3-3.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2165, § 3, adopted July 6, 1992, repealed § 3-3.1, which pertained to a hearing before city council and derived from Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 1974.  
Sec. 3-4. - General powers of the hearing officer. 
A hearing officer appointed pursuant to section 3-2 may receive and rule on the admissibility of any evidence, hear testimony under oath, and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of hearings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2165, § 4, 7-6-92)  
Sec. 3-5. - Burden of proof at hearings. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the burden is on the applicant/appellant in any hearing under this chapter to prove that he is entitled to that for which he is applying under section 3-2(1) or that the determination of the official or body which he is appealing under section 3-2(2) is unreasonable, erroneous or clearly abusive of discretion. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 3-6. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 4, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 3-7. - Report of the hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the hearing is closed submit a written report to the clerk of the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state the hearing officer's findings, conclusions and recommendations. The report shall also contain a final decision in the matter. All such reports filed with the clerk shall be matters of public record. A copy of each such report of final decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant/appellant within five (5) days of receipt by the clerk and a further copy shall be sent to the city department, board or commission most directly concerned with the subject of the report. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2165, § 5, 7-6-92; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 5, 8-17-09)  
Secs. 3-8—3-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2792, §§ 6—8, adopted August 17, 2009, repealed the former sections 3-8—3-10 in their entirety, which pertained to the consideration of hearing officer's report by council notice, exceptions to hearing officer's report, and action by council upon consideration of hearing officer's report, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, adopted December 9, 1974, and Ord. No. NS-2165, § 6, adopted July 6, 1992.  
Sec. 3-11. - Hearings to which this chapter shall not apply. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Hearings to consider the master plan or the general plan. 
(2)  Hearing to determine whether public convenience and necessity require acquisition of property for public use. 
(3)  Hearings to consider parcel maps. 
(4)  Hearings to review or consider on appeal any action of the planning commission or zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2165, § 7, 7-6-92)  
Sec. 3-12. - Applicability of this chapter to hearings before other bodies. 
Hearings before boards and commissions other than the hearing officer appointed pursuant to section 3-2 are not required to be conducted in accordance with provisions of this chapter. However, any board or commission may, with respect to any individual application or appeal submitted to it, by simple motion elect to proceed by use of the hearing officer procedure established herein. When such election has been made, the board or commission shall act in the manner prescribed for the hearing officer and the secretary of the board or commission shall act in the manner prescribed for the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1235, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 9, 8-17-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2792, § 9, adopted August 17, 2009, changed the title of section 3-12 from "Applicability of this chapter to hearings before bodies other than the city council."  
Sec. 3-13. - References to the chapter 3 appeal process. 
All references in this Code, or in any resolution, agreement, regulation, authorization or directive of the city council, the city manager or any board or commission of the city, or any agency or body controlled by the city, or in any document whatsoever, to an appeal to the city council pursuant to the terms of chapter 3 shall be deemed references to the current chapter 3 appeal process as amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-2792, § 10, 8-17-09)  
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, enacted July 6, 1970, repealed former Chapter 5, Animals, §§ 5-1—5-18, 5-50—5-64, and enacted new Chapter 5, §§ 5-1—5-13, 5-50—5-71, as herein set out. Former Chapter 5 was derived from: Code 1952, §§ 3134, 4110, 4111—4111.4, 4112—4117.3, 4118.1, 4120.1, 4121, 4121.1, 4122, 4123—4123.4, 4124, 4124.1, 4275.2, 4275.3, 4276.2, 4276.3, 5117; Ord. No. NS-118, § 1, 7-18-55; Ord. No. NS-148, §§ 1, 2, 1-3-56; Ord. No. NS-517, § 1, 5-15-61; Ord. No. NS-715, §§ 1, 2, 2-17-64; Ord. No. NS-851, § 1, 10-25-66; Ord. No. NS-922, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-1000, § 1, 1-19-70. 
Cross reference— Pest control § 18-257 et seq.; traffic regulations applicable, § 36-38; noises, § 18-309(5); in parks, § 31-1(1)(2). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1466, §§ 1-21, enacted Feb. 5, 1979, amended Art. I to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment Art. I was derived from Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, adopted July 6, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1152, § 1, adopted March 12, 1973; Ord. No. NS-1183, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1973; Ord. No. NS-1216, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 5, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 19, adopted Dec. 9, 1974; and Ord. No. NS-1330, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 26, 1976. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(a)  Animal includes, but not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fishes, fowl, rabbits, reptiles and nonhuman mammals. 
(b)  Apiary means the place where bees are kept and maintained, usually in a collection of hives or colonies. 
(c)  Bee means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera. 
(d)  Bird includes, but is not limited to, budgies, canaries, cardinals, cockatiels, cockatoos, doves, finches, lories, lorikeets, lovebirds, macaws, parakeets, parrots, pigeons, sparrows, toucans and weavers. 
(e)  Commercial kennels means any lot, building, structure, or premises where more than three (3) dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for any purpose, including but not limited to boarding, training, or breeding, exclusive of dental, medical, or surgical care, or for quarantine purposes. 
(f)  Domesticated animal means any dog, housecat (felis catus), livestock, rabbit, poultry or bird. 
(g)  Dog includes any male, female, or neuter domesticated member of the species canis familiaris, but excludes other members of the family canidae. 
(h)  Estray means any animal found running at large upon any land within the city. 
(i)  Fowl means any larger domestic bird generally used for food and includes, but is not limited to, the chicken, duck, goose and turkey. 
(j)  Hive means a structure for the housing of a bee colony. 
(k)  Livestock means animals kept for use on a farm and includes, but is not limited to, any swine, sheep, goat, horse, cattle, equine or bovine animal. 
(l)  Owner means any person having title to any animal, or a person who has, harbors, or keeps, or who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(m)  Premises means a parcel of land. 
(n)  Quarantine means the isolation of any animal within a substantial enclosure to avoid its contact with other animals or unauthorized persons. 
(o)  Running at large means free of restraint beyond the boundaries of the premises of the owner or custodian. 
(p)  Vaccination means a protective inoculation against rabies with an anti rabies vaccine recognized and approved by the Orange County Health Department. 
(q)  Vicious animal means any animal which has bitten or broken the skin of, or in any manner attacked or attempted to attack any person or any animal within the city. 
(r)  Wild animal means any animal which is either: 
(1)  Not a domesticated animal, or 
(2)  A vicious animal over which the owner has evidenced a failure to maintain control. 
(s)  Exotic animal means nonhuman primates and prosimians (such as chimpanzees, monkeys) felids, except domesticated cats; ursids (bears); elephants; crocodilians (such as alligators and crocodiles); ungulates (such as hippopotamus, rhinoceros, giraffes, zebra); and camels. These terms shall apply whether the animal is bred in the wild or captivity. It is not the intent of this definition to include domesticated species such as horses, cows, sheep, or llamas among the animals listed above. 
(t)  Barking dog means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls, or makes any noise for an extended period of time to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property. Such extended period of time shall consist of incessant barking for thirty (30) minutes or more in any 24-hour period, or intermittent barking for sixty (60) minutes or more during any 24-hour period. A dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this chapter if, at any time the dog is barking, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated, or when a dog is teased or provoked. 
(u)  Responsible person as defined in section 1-21.1(a)(1)—(5). 
(v)  Enforcement officer as defined in section 1-21.1(b). 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 1, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1527, § 1, 5-5-80; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2669, § 2, 10-4-04; Ord. No. NS-2754, § 2, 7-16-07; Ord. No. NS-2932, § 3, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 5-2. - Authority. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1822.50 et seq., the animal control officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises for the purpose of inspection upon reasonable cause to believe there is a violation of any provision of this chapter or any law of the state relating to the care, treatment, control, or prevention of cruelty to animals. 
(b)  The animal control officer is hereby authorized, and it is declared to be his duty, to go upon unenclosed lots or lands for the purpose of taking up and into his custody for impounding any animal found estray or running at large thereon or chained, staked, herded, or grazed thereon contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, when any animal other than an animal abandoned by its owner, is impounded pursuant to this section, the animal control officer shall, within forty-eight (48) working hours after impounding such animal, notify the owner, if known, of the location of such animal. Unless the owner is personally notified, such notification shall be by mail with postage fully prepaid thereon. 
(d)  The animal control officer and his deputies are designated as the employees of the City of Santa Ana charged with the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and are authorized to issue citations for violations of said provisions in accordance with Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 2, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 2, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-3. - Penalties. 
A violation of any section of this chapter restricting or otherwise regulating the care, maintenance, and control of animals is a misdemeanor. Each day which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not apply to public officials in the exercise of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 3, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1765, § 1, 3-18-85)  
Sec. 5-4. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 4, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-5. - Bird sanctuary. 
The City of Santa Ana is designated a bird sanctuary and signs bearing the legend "SANTA ANA IS A BIRD SANCTUARY" shall be placed at appropriate locations at or near the city limits at principal entrances to the city. No person shall kill or injure any species of wild birds or molest or damage the nest or the eggs of any wild birds within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully kill or injure any song bird, or to molest, or damage the nest of such bird. If the animal control officer shall determine that starlings or other birds have become so numerous in any particular location or area as to be a public nuisance or for any other reason have become a public nuisance or a menace to health or property, said fact may be declared and the birds involved may be destroyed or otherwise controlled. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 5, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 3, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-5.5. - Birds; number permitted; permit required; exceptions. 
The noncommercial keeping of more than four (4) birds (not including fowl) as pets or as a hobby requires a special permit issued by the animal control officer and subject to the following rules and regulations. Permits may be revoked on any grounds which would be sufficient to deny issuance. Any person aggrieved by the action of the animal control officer in denying or revoking a permit may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code: 
(a)  All birds shall be confined indoors or in a coop, aviary or pen, and all such buildings, coops, aviaries or other places where such birds are kept shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residence, the owner's excepted. 
(b)  The floors of every such building shall be smooth and tight and maintained so as to prevent accumulation of filth or water. 
(c)  All dead animals, manure, refuse, feathers and other waste matter shall be removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, or kept in fly-tight containers until such removal. 
(d)  The occasional sale of birds would be permitted if such sale is incidental to the keeping of the birds as pets or for a hobby. 
(e)  If the animal control officer or the city's code enforcement personnel determine that the keeping of birds, or the keeping of a particular number of birds, at a particular location constitutes a nuisance or a health or safety hazard, then the keeping of more than four (4) birds as pets or a hobby shall not be permitted and the permit issued therefor shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. NS-2134, § 4, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-6. - Permit required for large number of fowl, etc. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain more than four (4) in number of any fowl (excluding roosters which are not permitted within the city per section 5-6.5 hereof), rabbit, or any combination thereof, on any premises within the city unless a special permit has been issued, subject to the rules and regulations provided in this section and the approval of the city department of planning and development services. Permits may be revoked on any grounds which would be sufficient to deny issuance. Any person aggrieved by the action of the animal control officer in denying or revoking a permit may appeal to the city council as provided in chapter 3 of this Code. 
(b)  Any person keeping or maintaining more than four (4) in number of fowl (excluding roosters which are not permitted within the city per section 5-6.5 hereof), rabbits, or any combination thereof, on any premises within the city shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  All buildings, pens, runs, or other places where such fowl and/or rabbits are kept shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any residence, the owner's excepted. 
(2)  The floors of every such building shall be smooth and tight and maintained so as to prevent accumulation of filth or water. 
(3)  The floor area of every such building where the fowl and/or rabbits are given free run shall be of sufficient area so as to allow for two and one-half (2½) square feet per fowl and/or rabbit. 
(4)  All dead animals, manure, refuse, feathers, and other waste matter shall be removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, or kept in fly-tight containers until such removal. 
(5)  If runs are provided and the formation of ground therefor is such that it cannot be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times as required by the state or local health department, the floor of said runs or pens shall be constructed of cement, said cement to be laid so as to prevent rodents from entering thereunder. 
(6)  Rabbits must be kept in hutches so constructed as not to allow the urine to pollute the ground, and provided with floors that are removable for the purpose of cleaning and disinfecting; no box hutches will be permitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 6, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1720, § 1, 4-2-84; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 5, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2833, § 2, 6-4-12)  
Sec. 5-6.5. - Prohibition of roosters. 
No person shall keep any rooster on any premises within the City of Santa Ana which is used for residential purposes, or on any premises which permits residential uses pursuant to the zoning districts contained in Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1720, § 4, 4-2-84)  
Sec. 5-7. - Backyard beekeeping. 
The purpose of this section is to authorize backyard beekeeping subject to certain requirements intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas. The keeping of wasps, hornets, Africanized bees (Apis mellifera scutellata), and any other noxious insects is prohibited. 
Beekeeping is allowed in the general agricultural (A-1) zoning district subject to the conditions set forth in section 41-201.5(k) and on properties developed with a single-family residence subject to the conditions set forth herein. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  No more than two (2) hives may be maintained on a single-family residential property with six thousand (6,000) square feet or less. On lots larger than six thousand (6,000) square feet, the number of hives is limited to one (1) hive for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area, with a maximum of five (5) hives, whichever is less. 
(2)  All bee colonies shall be kept in hives consisting of moveable frames which shall be kept and maintained in sound and usable condition. 
(b)  Hive placement requirements. 
(1)  Hives shall be located within the rear yard of a single-family residential lot. A rear yard is a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear lot line toward the nearest main wall of the building. 
(2)  Hives shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from public rights-of-way or private streets. 
(3)  Hives shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from interior lots lines; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived in writing subject to the approval of the adjoining property owner(s). 
(4)  Hives must either be screened so that bees must fly over a six (6) foot barrier, which may be vegetative, before leaving the property, or be placed eight (8) feet above the adjacent ground floor. 
(5)  Hives must face away from nearest lot lines. 
(c)  Hive management requirements. 
(1)  Colonies must be maintained so as to not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(2)  A water source for the bees shall be provided at all times on the property where the bees are kept to discourage bee visitation at swimming pools, hose bibs and other water sources on adjacent public or private property. 
(3)  Hive maintenance materials or equipment must be stored in a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure. 
(d)  Nuisance. Bees or hives shall be considered a public nuisance when any of the following occurs: 
(1)  Colonies of bees that exhibit defensive or objectionable behavior, or interfere with the normal use of neighboring properties; 
(2)  Colonies of bees swarm; 
(3)  Hives that are abandoned by resident bees or by the owner; 
(4)  Bees or hives are not kept and/or maintained in conformance with this Section. 
(e)  Penalties for violations. Violation of this section shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by this Code. At the discretion of the issuing enforcement officer, violations may be cited as a misdemeanor or infraction. As an alternative enforcement method, violations of this section may be addressed through the use of an administrative citation as set forth in sections 1-21.1 through 1-21.9. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 7, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2932, § 4, 11-21-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2932, § 4, adopted April 21, 2017 , amended § 5-7, to read as set out herein. Previously § 5-7 was titled "Bees prohibited."  
Sec. 5-8. - Wild animals—Permit—Exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained, any wild animal without first, applying for and receiving a permit from the animal control officer, except that no permit is required to keep or maintain the following wild animals: chinchillas, chipmunks, guinea pigs, hamsters, turtles, tropical fish (except caribee), nonpoisonous snakes, where permitted by state and federal law, white mice and white rats. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the keeping or maintaining of wild animals in bona fide, licensed veterinary hospitals for treatment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 8, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 6, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2669, § 3, 10-4-04)  
Sec. 5-8.5. - Wild or exotic animals—Circus or carnival—Exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or display a wild animal or exotic animal at a circus or carnival or similar use, including but not limited to temporary outdoor activities regulated by chapter 41 of this Code. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any wild animals or exotic animals which are kept or displayed at a zoo or museum, or similar use as determined by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-2669, § 4, 10-4-04)  
Sec. 5-9. - Same—Same—Issuance. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall issue a permit for the keeping or maintaining of a wild animal if, after an inspection of the property where the animal is to be kept or maintained, he finds: 
(1)  That a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council has been paid to the department of finance; 
(2)  That the wild animal is at all times kept or maintained in a safe manner and that it is at all times confined securely so that the keeping of such animal will not constitute a danger to human life or the property of others; 
(3)  That adequate safeguards are made to prevent unauthorized access to such animal by members of the public; 
(4)  That the health or well being of the animal is not in any way endangered by the manner of keeping or confinement; 
(5)  That the keeping of such animal does not constitute a nuisance and will not harm the surrounding neighborhood; 
(6)  That the keeping of such animal will not create or cause offensive odors or constitute a danger to public health; 
(7)  That the quarters in which such animal is kept or confined are adequately lighted and ventilated and are so constructed that they may be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(8)  That the applicant proves his ability to respond in damages to and including the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Proof of liability to respond in damages may be given by filing with the animal control officer, in a form approved by the city attorney, a certificate of insurance issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the state, or a bond from a responsible and solvent corporation authorized to issue bonds under the laws of the state. Such certificate of insurance or bond shall provide that no cancellation of the insurance or bond will be made unless thirty (30) days written notice is first given to the animal control officer; 
(9)  That the applicant has proof of state and/or federal permits for the species or specimen when so required by law; 
(10)  That the planning and building agency has inspected the property and approved of the issuance of the permit. 
(b)  In no event shall a permit be issued for the keeping of more than two (2) wild animals over the age of two (2) months at any single location. 
(c)  Any applicant denied a permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 9, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 7, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-10. - Same—Same—Conditions. 
If, at any time, it appears to the animal control officer that there are grounds for denial or revocation of the wild animal permit, but that such grounds could be eliminated by the imposition of conditions, or of additional conditions, he may notify the applicant or permittee in writing that he intends to improve or amend such conditions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 10, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-11. - Same—Same—Revocation. 
A wild animal permit may be revoked on any one or more of the following grounds: 
(a)  Any fact exists which would be a reason for denial of the permit. 
(b)  The permittee, or any agent or employee of the permittee has violated, or has been convicted of violating any provisions of this or any other ordinance, or of any of the state now, or hereafter, in force regulating the activity for which the permit was issued. 
(c)  The permittee obtained the permit by false or fraudulent representations. 
Prior to any such revocation, the animal control officer shall provide the permittee with written notice by U.S. mail, of his intent to revoke the permit and advising the permittee of his right to appeal such decision. Any permittee aggrieved by a decision to revoke the permit may appeal pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 12, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-12. - Liability of nonowners. 
(a)  No person, other than an officer lawfully obtaining possession under this chapter, shall hold or retain possession of any dog or other animal for a period of longer than seventy-two (72) hours unless he holds title to such animal or has the consent of the owner thereof, or unless such person shall have reported the fact of such possession pursuant to section 5-13. 
(b)  Every operator of a self-propelled vehicle upon the streets and ways of the City of Santa Ana shall immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming, or running down any animal, give aid to such animal or immediately notify the animal control officer, furnishing sufficient facts relative to such injury. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 13, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 8, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-13. - Private impoundment. 
(a)  Any person finding any estray domesticated animal or permitted wild animal which is running at large contrary to the provisions of this Code may take up such animal if he complies with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person, seventy-two (72) hours after taking up any estray domesticated animal or permitted wild animal pursuant to this section, shall surrender such animal to the animal control officer on demand. 
(c)  Every person, except the animal control officer, taking up an estray domesticated animal or permitted wild animal pursuant to this section shall, within seventy-two (72) hours thereafter, give notice to the animal control officer of: 
(1)  The fact that he has such animal in his possession; 
(2)  The complete description of such animal; 
(3)  The license number of such animal, if any; and 
(4)  The place where such animal is confined. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 14, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 9, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-14. - Restraint of animals. 
(a)  Any person owning or having charge, custody, care or control of any animal kept or harbored in the City of Santa Ana shall confine such animal exclusively upon such owner's premises, except when otherwise properly restrained as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  No person shall allow or permit any animal to run at large, or be pastured, herded, staked, or tied in or on any public alley, street, sidewalk, vacant lot, school grounds, or other unenclosed place, or other public place belonging to or under the control of the city or in such a way as to trespass in any manner upon any of the aforesaid public places. 
(c)  No person shall ride, drive, lead or tie any horse or mule on any sidewalk, or allow any such animal attached to any vehicle, or any such vehicle to stand across or on a pedestrian crosswalk of any street or upon a sidewalk within the city, or allow any horse, mule or other animal used for riding or driving in a vehicle to stand upon any of the public streets without being securely tied or under the control of its owner or manager. 
(d)  No person shall ride a horse, mule, donkey, pony or bovine animal in a park except on designated paths or trails, nor shall any person abandon or bring into any park, except on a leash, any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind. 
(e)  No person shall hitch any animal to any hydrant, building, reservoir screening, or to any other part of the system of the city's waterworks. 
(f)  No person shall permit any animal to be at large or to go or be upon the premises owned or occupied by any other person in the city without said other person's consent. 
(g)  All dogs must be confined within a yard or other enclosure; provided that dogs on a secure leash not more than eight (8) feet in length may be permitted on the streets or other public places of the city. 
(h)  Any animal found to be at large or trespassing upon private premises or public property in violation of this section shall be deemed prima facie not to be under the control of the owner and is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the public health and safety, and shall be seized and impounded as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 15, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 10, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-15. - Disposition of animals. 
(a)  Any impounded animal may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of the fees established by resolution of the city council. The owner must also demonstrate that he is the owner or custodian of the animal, and that he can keep such animal in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  If a licensed animal is not redeemed within seven (7) days of impoundment, or an unlicensed animal is not redeemed within three (3) days of impoundment, excluding holidays and the day of impoundment, it shall be deemed abandoned and the animal control officer may sell, release or destroy said animal; provided, however, that the animal control officer be discouraged from selling or giving away unclaimed stray animals from the City of Santa Ana to any persons or organizations desiring such animals for research purposes, and that each employee of the city, when turning over animals to the animal control officer during the performance of their duties as city employees, shall direct such animal control officer not to use such animals for research purposes. 
(Ord. No NS-1466, § 16, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1623, § 1, 2-1-82; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 11, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-16. - Enclosure for breeding animals. 
No person shall permit breeding of animals under their custody or control except within an enclosure so arranged as to obstruct such animals from the view of all persons who have no proprietary interest in the breeding of such animals. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to zoos, museums, or any other place where such animals are kept as live specimens for the public to view. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 17, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-17. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the City of Santa Ana. Any person violating this section shall bear full costs and expenses incurred by the city in the care of said abandoned animal and shall reimburse to the city all said costs as determined by the department of finance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 18, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-18. - Proximity to humans. 
(a)  Livestock. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person who keeps or has upon premises owned, leased, or occupied by him any livestock shall keep such livestock within one hundred (100) feet of any family residence, with the exception of his own. 
(b)  Fowl and rabbits. No person shall keep fowl or rabbits within thirty (30) feet of any family residence or building designated for human occupancy, with the exception of his own. 
(c)  Enforcement. The director of planning and development services shall not approve for issuance any building permit until he has assured himself that the provisions of this section have been met. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 19, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1720, § 2, 4-2-84; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 12, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2833, § 3, 6-4-12)  
Sec. 5-19. - Slaughtering of animals. 
No person shall kill any animal in the City of Santa Ana, nor shall any person butcher, dismember or process any slaughtered animal in the City of Santa Ana, in order that it may be sold or used as food, except: 
(a)  In an enclosed building, provided each animal so slaughtered is of five (5) pounds or less in weight; or 
(b)  In commercial slaughtering buildings. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit any use of property in violation of the zoning regulations contained in Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1466, § 20, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1720, § 3, 4-2-84)  
Secs. 5-20—5-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies control provisions, § 1900 et seq. Health and S. Code. 
 
Sec. 5-50. - Limitation of number of dogs. 
(a)  No person or persons shall keep, harbor or maintain upon any one premises within the city more than three (3) dogs unless the person or persons shall comply with the commercial kennel requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no exceptions to this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70 ; Ord. No. NS-1286, § 1, 1-5-76; Ord. No. NS-1324, § 1, 10-26-76; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 13, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2249, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. NS-2754, § 3, 7-16-07)  
Sec. 5-51. - Dog license—Fee. 
(a)  A license fee is levied on all dogs over the age of four (4) months (except as otherwise hereinafter provided) owned, kept or harbored by, in the custody of, or under the control of any person within the city. The amounts of fee for neutered and unneutered dogs and exemptions therefrom, if any, shall be established by resolution of the council. Each license fee shall be paid to the director of finance. The license shall be valid for a period as set by the director of finance. The director of finance may provide for the renewal of dog licenses by mail. 
(b)  Any person who imports or brings into the city any dog with the intent to remain longer than one (1) month shall, within five (5) days after its arrival, cause the same to be vaccinated and licensed as herein provided. 
(c)  A penalty assessment shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to time and paid to the department of finance and charged against all persons who fail to secure said license within thirty (30) days after said license is required. Collection of said assessment shall be in conformity with the procedures established by the director of finance that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provision of this chapter. 
(d)  Said license fee shall be deemed a debt due the city from the owner, and in addition to the criminal penalties of this Code provided, such debt may be collected in the name of the city as any other debt may be collected. 
The foregoing license fee shall not apply to any dog while kept in a duly licensed commercial kennel, nor to any specially trained guide dog, signal dog, or service dog as defined in Penal Code Section 365.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1261, § 2, 6-2-75; Ord. No. NS-1272, § 2, 9-2-75; Ord. No. NS-1974, § 1, 9-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2012, § 1, 7-17-89; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 14, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2376, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. NS-2483, § 2, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 5-52. - Same—Tag. 
Upon payment of the license fee, the finance department shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a tag for each dog so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog, not kept in a kennel or otherwise exempted, with a collar to which the license tag must be permanently affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are continuously worn by said dog. In case a dog license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the finance department upon presentation of the receipt showing payment of the license fee for the current license period and upon payment of the fee fixed for the issuance of such duplicate tag. No owner shall transfer any dog tag from one dog to another and no person shall place a dog tag upon any dog except the dog for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 22, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-1974, § 2, 9-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 15, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-53. - License tag record. 
The finance department shall keep a record of the license tags issued, which record shall contain a brief description and the name of the dog and the name and address of the owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 23, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 16, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-54. - Vaccination—Required before licensing. 
The finance department shall not issue any license for any dog unless and until such dog has been vaccinated as herein defined and the owner or person seeking such a license shall produce for inspection a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing vaccination that will be valid for the entire licensing period, which certificate may be accepted as proof of vaccination. Any dog may be exempt from vaccination and license issued therefor without such proof upon presentation of an affidavit sworn to within sixty (60) days preceding the application for license by a veterinarian licensed to practice and actually practicing in the state, stating that, in his opinion, the rabies vaccination would be likely to seriously injure the dog described therein. No person shall allow any dog so exempted from rabies vaccination to be at large or be led about the streets on a leash at any time, and such dog must be restricted to the securely enclosed yard of the owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 24, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 17, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-55. - Same—Possession of unvaccinated dog. 
No person shall keep, harbor, or maintain upon his premises within the City of Santa Ana, or have title to any dog over four (4) months of age in the city which has not been vaccinated as herein required, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70)  
Secs. 5-56, 5-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2134, §§ 18 and 19, adopted July 1, 1991, repealed former §§ 5-56 and 5-57, which pertained to ordering restraint and allowing escape of biting dogs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, adopted July 6, 1970; and Ord. No. NS-1466, § 25, adopted Feb. 5, 1979.  
Sec. 5-58. - Dogs at large. 
(a)  All dogs must be confined within a yard or other enclosure except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  No person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog shall permit such dog to be on any public street or other public place within the city except when, such dog is wearing a collar and current license tag and is secured to and controlled by the person in charge of such dog by a leash of sufficient strength to support at least forty (40) pounds dead weight and having a length of not more than eight (8) feet; nor shall such person permit such dog to trespass or be upon the private property of any other person without the consent of such other person. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as follows: By a minimum fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors, except that upon a second conviction within one (1) year of a prior conviction for violation of said subsections, punishment shall be a minimum fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors, and a third conviction within one (1) year of two (2) prior convictions shall be punishable by a minimum fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors. 
(d)  No person owning, keeping or harboring any unspayed female dog shall permit such dog to be at large, be led on a leash, or tied or maintained at any place that is not securely fenced in a manner to keep out all other dogs while such female dog is in heat or breeding condition. Every female dog kept in violation hereof is declared to be a public nuisance and may be taken up, impounded, and delivered to the county pound and there released or disposed of as provided in this article. The provision for impounding shall be in addition to any punishment for the violation of this subsection. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as follows: By a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors, except that upon a second conviction within one year of a prior conviction for violation of said subsection, punishment shall be a minimum fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors, and a third conviction within one (1) year of two (2) prior convictions shall be punishable by a minimum fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) but not to exceed the maximum punishment for misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1216, § 1, 8-5-74; Ord. No. NS-1527, § 2, 5-5-80; Ord. No. NS-1765, § 2, 3-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1788, § 1, 8-19-85; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 20, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-59. - Noisy animals. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to keep, maintain or permit on any lot, parcel of land, or premises under his/her control any animal, including a barking dog as defined in subsection 5-1(q), within the city limits which is in the habit of either disturbing the peace and quiet of any person within the city or interfering with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property. Every day a violation exists shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 21, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2818, § 2, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 5-59.1. - Enforcement—Noisy animals. 
(a)  Any enforcement officer has the authority to issue an administrative citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in sections 1-21.1—1-21.9 of this Code to any responsible person for a noisy animal, including a barking dog, violation that the enforcement officer did not see or hear based upon a complaint signed under penalty of perjury lodged by a member of the community who has been disturbed by the noisy animal or barking dog. All noisy animal or barking dog complaints shall be lodged with the Santa Ana Police Department. 
(b)  Prior to issuing the administrative citation to the responsible person the enforcement officer shall send a warning notice via first class mail or shall personally serve upon the responsible person a warning notice giving the responsible person ten (10) days from the date of mailing or date of personal service in which to abate the public nuisance caused by the noisy animal or barking dog. 
(c)  The administrative citation shall contain the information set forth in section 1-21.5 of this Code. 
(d)  The responsible person shall have the right to appeal the administrative citation as set forth in section 1-21.8 of this Code. 
(e)  The procedures established in this section may be in addition to criminal civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2818, § 3, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 5-60. - Reports of complaints. 
Written complaints may be made by any person to the animal control officer alleging that any dog or other animal is a nuisance by reason of: 
(1)  Noise (as set forth in section 5-59 hereof); 
(2)  Nonrestraint (as set forth in sections 5-14 and 5-58 hereof); 
(3)  Viciousness (as set forth in section 5-72 hereof); or 
(4)  Due to the destruction or molestation of property by such dog or animal. 
Such written complaint must be signed by at least two (2) unrelated persons over the age of eighteen (18) years and shall set forth: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the complainants; 
(2)  The reasons for the complaint; 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the dog; 
(4)  The time and place the acts complained of occurred; and 
(5)  A listing of any damages which resulted, if any. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 26, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 22, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-61. - Response and impounding. 
The animal control officer, upon receipt of a complaint as provided in section 5-60 of this Code, shall investigate and he may seek a criminal complaint. 
The owner of a dog or other animal concerning which a complaint has been made in writing may submit to the animal control officer his written report in response to that of the complainant. Such response to the complaint may set forth: 
(1)  The owner's name and address; 
(2)  The owner's view of the facts or series of events which caused the original complaint; and 
(3)  An agreement to abide by all existing city ordinances. 
The written response will be filed with the complaint and will be shown to any party named in the reports who requests to see them at the police department. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 27, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 23, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-62. - Commercial kennel requirements. 
(a)  No person shall establish, operate, maintain or have a commercial kennel within the city without an inspection permit. 
(b)  No commercial kennels shall be allowed in any area zoned residential pursuant to chapter 41 of this Code. 
(c)  Residential structures of one (1) story in height shall maintain a setback of one hundred (100) feet from any preexisting outside kennel runs of a preexisting kennel, and commercial kennels shall also maintain a setback of one hundred (100) feet from any preexisting residential structure. 
(d)  Residential structures of two (2) stories or more in height shall maintain a setback of two hundred (200) feet from any preexisting commercial kennel, and commercial kennels shall also maintain a setback of two hundred (200) feet from any preexisting structure of two (2) or more stories. These provisions will not apply to anyone who erects a residential structure of two (2) stories or more in height or to anyone who erects a commercial kennel if, in erecting the structure or kennel, that person: 
(1)  Provides a barrier that will impair the vision between the kennels and the residential structure to at least the same extent as if a 200-foot setback were used, and provides sufficient sound-retardant materials to produce no more than the same decibel level than if a 200-foot setback was maintained. The decibel level shall be measured both at the kennel and at the residential structure; or 
(2)  In the alternative, provides visual and sound standards that, in the opinion of the director of planning and development services, are equal to or greater than those required by the provisions of subsection (1) above. 
(e)  The residence of a commercial kennel operator or owner shall not be deemed a residential structure as applied in the language of this section. 
(f)  The development and occupation of buildings for human habitation within the distances prescribed above by others than the kennel owner or operator or grantees, directly or indirectly, from or through the kennel owner or operator following the proper establishment of kennels, shall not render the maintenance of such preexisting kennels unlawful by reason of the diminished separation of the kennel use and the use of buildings for human habitation. 
(g)  Enforcement. The director of planning and development services shall not approve for issuance any building permit until he has assured himself that the provisions of this section have been met. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 24, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2818, § 4, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 5-63. - Application procedure for inspection permits. 
Any person desiring the issuance of an inspection permit for a commercial kennel within the City of Santa Ana shall make application to the finance department of the city on such forms as may be provided. 
Upon such application being made, a nonrefundable payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made. Said payment is intended to defray the expense of the city in causing the inspection to be made. 
The city shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises intended to be used or being used as a commercial kennel. If such inspection reveals that the use of the premises for any such purpose would not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the city nor violative of any law or ordinance of the city, nor of any law of the State of California, or allow a condition to be maintained which would subject animals in such condition to needless suffering, unnecessary cruelty, abuse, or unsanitary conditions, the city may grant and issue said inspection permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 25, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-64. - Inspection permit: nontransferable. 
No inspection permit shall be transferred from the inspected premises to another location, nor from the named permittee to another person. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70)  
Sec. 5-65. - Inspection permit; duration. 
The inspection permit issued for any premises within the city shall expire annually unless sooner revoked or suspended for cause by the animal control officer or unless the establishment ceases business. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 28, 2-5-79; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 26, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-66. - Inspection permit: revocation or suspension. 
The animal control officer may revoke or suspend any inspection permit for the following reasons: 
(a)  Violation by permittee of any law of the State of California or of any ordinance of the City of Santa Ana; 
(b)  Failure to provide any animal in permittee's possession with proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter and protection from the elements; 
(c)  Subjecting said animal to cruel or abusive treatment; or 
(d)  Failure to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 29, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-67. - Reinstatement of suspended permits. 
A permittee whose permit has been suspended or revoked may at any time make application to the animal control officer for reinstatement of the inspection permit; the animal control officer shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations of the City of Santa Ana, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1466, § 30, 2-5-79)  
Sec. 5-68. - Denial of reinstatement; hearing. 
A permittee whose permit has been denied reinstatement may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 33, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 5-69. - General requirements for the maintenance of animals and birds. 
(a)  The premises where animals and birds are kept shall be ventilated to the external air by forced draft ventilation or other approved means and shall be adequately lighted. 
(b)  All premises, implements, cages, and appurtenances shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free of animal and bird parasites and other health hazards. 
(c)  Properly plumbed, sewer-connected sinks having an adequate supply of hot and cold water readily accessible to the portions of the premises in which the animals or birds are kept shall be provided. 
(d)  All garbage, excreta, refuse, dead birds or animals, and other putrescible material shall be stored in a durable, fly-tight container and disposed of as soon as practicable, but not less than once a week, and in an approved manner. 
(e)  All cages in which birds or animals are kept shall be constructed of durable material and in such a manner as to be readily cleaned and disinfected with approved solutions, live steam, or other approved means. 
(f)  Cages in veterinary clinics and hospitals shall be similarly designed and constructed and, in addition, each occupied cage shall be cleaned and disinfected at least once each day. Animals receiving medical care and quarantined animals shall not be commingled. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 27, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 5-70. - Limitations. 
(a)  No portion of any kennel or veterinary hospital in which animals or birds are kept, caged, or boarded shall be used for human habitation. 
(b)  Food for human consumption shall not be prepared or served in the same room in which animals or birds are kept, caged, or boarded. 
(Ord. No. NS,1020, § 1, 7-6-70)  
Sec. 5-71. - Veterinarian. 
The regulations contained in this article shall not be used to interfere with a licensed veterinarian in the practice of his profession, but such veterinarian shall comply with the sanitation provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1020, § 1, 7-6-70)  
Sec. 5-72. - Declaration and possession of vicious or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  If the animal services officer or police officer has cause to believe that a dog is a "vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog" within the meaning of section 5-72.1, he or she may tentatively find and declare such dog a "vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog." 
(2)  Upon tentatively finding and declaring that a dog is a "vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog," the animal services officer or police officer shall notify the owner and/or custodian in writing of his or her tentative finding and declaration. 
(3)  The notice shall inform the owner and/or custodian of such dog that he or she may request a hearing in writing in accordance with chapter 3 of this Code within ten (10) days of receipt of such notice to contest the tentative finding and declaration. 
(4)  Failure of the owner and/or custodian to request a hearing pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of this section or failure to comply with the conditions and restrictions of the declaration shall result in the declaration becoming final and may result in the destruction of the dog. 
(5)  The possession or maintenance of a "vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog," or the allowing of any such dog to be in contravention of this division, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The Santa Ana Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to impound and/or abate any "vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog" independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof by any means reasonably necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public, including, but not limited to, the destruction of the dog or by the imposition upon the owner and/or custodian of specific reasonable restrictions and conditions for the maintenance of the dog. The restrictions and conditions may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Obtaining and maintaining liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) against bodily injury or death or damage to property and furnishing a certificate or proof of insurance by which the Santa Ana Police Department shall be notified at least ten (10) days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal or, at the owner's or custodian's option, the filing with the Santa Ana Police Department of proof of a bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), to be able to respond in damages. 
b.  Requirements as to size, construction and design of the dog's enclosure. 
c.  Location of the dog's residence. 
d.  Requirements as to type and method of restraints and/or muzzling of the dog. 
e.  Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purposes of identification, such as a tattoo or microchip, may be required. 
f.  Requirements as to the posting of a warning notice or notices conspicuous to the public warning persons of the presence of a vicious dog. 
g.  Payment of a fee or fees as established by resolution of the city council to recover the costs of enforcing the provisions of this Code as applied to the regulation of vicious dogs. 
(b)  Notification of right to hearing. At least five (5) working days prior to impoundment and/or abatement, the owner or custodian shall be notified in writing of his or her right to request a hearing in writing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment and/or abatement. If a hearing is requested, the impoundment and/or abatement hearing may be held in conjunction with the hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section. If the owner or custodian requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement, no impoundment and/or abatement shall take place pending decision following a hearing, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. Pending such impoundment and/or abatement hearing and decision, the Santa Ana Police Department may order the owner or custodian to keep the dog within a substantial enclosure as deemed necessary under the circumstances. The Santa Ana Police Department may also order the owner or custodian to post and keep posted upon the premises where such dog is kept under restraint, a warning notice pending such impoundment and/or abatement hearing and decision by the Superior Court. The form, content and display of such notice shall be specified by the Santa Ana Police Department. Any hearing under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of this Code. 
(c)  Immediate impoundment. When, in the opinion of the animal services officer or police officer, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the dog has been impounded under other provisions of this Code or state law, the preimpoundment hearing shall not be required; however, the owner or custodian shall be given written notice allowing ten (10) days from receipt of such notice to request in writing an abatement hearing. If requested, a hearing shall be held within ten (10) working days of receipt of the request, and the dog shall not be disposed of prior to the decision following such hearing. A hearing under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of this Code, except as otherwise indicated. If, after ten (10) days following receipt of such notice, no written request for a hearing is received from the owner or custodian, the dog in question shall be disposed of under applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  Initial hearing and appeal. 
(1)  Initial hearing. Any hearing requested or conducted pursuant to this section shall be requested and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of this Code, unless otherwise stated herein. 
(2)  Appeal. After any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (1), any party to the hearing may, within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision of the hearing entity of original jurisdiction to the Orange County Superior Court. Any such appeal shall be requested and conducted in accordance with California Food and Agriculture Code Sections 31601, et seq. 
(3)  The Santa Ana Police Department shall have the discretion, in any event, to directly petition the Superior Court to seek a determination whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The Santa Ana Police Department shall follow the procedures set forth in California Food and Agriculture Code Sections 31601, et seq. for this purpose. 
(e)  Change of circumstances. In the event of changed circumstances, the Santa Ana Police Department may amend or rescind any abatement and/or impoundment imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this section. Any such revision to the abatement and/or impoundment due to changed circumstances shall be subject to the same notice, hearing and other procedural requirements as required for imposing an initial abatement and/or impoundment set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(f)  Change of ownership, custody and/or residence. Owners of a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog who sell or otherwise transfer the ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall at least ten (10) days prior to the sale or transfer, inform the Santa Ana Police Department in writing of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, custodian and/or residence and the name and description of the dog. The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner or custodian in writing of the details of the dog's record, terms and conditions of maintenance and provide the Santa Ana Police Department with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgment by the new owner or custodian of his or her receipt of the original. The Santa Ana Police Department shall notify the new owner or custodian in writing of any different or additional restrictions or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this section as a result of the change of ownership, custody or residence. The imposition of any such different or additional restrictions or conditions shall be subject to the same notice, hearing and other procedural requirements as required for imposing an initial abatement and/or impoundment set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(g)  Possession unlawful. It is unlawful to have custody of, own or possess a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of section 5-72.1 unless it is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person. 
(h)  Declared vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or custodian of a dog declared vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to subsection (a) to fail to comply with any requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection (a)(5) of this section. If a vicious or potentially dangerous dog escapes, the owner and/or custodian shall immediately notify the Santa Ana Police Department. The dog shall be seized by the Santa Ana Police Department pending an investigation and may be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2818, § 5, 5-2-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2818, § 5, adopted May 2, 2011, amended section 5-72 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 5-72 pertained to vicious dogs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1527, § 3, adopted May 5, 1980; Ord. No. NS-2134, § 28, adopted July 1, 1991, and Ord. No. NS-2439, § 2, adopted September 1, 2000.  
Sec. 5-72.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Potentially dangerous dog means any of the following: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, after two (2) separate documented bites within the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury whether the person and the dog are on or off the property of the owner or custodian of the dog. 
(2)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing any injury less severe than a "severe injury." Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
(3)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal, horse, or livestock. 
(b)  Vicious dog means any of the following: 
(1)  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being, whether the person and the dog are on or off the property of the owner or custodian of the dog. 
(2)  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog, which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior of a "potentially dangerous dog" as set forth above, or is maintained in violation of the conditions and restrictions placed upon the dog as a "potentially dangerous dog." 
(c)  Provided, no dog may be determined to be a vicious dog if any such bite, threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian of the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime upon the premises occupied by the owner or custodian of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or who has, in the past, teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog. 
(d)  These definitions do not apply to dogs used in military or police work while they are actually performing in that capacity. 
(Ord. No. NS-2818, § 6, 5-2-11; Ord. No. NS-2912, § 2, 3-7-17 )  
Sec. 5-73. - Zoning regulations. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to, and not in limitation of, the requirements of the zoning regulations contained in Chapter 41 of this Code. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not operate to authorize the keeping or maintaining of animals or wild animals in any zoning district where the use of land for such purposes is not authorized by the then applicable zoning regulations for such districts. 
(Ord. No. NS-1720, § 5, 4-2-84)  
Secs. 5-74, 5-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2818, §§ 7, 8, adopted May 2, 2011, repealed the former sections 5-74 and 5-75 in their entirety, which pertained to public nuisance—barking dog, and enforcement—barking dog, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2754, § 4, adopted July 16, 2007.  
Sec. 5-76. - Care and maintenance of dogs. 
(a)  Shelter requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house, or maintain any dog outdoors on any premises within the city unless the dog has access at all times to an enclosed building or a shelter which meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  It is weatherproof meaning that it keeps the dog dry when it rains and provides sufficient protection from the sun so that the dog will not overheat; 
(2)  It has a floor that is level and dry; 
(3)  It is composed of material that will not result in injury to the dog; 
(4)  It is maintained in a condition that will not result in injury to the dog; 
(5)  It contains bedding material which is kept clean and dry; 
(6)  It allows the dog easy access in and out; 
(7)  It is cleaned and maintained in a manner designed to insure sanitary conditions, including but not limited to, removal of excrement, removal of urine, and treatment of area for flies, fleas, ticks, and parasites as necessary. 
(b)  Water requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house, or maintain any dog on any premises within the city unless the dog has access at all times to clean and fresh drinking water. 
(1)  If the water is in a container, this container shall be designed, secured, placed and maintained in a manner that prevents tipping and spilling of the water; 
(2)  Water containers shall be kept clean and sanitary, out of the sun, and shall be emptied and refilled regularly with fresh water. 
(c)  Feeding requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house, or maintain any dog on any premises within the city without providing food daily to maintain proper body weight and good general health. The food shall be: 
(1)  Free from contamination; 
(2)  Wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quality, quantity, and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the age, size, and breed of the dog; 
(3)  Easily accessible to the dog; 
(4)  Maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(d)  Tethering requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, chain, tie, restrain or cause a dog to be fastened, chained, tied or restrained to a house, tree, garage, stake, fence, or other object except in circumstances where all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The tethering, fastening, chaining, tying, and restraining is not accomplished by means of using a choke type of collar; 
(2)  The tethering, fastening, chaining, tying or restraining shall not exceed three (3) hours in any 24-hour period; 
(3)  The length of the tether or implement used to restrain the dog is not less than three (3) times the length of the dog's body measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the end of the dog's tail; 
(4)  The tether or implement used to restrain the dog is free from entanglement; 
(5)  The dog has access to water, food, and shelter as described in this section; 
(6)  The dog is monitored periodically. 
(e)  Leaving in unattended vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way to endanger the animal's health, safety or welfare. An animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety or welfare is or will be endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be taken to the shelter or to a veterinarian if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of the officer removing the animal, a telephone number where the officer can be contracted, and the location where the animal may be claimed by the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment cost and/or disposal of said animal, including removal from and/or damage done to the vehicle. 
(f)  Exceptions. These provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Government agencies; 
(2)  Non-profit animal rescue organizations exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3); 
(3)  Humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals if incorporated under the provisions of the California Corporations Code Section 10400 and the Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Law in Part 2 of the California Corporations Code, beginning at Section 5110; or 
(4)  Permitted dog or cat shows. 
(Ord. No. NS-2754, § 5, 7-16-07; Ord. No. NS-2818, § 9, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 5-77. - Dogs to be curbed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether willful or as a result of failure to exercise due care, having custody or control of any dog to permit that dog to defecate in a public area, any area open to the public, or any private property without the property owner's consent, without immediately removing the feces and disposing of it in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. NS-2754, § 6, 7-16-07)  
Chapter 7 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2789, §§ 3, 4, adopted July 20, 2009, repealed and reenacted chapter 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 7, articles I—III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1503, § 1, adopted October 1, 1979; Ord. No. NS-1601, § 1, adopted September 21, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1665, §§ 1—15, adopted January 3, 1983; Ord. No. 1686, § 1, adopted June 6, 1983; Ord. No. NS-1951, §§ 1—28, adopted April 4, 1988; Ord. No. NS-2183, §§ 1—20, adopted January 19, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2215, § 1, adopted February 22, 1994, and Ord. No. NS-2631, §§ 3—30, adopted June 16, 2003. 
Cross reference— Buildings and structures, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 18; planning, Ch. 27; streets, sidewalks and public works, Ch. 33; subdivisions, Ch. 34; water and sewers, Ch. 39; zoning, Ch. 41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Authorization. 
Pursuant to section 200 of its Charter, the city has the explicit authority to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to, including all provisions of this chapter. In addition, the Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide, mudflow or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
(a)  Protect human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(g)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(h)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-4. - Methods of reducing flood loss. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A zone. See "Special flood hazard area." 
Accessory structure means a structure that is either: 
(a)  Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or 
(b)  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value. 
Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, where right to appeal is provided herein. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
Base flood means a flood which has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade—i.e., below ground level—on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 1, 1979. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood, flooding, or flood water means: 
(a)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(b)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
Floodplain administrator is defined in section 7-13. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodplain variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93, or successor bulletins. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. Also referred to in this chapter as "Regulatory floodway." 
Floodway fringe is that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and victimization as related to article IV of this chapter, means that the floodplain variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Hardship means the floodplain exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested floodplain variance. The request for floodplain variance be unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on the city's list of historic places, adopted pursuant to chapter 30 of this Code. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see definition of "Basement"). 
(a)  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The flood openings standard in section 7-17; 
(2)  The anchoring standards in subsection 7-17(a); 
(3)  The construction materials and methods standards in subsection 7-17(b); and 
(4)  The standards for utilities in section 7-18. 
(b)  For residential structures regulated by this chapter, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see definition of "Basement"). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value means the substantial damage/improvement procedures referenced in subsection 7-14(b)(1). 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after November 1, 1979, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 1, 1979. 
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See "Base flood." 
Program deficiency means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
Public safety and nuisance as related to article IV of this chapter, means that the granting of a floodplain variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including but not limited to tributaries, streams and brooks. 
Sheet flow area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(b)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the County of Orange dated February 18, 2004, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM's) dated February 18, 2004, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain administrator. The study and FIRM's are on file at Building Safety Division of City of Santa Ana at 20 Civic Center Plaza in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-8. - Compliance; violation. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-10. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under this Code, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-12. - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7-13. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
Except as to article V of this chapter, the executive director of planning and building agency shall be designated as the floodplain administrator and administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. With respect to article V of this chapter, the executive director of the public works agency shall be designated as the floodplain administrator and administer, implement, and enforce said article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-14. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Permit review. Review all development permits to determine: 
(1)  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
(2)  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
(3)  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the city; and 
(5)  All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
(b)  Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures. 
(1)  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings" as amended from time to time, develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
(2)  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
(c)  Review, use, and development of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 7-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer article III of this chapter. 
Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one (1) of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995, as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Notification of other agencies. 
(1)  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(2)  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations. 
a.  Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
(3)  Changes in corporate boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
(e)  Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
(1)  Certification required by subsections 7-17(c)(1) and 7-20 (lowest floor elevations); 
(2)  Certification required by subsection 7-17(c)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
(3)  Certification required by subsection 7-14(c)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
(4)  Certification of elevation required by subsection 7-19(a)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
(5)  Certification required by subsection 7-22(b) (floodway encroachments); and 
(6)  Maintain a record of all floodplain variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such floodplain variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(f)  Map determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. Such determination may be appealed by any interested person as provided in section 7-25. 
(g)  Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in section 7-8. 
(h)  Biennial report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
(i)  Planning. Assure the city's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-15. - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in section 7-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
(a)  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
(2)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
(3)  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
(4)  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
(5)  Base flood elevation information as specified in sections 7-7 and 7-14(c); 
(6)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
(7)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subsection 7-17(c)(2) in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in subsection 7-17(c)(2). 
(c)  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 7-17(c)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93 as it may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(e)  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 7-14(e) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 7-17. - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(a)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(b)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
(1)  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
(2)  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
(4)  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(c)  Elevation and floodproofing. 
(1)  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under subsection 7-14(c). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection 7-17(c)(1), or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection 7-17)(c)(1), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsection 7-17(c)(2)a. and b. are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
1.  Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
4.  Buildings with more than one (1) enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  See section 7-20. 
(5)  Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
a.  Attached garages. 
1.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See subsection 7-17(c)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials (see subsection 7-17(b)). 
2.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6, as it may be amended from time to time. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in section 7-5, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
b.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
c.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
a.[d.]  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
b.[e.]  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in section 7-22; and 
c.[f.]  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with subsection 7-17(c)(3). 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in section 7-17. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-18. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-19. - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
(a)  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
(1)  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE). 
(2)  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
(3)  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-20. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
(1)  Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection 7-20(a) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-21. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of section 7-15 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 7-20(a). 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-22. - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the city. 
(b)  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(c)  If subsection 7-22(a) and (b) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article III. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 7-23. - Nature of floodplain variances. 
The issuance of a floodplain variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a floodplain variance. 
The floodplain variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that floodplain variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A floodplain variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
Floodplain variances shall be approved only in rare circumstances. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if floodplain variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the floodplain variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a floodplain variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a floodplain variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-24. - Conditions for floodplain variances. 
(a)  Generally, floodplain variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of articles II and III have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the floodplain variance increases. 
(b)  Floodplain variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in section 7-5) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the floodplain variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(c)  Floodplain variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Floodplain variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the floodplain variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of floodplain variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city finds will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this chapter. 
(e)  Any applicant to whom a floodplain variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a floodplain variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the county recorder's office of the County of Orange and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(f)  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all floodplain variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such floodplain variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-25. - Appeals. 
(a)  In passing upon requests for floodplain variances, the city's planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Floodplain variances shall only be issued upon a: 
(1)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  Determination that failure to grant the floodplain variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determination that the granting of a floodplain variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters. 
(c)  Floodplain variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of section 7-25 are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(d)  Upon consideration of such factors, the Planning Commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions any request for a floodplain variance. 
(e)  The planning commission shall hear such other appeals as are authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC WORKS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-26. - General development standards. 
The floodplain administrator shall review the following proposals for development in the special flood hazard area: 
(a)  All public works construction proposals; 
(b)  All tentative subdivision maps; and 
(c)  All development proposals referred to him pursuant to section 7-25; and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove them based on his determination of whether the following standards are satisfied: 
(1)  The proposed development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the special flood hazard area. 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)  Adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. Within the special flood hazard area, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes must be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-27. - Base flood elevation data. 
No tentative or final subdivision map which pertains to a proposed subdivision greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, in the Special flood hazard area shall be approved unless base flood elevation data is included in or with the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-28. - Water supply systems. 
The floodplain administrator shall assure that new and replacement water supply systems in the special flood hazard area are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-29. - Sewerage systems. 
The floodplain administrator shall assure that new and replacement sanitary sewerage systems in the special flood hazard area are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-30. - Waste disposal systems. 
The floodplain administrator shall assure that on-site waste disposal systems in the special flood hazard area are located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Sec. 7-31. - Watercourse alterations. 
The floodplain administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse in riverine situations. He shall submit copies of such notifications to the federal insurance administrator. He shall assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. NS-2789, § 4, 7-20-09)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Uniform code appeals board, § 2-450; floodplain management regulations, Ch. 7; storing building materials, etc., § 10-140; health and sanitation, Ch. 18; zoning, Ch. 41. 
State Law reference— For authority to regulate, see § 38660, Gov. Code. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Enforcement of state building standards. 
In any case where the city, or any agency or department thereof, is mandated by state law to enforce a building standard contained in the State Building Standards Code, such state code provision shall prevail over any inconsistent provision contained in any uniform or national code which has been incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 8000; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1416, § 1, 6-27-78; Ord. No. NS-2085, § 1, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-2. - License tax paid prior to final inspection. 
No final inspection required by any of the provisions of this chapter shall be issued, or applied for, until the executive director of finance and management services or his designated representative shall have certified that applicable license taxes have been paid by all independent contractors who have performed any work or service upon the project for which such final inspection is required. 
The building official shall not make such final inspection until the executive director of finance and management services or his designated representative certifies that there has been full compliance with the requirements of Chapter 21 of this Code and all other applicable taxing laws. To obtain such certificate, there shall be submitted to said executive director or his designated representative an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury, by the owner of the property or by the contractor having control of the project, upon a form provided by the city, which contains the complete name, street address of the place of business and the telephone number of each contractor and subcontractor who has performed any work or labor, or has rendered any service upon the project for which such final inspection is required. 
(Ord. No. NS-1597, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 4, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-3. - Building official or administrative authority. 
Whenever a reference is made to the building official or administrative authority in any provision in this chapter, or in any state, uniform or national code incorporated by reference into this chapter, such reference shall be taken to mean the executive director of planning and building or such employee within the planning and building agency of the city as is designated by the said executive director to act in such capacity. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 1, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 1, adopted February 3, 2003, amended § 8-3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 8-3 pertained to the building official and derived from Ord. No. NS-2085, § 2, adopted September 17, 1990.  
Sec. 8-4. - Appeals from decisions of the building official. 
The planning commission shall have the power and be required to hear appeals regarding the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the various codes included in this chapter; provided, however, the planning commission shall have no authority to interpret the administration or procedural provisions of such codes not to waive the requirements of such codes. The building official shall be entitled to attend all hearings of the planning commission held pursuant to this section and to present such evidence and argument as he or she deems appropriate with regard to any matter heard by the planning commission pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2085, § 3, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2238, § 3, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 8-5. - Fees. 
Fees and charges for permits, plan review, inspections, reinspections, investigations, hearings or other purposes requiring fees as set forth in this Code shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any provision of any California, uniform or national code adopted by reference herein as part of this Code that may set forth fees are hereby deemed amended and superceded by this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2085, § 4, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 2, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-6. - License requirements of contractors and subcontractors. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a permit to perform work requiring a permit under this Code, unless they are: 
(1)  A licensed contractor; 
(2)  An employee, agent or authorized representative of a licensed contractor; 
(3)  A representative of an electronically subscribed service acting on behalf of a licensed contractor; or 
(4)  The property owner performing their own work; 
(5)  An employee of the owner, provided that the owner shows evidence of workers' compensation insurance required by state and city law, and their federal tax identification number. 
(b)  At the time of permit issuance, the applicant shall submit a list of all subcontractors and provide verification of each subcontractor's workers' compensation insurance, state contractor license and license category, city business license and federal tax identification number. No person shall contract or subcontract construction work without a valid contractor's license pursuant to applicable provisions of the state business and professions code. 
(c)  In the event that the applicant cannot provide a list of valid subcontractors upon permit application, the applicant shall provide to the city, within a reasonable period of time after issuance of each permit but prior to commencement of any work pursuant to said permit, all information required by subsection (b). Failure to provide valid and current subcontractor listings prior to commencing work shall result in: 
(1)  Revocation of any permit issued by the city; and 
(2)  The permit applicant paying a penalty for default to the city in an amount equal to the original permit fee for each violation in order to defray city costs of enforcement of this section prior to the issuance of any new permit. 
Any work performed prior to satisfying the requirements of this section shall be deemed performed without the required permits. 
(Ord. No. NS-2093, § 1, 1-22-91; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 3, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-7. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code, and in addition, all procedures for the correction of illegal conditions shall apply. 
(b)  Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(c)  The issuance or granting of a permit, or approval based on plans, specifications or other data shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be invalid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful. 
(d)  The issuance or granting of a permit, approval or certificate of occupancy based on submitted plans, specifications or other data shall not prevent the administrative authority from: 
(1)  Thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such plans, specifications or other data; or 
(2)  Ordering cessation of construction, maintenance, operation, or occupancy when it is in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance; or 
(3)  Revoking any permit, approval or certificate of occupancy or completion when issued in; or; 
(4)  Suspending or revoking any permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion when issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any section of this Code. 
(e)  Any business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, shall be abated by the city through the removal of any and all utilities to the property. In addition, it shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City may impose all additional criminal, civil, and administrative penalties pursuant to applicable law. The cost of such abatement may be recovered by the City as outlined in the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2188, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 4, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2957 , § 3, 11-20-18)  
Sec. 8-8. - Duplicate or invalid provisions. 
Should any provision herein duplicate any provision of any state code adopted herein by reference, then the state code section adopted by reference shall be the controlling provision. Should any provision of this Code be deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 5, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-9. - Revocation of permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion and appeal. 
A.  Revocation. The Executive Director of the Planning and Building Agency or his/her designee may revoke a permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion, after notice and opportunity to be heard by the grantee, upon his/her determination that the permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion is being exercised in a manner contrary to the regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the use or activity permitted by such permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion. 
B.  Appeal. Any applicant for a permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion whose application is denied by the Executive Director of the Planning and Building Agency, and any grantee whose permit, approval, certificate of occupancy or completion is revoked by said Director, may, within ten (10) days following such decision, appeal such decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2957 , § 4, 11-20-18)  
Sec. 8-10. - Onsite caretakers for large apartment buildings and hotels. 
A manager, janitor, housekeeper, or other responsible person shall reside upon the premises and shall have charge of every apartment house in which there are sixteen (16) or more apartments, and of every hotel in which there are twelve (12) or more guest rooms, in the event that the owner of any such apartment house or hotel does not reside upon the premises. Only one (1) caretaker would be required for all structures under one (1) ownership and on one (1) contiguous parcel of land. If the owner does not reside upon the premises of any apartment house in which there are more than four (4) but less than sixteen (16) apartments, a notice stating his name and address, or the name and address of his agent in charge of the apartment house, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. NS-2224, § 1, 7-5-94) 
Editor's note— As set out in § 2 of Ord. No. NS-2224, adopted July 5, 1994, "those officers and employees of the planning and building agency specified in § 1-18.1 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code are charged with the enforcement of said § 8-10."  
Secs. 8-11—8-19. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-20. - Fences required for swimming pools, ponds and other bodies of water. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, every swimming pool, pond or other body of water eighteen (18) inches or more in depth at any point shall be surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five (5) feet above the adjacent exterior grade and/or five (5) feet above the finished elevation. Such fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained with no openings nor projections, which could serve as a means to scale the fence or wall. Openings, holes, or gaps in the enclosure, doors, and/or gates shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere and horizontal members, accessible from the exterior, shall be no closer than forty-eight (48) inches. 
Openings for gates or doors through such enclosure shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in width. Each gate or door shall be self-closing and self-latching, with the release five (5) feet above exterior grade or so located on the water side as to prevent release from the exterior. 
Exception No. 1: Doors opening into a single detached dwelling unit. 
Exception No. 2: Subject to approval by the building official, pool(s) or pond(s) operated by the municipality or public school(s) that are under continuous supervision while the gate(s) or door(s) that provide access to the pool(s) or pond(s) are unlocked. 
For occupancies classified as R1, R2, R3, R3.1, and R4 in the building code, the fence or walls shall be so located as to allow access to all living units without entering the pool enclosure. The fence or walls shall serve to isolate the pool from other activities or structures and shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the pool. Gates in such enclosures shall be located in view of the pool. A building wall with no doors or openable windows may be used as part of such pool enclosures when within the specified distance of the pool. 
Exception: When approved by the building official, such enclosures may include sunshade, toilet or shower structures which are used only in conjunction with the pool. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any manmade pond or lake, which is designed, constructed, and maintained to conform to all of the following standards: 
(1)  The maximum water depth of the pond or lake shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches at any place within four (4) feet of the bank. (Bank shall mean the edge of the water or any point adjacent to or under a bridge, dock or similar structure or feature, which provides access to the water.) 
(2)  From a point four (4) feet from the bank, the water depth may increase at a maximum slope of one (1) inch for every eight (8) inches of horizontal distance away from the bank. 
(3)  The bottom shall be surfaced within fifteen (15) feet of the bank with concrete, asphalt, soil cement, or other material approved by the building official. 
(4)  The open areas surrounding the pond or lake within a distance of twenty (20) feet from the bank shall not increase in grade at a slope greater than one (1) inch for every eight (8) inches of horizontal distance away from the bank. Exception: Isolated landscape features such as boulders, mounds, and tree wells are not regulated in the 20-foot area. 
(5)  The drainage, water level, and overflow system shall be designed with a secondary water level control, which will automatically function to maintain water levels and depths within the limits of these standards in the event of failure or stoppage of the primary control. The design of such system shall be submitted to and receive approval of the executive director of public works and the building official prior to beginning of construction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2085, § 5, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 6, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 2, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 8-21. - Abandoned pools. 
Pools which are to be abandoned shall be filled solid with granular material to prevent flotation and capped with soil, sand, concrete or asphalt paving material. The pool wall must be perforated with sufficient openings to permit infiltration and exfiltration of groundwater. 
All connections to water supply or drains must be capped in accordance with applicable codes. All electrical connections are to be terminated or disconnected in accordance with the electrical code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2085, § 6, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2226, § 1, adopted July 18, 1994, repealed § 8-22, which pertained to location of mechanical equipment and derived from Ord. No. NS-2085, § 7, adopted Sept. 17, 1990. (For further information on mechanical equipment, please see § 41-622.5, which was created by § 2 of Ord. No. NS-2226.)  
Secs. 8-23—8-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 8-40—8-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1573, § 1, enacted April 20, 1981, repealed §§ 8-40—8-42, creating fire zones 1, 2 and 3 and describing the boundaries of fire zones 1 and 2. Said sections were derived from Code 1952, §§ 8101—8101.2; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, adopted April 19, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1012, § 1, adopted May 4, 1970.  
Sec. 8-43. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Building Code," "building code," or "California Building Code"), consisting of "Volume 1", "Volume 2" and the 2016 California Existing Building Code (together with subsequent supplements or amendments to any volume, each of which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless otherwise specified), of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The building code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the building code set forth in this chapter that specifically amends the Building Code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of the Santa Ana Municipal Code that amended a pre-2016 edition of the "Building Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2016 or later edition of the building code. The building code, as thus amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city building code. 
Appendices which are adopted pursuant to this section are as follows: 
Appendix I, Patio Covers 
Appendix J, Grading 
(Code 1952, § 8100; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 2, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-1214, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. NS-1413, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1573, § 2, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 2, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1900, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2076, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 1, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 7, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 3, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 1, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 1, 12-6-16 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt codes by references, § 50022.1 et seq., Gov. Code.  
Sec. 8-44. - Transportation system improvement fee. 
(a)  In addition to any other charges, there shall be a special fee required as a condition precedent to the issuance of certain building permits for construction or improvement on those properties lying at least partially within any portion of the city designated by resolution of the city council as a transportation system improvement program area. 
(b)  The building official shall require the payment of a special fee in such amount as the city council shall set by resolution before a building permit will be issued when an application for a building permit indicates the following: 
(1)  A construction or improvement project which will result in an increase of floor area is on a parcel of land which lies wholly or partially within the boundaries of a transportation improvement program area; and 
(2)  The estimated cost of the proposed construction or improvement, as determined by the building official, will exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00). For purposes of this section the valuation per square foot shall not exceed that listed in the latest edition of "Building Standards Magazine" containing a building valuation data chart. 
A construction or improvement project shall not be deemed to result in an increase of floor area on a site to the extent that the floor area in the buildings to be constructed replaces floor area in any existing buildings on that site which are to be demolished, provided that such existing buildings are still in existence at the time of the approval, pursuant to Division 3 (commencing with section 41-668) of Article V of Chapter 41 of this Code, of a development project plan for the buildings to be constructed, and that reasonable evidence of the size of the floor area of the existing buildings is provided to the city by the owner or developer of the site. In such a case, the floor area of the buildings which are to be demolished shall be deducted from the floor area of the new buildings in determining the amount of the fee; provided, however, that in no event shall the owner or developer of the new buildings be entitled to receive any payment or credit from the city by reason of such deduction. If the demolition of the existing buildings is not to occur until after the construction of the new buildings, then either the fee for the new buildings shall be collected without set-off for the existing buildings and a refund in the amount of the set-off shall be made at the time of the demolition of those buildings, or the fee shall be paid in accordance with such agreement as the executive director of the public works agency may enter into with the owner or developer of the site on behalf of the city. 
(c)  The following construction and improvement projects are specifically excluded from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Tenant improvements and maintenance work which will not increase the floor area of existing structures. 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities, whether surface or structured. 
(d)  Any resolution of the city council establishing a transportation system improvement program area shall have affixed thereto a map specifically describing the boundary of such transportation system improvement program area and shall be on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(e)  The purpose of a transportation system improvement program is to identify and designate those areas where the transportation system may experience a significant reduction in the level of service unless corrective measures are instituted concurrent with increased transportation demands. Fees collected for building projects and improvements on properties in a transportation systems improvement program area shall be used to improve the transportation system within such area when such improvements will substantially benefit the transportation system within the area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1651, § 1, 10-4-82; Ord. No. NS-1728, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 5, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1900, § 2, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-1967, § 1, 8-1-88; Ord. No. NS-2143, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. NS-2197, § 1, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2355, § 1, 6-15-98) 
Cross reference— Transportation System Improvement Area Funds, § 13-110 et seq.  
Sec. 8-45. - Major thoroughfare and bridge fee. 
(a)  A building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the costs of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Construction. The term "construction" as used in this section includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction. 
(2)  Major thoroughfare. The term "major thoroughfare" means those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the master plan of arterial highways, the circulation element of the general plan. The primary purpose of such roads is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system. 
(3)  Bridge facilities mean those locations identified in the transportation of flood control provisions of the circulation element or other element of the general plan as requiring a bridge to span a waterway, a railway, freeway, or canyon. 
(4)  Area of benefit means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare or bridge project. 
(c)  The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the major thoroughfare or bridge facility has been included in an element of the city's general plan or the general plan of the County of Orange adopted at least thirty (30) days prior to the application for a building permit and on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(d)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a widening or reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(e)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is a new bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(f)  Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the city council upon its motion or upon the recommendation of the executive director of public service agency. The city council shall set a public hearing for each proposed area benefitted. Notice of the time and place of said hearing including preliminary information related to the boundaries of benefit, estimated costs and the method of fee apportionment shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 65091. 
(g)  At the public hearing the city council will consider the testimony, written protests, and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing the city council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn, determine to establish an area of benefit, setting forth the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded by the city clerk with the Orange County Recorder's Office. 
(1)  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the city council shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement cost apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
(2)  Written protests shall be received by the city clerk at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the city council shall not, for one (1) year from the filing of said written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public meeting. 
(3)  If any majority protests are directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all future proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one (1) year, but the city council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth in subsection (f) above. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
(h)  Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the area of benefit is one in which more than one (1) bridge or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects or major thoroughfares in the area of benefit. If the area of benefit encompasses one (1) or more bridges and one (1) or more thoroughfares and all lands within the area of benefit are subject to the same proportionate fee for all bridges and thoroughfares, a single fund may be established to account for fees paid. Monies in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvements serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, to reimburse the city for the costs of constructing the improvement. 
(i)  The city council may approve the acceptance of consideration in lieu of the payment of fees established herein. 
(j)  The city council may approve the advancement of money from the general fund or road fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered herein and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to this section. 
(k)  If the building permit applicant, as a condition of the issuance of the building permit, is required or desires to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare, the city council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the applicant. Such agreement may provide for payments to the applicant from the bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the applicant for costs not allocated to the applicant's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one (1) project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro rata basis reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1829, § 1, 1-20-86)  
Sec. 8-46. - Fire facilities fee. 
(a)  In addition to any other fees and charges, a fire facilities fee is required as a condition precedent to the issuance of building permit for construction of buildings exceeding two (2) stories in height (excluding parking structures and excluding buildings owned and occupied by agencies of the federal, state or local governments). The fee shall be in such amount as shall be set by resolution of the city council. In the event that, for any reason, the fee is not collected prior to issuance of the building permit, it shall be collected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  The purpose of the fire facilities fee is to provide revenue to pay for equipment needed to fight fires in the expanding number of buildings over two (2) stories in height in the city, and to improve fire stations in the city as necessary to accommodate such equipment and otherwise augment the city's capability to fight fires in such buildings. The fire facilities fee revenues shall be used for such purpose. The facilities to be financed with fire facility fee revenues shall be identified in the resolution of the city council setting the amount of the fee. 
(c)  In establishing the fire facilities fee, the city council finds and determines that buildings over two (2) stories in height require unique firefighting equipment and fire station configurations, that the city has experienced considerable development of such buildings in the recent past and will continue to do so in the future, and that the acquisition of new equipment to fight fires in such buildings and the improvement of fire stations to accommodate such equipment are needs arising directly from the expanding development of such buildings. 
(d)  All fire facility fee revenues shall be deposited in an account separate and apart from other city revenues and may be expended from such solely to pay for the cost of the facilities identified pursuant to subsection (b) of this section or to reimburse the city for moneys expended by the city on such facilities from other revenue sources. Moneys in the fire facilities fee account may be temporarily invested in the same manner as other city moneys, and any interest income earned by moneys in the fire facilities account shall also be deposited in that account and shall be subject to the same limitations as fee revenues. 
(Ord. No. NS-2075, § 1, 8-20-90)  
Sec. 8-47. - Proactive rental enforcement program fee. 
All funds received pursuant to the provisions of section of Article X, Division 2 of chapter 8 of this Code shall be deposited in a separate account and identified with a separate unique expenditure activity number. All such funds shall be expended solely for the proactive rental enforcement program and shall not be used for any other purpose. 
All interest income earned by the moneys in the proactive rental enforcement program account shall also be expended only for the proactive rental enforcement program. Should such monies be invested in combination with other funds and accounts, then the pro rata share of the interest earned by all such monies that is attributable to the program account shall be expended for the proactive rental enforcement program. 
(Ord. No. NS-2408, § 4, 11-1-99; Ord. No. NS-2898, § 3, 5-17-16 )  
Secs. 8-48, 8-49. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-50. - Lot line waivers. 
(a)  In the event that land has been divided without prior approval of the city in the manner set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and subdivision regulations of the city, and such division results in violations of the building code by reason of the interior lot lines thereby created, the requirements of the building code which apply to existing buildings, other than R occupancy buildings, by reason of such interior lot lines may be waived, if: 
(1)  The owners of the lots created by the division submit a tentative map for the division and obtain conditional approval thereof; and 
(2)  The existing buildings are not rendered substantially less safe by reason of the lot lines thereby created than would be the case if the land had remained under single ownership and the building space had been divided by long-term leases or condominiums into units similar to those resulting from the division of land; and 
(3)  The restructuring or remodeling of the buildings to strictly conform to the building code requirements arising by reason of the interior lot lines would cause economic hardship disproportionate to the additional protection against spread of fire between ownership units which would result from strict adherence to such building code requirements. 
(b)  As used herein, "existing building" means a building in existence prior to the time of submission of a tentative map pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(c)  A waiver under this section shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the city council after review and recommendations by the building official, the fire chief, and the executive director of public services. Any such waiver may be made subject to conditions designated to maintain or improve building safety, including: 
(1)  A requirement for covenants, conditions and restrictions running with the lots created by the division of land; 
(2)  A requirement that fire flow limitations as specified by the fire chief shall not be exceeded; 
(3)  Additional water service for fire protection purposes, 
(Ord. No. NS-1435, § 1, 9-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 6, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-51. - Parking structures in integrated developments. 
(a)  Those provisions of the building code which, in the absence of this section, would impose requirements or restrictions on the construction of a motor vehicle parking structure by reason of any interior lot line transversing the ground surface area of said structure shall not apply to any such structure located in an integrated development. 
(b)  As used herein, "integrated development" means a development site comprised of two (2) or more lots where a parking structure or structures are provided for all uses located on the site in common and the lots are subject to reciprocal easements for the passage and parking of motor vehicles. 
(c)  This section shall not apply unless the reciprocal easements referenced in subsection (b) meet the following requirements: 
(1)  They must run with the land and be binding on all the owners thereof and their successors, heirs and assigns. 
(2)  They must be recorded in the county recorder's office. 
(3)  They must, by their terms, provide that they cannot be rescinded or substantially amended without the consent of the city evidenced in writing in or attached to the document setting forth the rescission or amendment. 
(d)  It is the intent of this section to allow a parking structure to be constructed on an integrated development site subject only to the same building code provisions as would apply if the site were held as one (1) parcel under single ownership. 
(Ord. No. NS-1998, § 1, 2-21-89)  
Secs. 8-52—8-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Due to the nature of the subject matter, no attempt has been made to detail the effects of the various amendments to the building code. Catchlines have been revised by the editors to include references to the particular sections of the building code. 
 
Sec. 8-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-60, providing for the amendment of Section 104(a) of the building code, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1573, § 3, enacted April 20, 1981. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1143, § 2, adopted April 17, 1978.  
Sec. 8-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 2, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 8-61, which pertained to fire protection requirements, building code Section 104(b), and derived from Ord. No. NS-1734, § 1, adopted July 2, 1984. 
Cross reference— Fire protection requirements, § 8-150.  
Secs. 8-62—8-79. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1573, § 3, adopted April 20, 1981, repealed § 8-80 which amended Section 105 of the building code. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 8102, and Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, enacted April 19, 1965.  
Secs. 8-81—8-89. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-90. - Board of appeals (Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113). 
Section 113 of Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II, of the building code is deleted. 
(Code 1952, § 8103; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1573, § 4, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 7, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1900, § 3, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2076, § 2, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 3, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 2, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 2, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-90.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2076, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-90.1, which pertained to board of appeals (Section 204 of the building code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1596, § 2, adopted Sept. 8, 1981.  
Sec. 8-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2250, § 1, adopted June 5, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 8-91, which pertained to an amendment of section 205 of the building code dealing with penalties.  
Secs. 8-92, 8-93. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-94. - Permits required (Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105). 
Section 105.1 of Chapter 1, Volume 1, Division II of the building code is amended to read as follows: 
105.1 Permits required. No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, or its occupancy changed, removed, converted, demolished or maintained unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the building official. 
Sections 105.1.1 and 105.1.2 of Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II of the building code are deleted. 
Item 6 of Section 105.2 is amended to read: 
Sidewalks, driveways and decks not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
(Ord. No. NS-2182, § 2, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 4, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 4, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 3, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 3, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-95. - Certificate of occupancy (Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111). 
Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.1 of the building code is amended to read in full as follows: 
Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.1—Certificate of Occupancy 
(1)  Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section 105.2 
(2)  No alteration to an existing building which changes the floor area of the building or which changes the means of egress from the building shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. 
(3)  No change of occupant within a building or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. 
EXCEPTION: Group R, Divisions 2 and 3, and Group U Occupancies. 
(4)  Code violations—Disconnection of utilities. 
(i)  No building or structure shall be occupied, nor shall a business operate without a valid Certificate of Occupancy. A business operating in a manner inconsistent with its Certificate of Occupancy is operating in violation of this Code provision. 
(ii)  Violation of this Code provision may result in the disconnection of any or all utilities. 
(iii)  A building, structure, or business whose utilities have been disconnected shall not have the utilities reconnected until an inspection has been made by the city's building official and the building official has determined that the building complies with this code. 
(iv)  A building or structure that is new construction can likewise not be occupied or its utilities connected until an inspection has been made by the city's building official and the building official has determined that the building complies with this Code. 
(v)  Removing or defacing a notice posted in relation to violations of this Code provision or this code, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this Code provision. 
(5)  No building or structure shall be connected with utility services, nor shall a building or structure whose electrical service has been disconnected be reconnected with electrical service until an inspection has been made and the building official has determined that the building does not constitute an unsafe building. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 4, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2876, § 5, 3-13-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 2, 12-6-16 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 7, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 8-96. - Time limitation of application (Volume 1, Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.2). 
Section 105.3.2 is amended to read as a follows: 
Sec. 105.3.2. Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless the permit has been issued; except that the Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty (180) days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 5, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 5, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-97. - High rise buildings (Section 202, Section 403). 
(a)  Section 202 Definitions are added and/or revised as follows: 
APPROACH-DEPARTURE PATH. The flight path of the helicopter as it approaches or departs from the landing pad. 
EMERGENCY HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY (EHLF). A landing area on the roof of a building that is not intended to function as a heliport or helistop but is capable of accommodating fire or medical helicopters engaged in emergency operations. 
High-rise structure. Every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 75 feet above the lowest floor level having building access (see Section 403), except buildings used as hospitals as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1250. 
SAFETY AREA. A defined area surrounding the landing pad which is free of obstructions. 
TAKEOFF AND LANDING AREA. The combination of the landing pad centered within the surrounding safety area. 
(b)  Section 403 is amended to read as a follows: 
Sec. 403. High-rise buildings and group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
(c)  Section 403.1 is amended to read as a follows: 
403.1 Applicability. New high-rise buildings and group I-2 having occupied floors located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access and new group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall comply with Sections 403.2 through 403.6. 
(d)  Section 403.1.1 is amended to read as a follows: 
1.  "High-rise building" means every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floor used for human occupancy located above 75 feet above the lowest floor level having building access, except buildings used as hospitals as defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 1250. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 6, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 6, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2883, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Secs. 8-98—8-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, §§ 7—9, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed §§ 8-98—8-100 in their entirety. Former §§ 8-98—8-100 pertained to applicability (section 403.1); high-rise structure (section 403.1.1) and standby power loads (section 403.4.7.2), respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-2810, §§ 7—9, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 8-101. - Aircraft-related occupancies (Section 412). 
Section 412.7 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by adding Sections 412.7.6 through 412.7.6.13 as follows: 
412.7.6. Emergency Helicopter Landing Facility. Emergency Helicopter Landing Facility (EHLF) shall be constructed as specified in Section 412.7.6.1 through 412.7.6.13. 
412.7.6.1 General. Every building of any type of construction or occupancy having floors used for human occupancy located more than 75 ft above the lowest level of the fire department vehicle access shall have a rooftop emergency helicopter landing facility (EHLF) in a location approved by the fire code official for use by fire, police, and emergency medical helicopters only. 
412.7.6.2 Rooftop Landing Pad. The landing pad shall be 50 ft. x 50 ft. or a 50 ft. diameter circle that is pitched or sloped to provide drainage away from access points and passenger holding areas at a slope of 0.5 percent to 2 percent. The landing pad surface shall be constructed of approved non-combustible, nonporous materials. It shall be capable of supporting a helicopter with a maximum gross weight of 15,000 lbs. For structural design requirements, see California Building Code. 
412.7.6.3 Approach-Departure Path. The emergency helicopter landing facility shall have two approach-departure paths separated in plan from each other by at least 90 degrees. No objects shall penetrate above the approach-departure paths. The approach-departure path begins at the edge of the landing pad, with the same width or diameter as the landing pad and is a rising slope extending outward and upward at a ratio of eight feet horizontal distance for every one foot of vertical height. 
412.7.6.4 Safety Area. The safety area is a horizontal plane level with the landing pad surface and shall extend 25 ft in all directions from the edge of the landing pad. No objects shall penetrate above the plane of the safety area. 
412.7.6.5 Safety Net. If the rooftop landing pad is elevated more than 30 in. (2'-6") above the adjoining surfaces, a 6 ft in wide horizontal safety net capable of supporting 25 lbs/psf shall be provided around the perimeter of the landing pad. The inner edge of the safety net attached to the landing pad shall be slightly dropped (greater than 5 in. but less than 18 in.) below the pad elevation. The safety net shall slope upward but the outer safety net edge shall not be above the elevation of the landing pad. 
412.7.6.6 Take-off and Landing Area. The takeoff and landing area shall be free of obstructions and 100 ft x 100 ft. or 100 ft. diameter. 
412.7.6.7 Wind Indicating Device. An approved wind indicating device shall be provided but shall not extend into the safety area or the approach-departure paths. 
412.7.6.8 Special Markings. The emergency helicopter landing facility shall be marked as indicated in Figure 412.7.6.8. 
412.7.6.9 EHLF Exits. Two stairway exits shall be provided from the landing platform area to the roof surface. For landing areas less than 2,501 square feet in area, the second exit may be a fire escape or ladder leading to the roof surface below. The stairway from the landing facility platform to the floor below shall comply with CFC 1009.4.2 for riser height and tread depth. Handrails shall be provided, but shall not extend above the platform surface. 
412.7.6.10 Standpipe systems. The standpipe system shall be extended to the roof level on which the EHLF is located. All portions of the EHLF area shall be within 150 feet of a 2.5-inch outlet on a Class I or III standpipe. 
412.7.6.11 Fire extinguishers. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher having a minimum 80-B:C rating shall be provided and located near the stairways or ramp to the landing pad. The fire extinguisher cabinets shall not penetrate the approach-departure paths, or the safety area. Installation, inspection, and maintenance of extinguishers shall be in accordance with the CFC, Section 906. 
412.7.6.13 EHLF. Fueling, maintenance, repairs, or storage of helicopters shall not be permitted. 
FIGURE 412.7.6.8 HELICOPTER LANDING PAD MARKINGS
 
1.  The preferred background is white or tan. 
2.  The circled, red numbers indicate the allowable weight that the facility is capable of supporting in thousands of pounds. 
3.  The numbers shall be oriented towards the preferred flight (typically facing the prevailing wind). 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 10, 11-18-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 10, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 8-101 in its entirety. Former § 8-101 pertained to emergency power loads (section 403.4.8.1) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2810, § 10, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 8-102. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  Section 903.2 Where required is hereby revised to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in the CBC, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or more than two stories in height. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
b.  When an addition exceeds 2000 square feet (186 m 2 ) and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202. 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Group R-3 occupancies. Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8. 
(b)  Section 903.2.8 Group R is hereby revised as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 902.1 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
1.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
(c)  Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms is hereby revised to read as follows: 
1.  Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Limited area systems serving fewer than 20 sprinklers. 
3.  Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
4.  Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
5.  Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, preaction and deluge sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
(d)  Section 905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connection s is hereby revised to read as follows: 
905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections. is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.  The centerline of the 2.5 inches (63.5 mm) outlet shall be no less than 18 inches(457.2 mm) above and no more than 24 inches above the finished floor. 
(e)  Section 907.2.13 High-rise buildings is hereby revised to read as follows: 
907.2.13 High-rise buildings and Group I-2 occupancies having floors located more than 55 feet above the lowest level fire department vehicle access. High-rise buildings and Group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire department communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2 
Exceptions: 
1.  Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Section 907.2.22 and Section 412 of the California Building Code. 
2.  Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the California Building Code. 
4.  Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1 of the California Building Code. 
5.  In Group I-2 and R-2.1 occupancies, the alarm shall sound at a constantly attended location and general occupant notification shall be broadcast by the emergency voice/alarm communication system 
(f)  Section 907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors is hereby amended to read as follows: 
907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors. Smoke detectors installed in ducts shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity present in the duct. Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control unit when a fire alarm system is installed. Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location and shall perform the intended fire safety function in accordance with this code and the California Mechanical Code. Duct smoke detectors shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection. 
Exception: In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an approved location. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be identified as air duct detector trouble. 
(g)  Section 907.5.2.2 Emergency voice/alarm communication system is revised to read as follows. 
907.5.2.2 Emergency voice/alarm communication system. Emergency voice/alarm communication system required by this code shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The operation of any automatic fire detector, sprinkler waterflow device or manual fire alarm box shall automatically sound an alert tone followed by voice instructions giving approved information and directions for a general or staged evacuation in accordance with the building's fire safety and evacuation plans required by Section 404. In high-rise buildings and Group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, the system shall operate on a minimum of the alarming floor, the floor above and the floor below. Speakers shall be provided throughout the building by paging zones. At a minimum, paging zones shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Elevator groups. 
2.  Exit stairways. 
3.  Each floor. 
4.  Areas of refuge as defined in Section 1002.1. 
5.  Dwelling Units in apartment houses. 
6.  Hotel guest rooms or suites. 
Exception: In Group I-1 and R-2.1 occupancies, the alarm shall sound in a constantly attended area and a general occupant notification shall be broadcast over the overhead page. 
(h)  Section 907.6.3.2 High-rise buildings is revised to read as follows. 
907.6.3.2 High-rise buildings. High-rise buildings and Group I-2 occupancies having occupied floors located more than 55 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for all of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided: 
1.  Smoke detectors. 
2.  Sprinkler water-flow devices. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes 
4.  Other approved types of automatic detection devices or suppression systems. 
(i)  Section 907.6.5 Monitoring is revised to read as follows 
907.6.5 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the California Fire Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72, this section, and per Orange County Fire Authority Guideline "New and Existing Fire Alarm & Signaling Systems". 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 11, 11-18-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 11, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 8-102 in its entirety. Former § 8-102 pertained to location of class I standpipe hose connections (section 905.4) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2810, § 11, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Secs. 8-103—8-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, §§ 12—15, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed §§ 8-103—8-106 in their entirety. Former §§ 8-103—8-106 pertained to high-rise buildings (section 907.2.13); emergency voice/alarm communication system (section 907.5.2.2); high-rise buildings (section 907.6.3.2) and sprinkler buildings (section 910.3.2.2), respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-2810, §§ 12—15, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Secs. 8-107, 8-108. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-109. - Section 1505.5. 
Section 1505.5 of the building code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 16, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-110. - Section 1505.7. 
Section 1505.7 of the building code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 17, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2076, § 7, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-111, which pertained to fees (Section 304 of the building code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1147, § 8, adopted Nov. 6, 1972; Ord. No. NS-1573, § 6, adopted Apr. 20, 1981, and Ord. No. NS-1900, § 5, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-112, 8-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, §§ 16, 17, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed §§ 8-112, 8-113 in their entirety. Former §§ 8-112—8-113 pertained to certificate of occupancy (section 110) and exception (section 111.1), respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-1147, § 9, adopted November 6, 1972; Ord. No. NS-1573, § 7, adopted April 20, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1806, § 10, adopted November 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 3, adopted January 19, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 8, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 7, adopted December 3, 2007; Ord. No. NS-2810, §§ 18, 19, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 8-114. - Posting (Section 111.5). 
Section 111.5 is hereby added to read as follows: 
111.5 Posting. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 20, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-115. - Inspections (Section 111.6). 
Section 111.6 is hereby added to read as follows: 
111.6 Inspections. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant whose action makes necessary the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to this section to apply to the building official for the inspection of the building or structure or portion thereof as necessary to obtain such certificate. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a nonrefundable application processing fee and an inspection fee, which shall be refunded if an inspection proves to be unnecessary, in such amounts as shall be established by resolution of the city council. The building official and the executive director of finance and management services shall establish procedures and forms to implement this subsection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 21, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-116. - Prohibition against falsification (Section 111.7). 
Section 111.7 is hereby added to read as follows: 
111.7 Prohibition against falsification. No person shall alter or reproduce a certificate of occupancy for the purpose of circumventing the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 22, 11-15-10)  
Secs. 8-117—8-119. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2471, § 3, adopted May 21, 2001 repealed the provisions of former § 8-120 which pertained to efficiency dwelling units (amendments to building code Volume 1, Section 310.7) and derived from Ord. No. NS-2288, § 1, adopted April 15, 1996.  
Secs. 8-121—8-149. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2760, §§ 12—14, adopted December 3, 2007, repealed §§ 8-130—8-132, which pertained to special inspectors (volume 1, section 1701.2), section 1900.4.4, and 1922.10.3, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2273, § 9, adopted December 18, 1995, and Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 16—18, 20, adopted February 3, 2003.  
Sec. 8-150. - Fire protection requirements (Volume 2, Section 3403). 
The first paragraph of Section 3403 of the building code is amended by adding thereto the following: 
EXCEPTION: If additions, alterations or repairs made to any building constructed prior to January 1, 1946, other than an R-occupancy building, exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in cost in any one-year period, then either (A) the entire building must be completely sprinklered in accordance with fire department standards, or (B) the building must comply with all the following requirements: 
1.  The ceiling of a roof system shall be of one-hour construction, and all ceiling or wall penetrations shall have approved fire dampers. 
2.  All stairways shall be completely enclosed with one-hour construction to exits; and enclosed stairways or required exits shall lead directly to the outside of the building. 
3.  Draft stops are required in floors in accordance with Section 717.3. In attic areas, one-hour walls shall be required for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of area. 
4.  Smoke detectors with an alarm system, receiving their primary power from the building wiring, shall be required throughout the building in accordance with NFPA standards. 
5.  Either (a) corridors, regardless of occupant load, shall be one-hour construction; or (b) a "life safety" sprinkler system, as approved by the fire department, shall be installed in all corridors. 
(Ord. No. NS-2273, § 10, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2332, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 15, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 23, 11-15-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 23, adopted November 15, 2010, changed the title of section 8-150 from "Fire protection requirements (Volume 2, Section 3403.1)" to "Fire protection requirements (Volume 2, Section 3403)." 
Cross reference— Fire protection requirements (building code section 104(b)), § 8-61 (Reserved).  
Sec. 8-151. - Fire protection requirements (Volume 2, Section 3404). 
The first paragraph of Section 3404 of the building code is amended by adding thereto the following: 
EXCEPTION: If additions, alterations or repairs made to any building constructed prior to January 1, 1946, other than an R-occupancy building, exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in cost in any one-year period, then either (A) the entire building must be completely sprinklered in accordance with fire department standards, or (B) the building must comply with all the following requirements: 
1.  The ceiling of a roof system shall be of one-hour construction, and all ceiling or wall penetrations shall have approved fire dampers. 
2.  All stairways shall be completely enclosed with one-hour construction to exits; and enclosed stairways or required exits shall lead directly to the outside of the building. 
3.  Draft stops are required in floors in accordance with Section 717.3. In attic areas, one-hour walls shall be required for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of area. 
4.  Smoke detectors with an alarm system, receiving their primary power from the building wiring, shall be required throughout the building in accordance with NFPA standards. 
5.  Either (a) corridors, regardless of occupant load, shall be one-hour construction; or (b) a "life safety" sprinkler system, as approved by the fire department, shall be installed in all corridors. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 24, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-152. - Fire protection requirements (Volume 2, Section 3405). 
The first paragraph of Section 3405 of the building code is amended by adding thereto the following: 
EXCEPTION: If additions, alterations or repairs made to any building constructed prior to January 1, 1946, other than an R-occupancy building, exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in cost in any one-year period, then either (A) the entire building must be completely sprinklered in accordance with fire department standards, or (B) the building must comply with all the following requirements: 
1.  The ceiling of a roof system shall be of one-hour construction, and all ceiling or wall penetrations shall have approved fire dampers. 
2.  All stairways shall be completely enclosed with one-hour construction to exits; and enclosed stairways or required exits shall lead directly to the outside of the building. 
3.  Draft stops are required in floors in accordance with Section 717.3. In attic areas, one-hour walls shall be required for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of area. 
4.  Smoke detectors with an alarm system, receiving their primary power from the building wiring, shall be required throughout the building in accordance with NFPA standards. 
5.  Either (a) corridors, regardless of occupant load, shall be one-hour construction; or (b) a "life safety" sprinkler system, as approved by the fire department, shall be installed in all corridors. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 25, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 8-153. - Standards for the installation of sprinkler systems. 
NFPA 13, 2013 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 6.8.3 is hereby revised as follows: 
6.8.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The FDC shall contain a minimum of two 2 ½" inlets. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½" inlets shall be provided. 
(b)  Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
8.3.3.1. When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
1.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.7 
2.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
3.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
4.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
(c)  Section 8.17.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows 
8.17.1.1.1 Residential Waterflow Alarms. A local water-flow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, where provided. Group R occupancies not requiring a fire alarm system by the California Fire Code shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be minimum of 15 DBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 DBA with all intervening doors closed, whichever is greater. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
(d)  Section 11.1.1.2 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.2 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new occupancy. 
(e)  Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the Fire Code Official: 
1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3)  Utilize the Orange County Fire Authority water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
(f)  Section 23.2.1.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
Section 23.2.1.1 Where a waterflow test is used for the purposes of system design, the test shall be conducted no more than 6 months prior to working plan submittal unless otherwise approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 18, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-154. - Installation of sprinkler system in residential occupancies up to and including four stories in height. 
NFPA 13R 2013 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler System in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.16.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
6.16.1 A local water-flow alarms shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system where provided. Group R occupancies containing less than the number of stories, dwelling units or occupant load specified in Section 907.2.8 of the 2010 California Fire Code as requiring a fire alarm system shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 dBA with all intervening doors closed, whichever is greater. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
There shall also be a minimum of one exterior alarm indicating device, listed for outside service and audible from the access roadway that serves that building. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 19, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-155. - Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems in one and two family dwellings and manufactured homes. 
NFPA 13D 2013 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 4.1.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3 Stock of Spare Sprinklers 
(b)  Section 4.1.3.1 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.1. A supply of at least two sprinklers for each type shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced. 
(c)  Section 4.1.5.2 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.2 The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property. 
(d)  Section 4.1.3.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.3 The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed 100° F (38° C). 
(e)  Section 4.1.3.4 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.4 A special sprinkler wrench shall be provided and kept in the cabinet to be used in the removal and installation of sprinklers. One sprinkler wrench shall be provided for each type of sprinkler installed. 
(f)  Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised as follows: 
7.1.2 The system piping shall not have a separate control valve unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
(g)  Section 7.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.6 Alarms. Exterior alarm indicating device shall be listed for outside service and audible from the street from which the house is addressed. Exterior audible devices shall be placed on the front or side of the structure and the location is subject to final approval by the fire code official. Additional interior alarm devices shall be required to provide 55 dBA or 15 dBA above ambient, whichever is greater. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA, whichever is greater. Audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
Exception: 
1.  When an approved water flow monitoring system is installed, interior audible devices may be powered through the fire alarm control panel. 
2.  When smoke detectors specified under CBC Section 907.2.11 are used to sound an alarm upon waterflow switch activation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 20, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-156. - Installation of standpipe and hose systems. 
NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby is deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 21, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-157. - Standard for the installation of private fire service mains and their appurtenances. 
NFPA 24, 2013 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 6.2.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.1.1 The closest upstream indicating valve to the riser shall be painted OSHA red. 
(b)  Section 6.2.11 (5) is hereby deleted without replacement and (6) and (7) renumbered: 
(5)  Control Valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior. 
(6)  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior as permitted by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Section 6.3.3 is herby added as follows: 
Section 6.3.3 All post indicator valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
(d)  Section 10.1.6.3 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.6.3 All ferrous pipe shall be coated and wrapped. Joints shall be coated and wrapped after assembly. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube. The ends of the tube shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
(e)  Section 10.3.6.2 is hereby revised as follows: 
10.3.6.2 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material, prior to poly-tube, and after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
(f)  Section 10.3.6.3 is hereby added as follows: 
10.3.6.3 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
(g)  Section 10.6.3.1 is hereby deleted and replaced as follows: 
10.6.3.1 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.6.2. 
(h)  Section 10.6.4 is hereby revised as follows: 
10.6.4 Pipe joints shall not be located under foundation footings. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 22, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-158. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1214, § 6, adopted July 1, 1974, repealed § 8-158 which amended Chapter 17 of the building code by adding Section 17-15 pertaining to special life-safety provisions for high-rise residential and office buildings. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1163, § 1, adopted June 4, 1973.  
Secs. 8-159—8-162. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-163. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. NS-1878, adopted Dec. 15, 1986, repealed § 8-163. Prior to its deletion § 8-163 amended provisions of the building code pertaining to roofs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1633, § 1, adopted June 7, 1982; and Ord. No. NS-1688, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 1983.  
Secs. 8-164—8-167. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2076, § 9, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-168, which pertained to ordinary roof covering (Section 3203(f) of the building code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1668, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 1983.  
Sec. 8-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 11, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 8-169, which pertained to re-roofing, building code Section 3210, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1878, § 2, adopted Dec. 15, 1986, and Ord. No. NS-2076, § 10, adopted Sept. 17, 1990.  
Sec. 8-170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 11, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 8-170, which pertained to minimum roof classes, building code Table No. 32-A, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2076, § 11, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, and Ord. No. NS-2182, § 4, adopted Jan. 19, 1993.  
Sec. 8-171. - Reserved.  
Secs. 8-172, 8-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2076, §§ 12, 13, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed §§ 8-172 and 8-173, respectively, which pertained to chimneys (Section 3703(f) of the building code) and to duets penetrating fire rated corridor walls and ceilings (Section 4306(J) of the building code) and derived, respectively, from Ord. No. NS-1668, § 3, adopted Jan. 17, 1983, and Ord. No. NS-1806, § 14, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-174—8-178. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-179. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1806, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, repealed § 8-179 which deleted provisions relating to Ch. 11 in the Appendix of the building code pertaining to agricultural buildings. Former § 8-179 derived from Ord. No. NS-1413, § 9, adopted April 17, 1978 and Ord. No. NS-1573, § 13, adopted April 20, 1981.  
Sec. 8-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 11, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, set out provisions repealing § 8-180, which pertained to groundwater table investigation, building code Section 2912, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2182, § 5, adopted Jan. 19, 1993.  
Sec. 8-181. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-182. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 21, adopted February 3, 2003, repealed § 8-182 in its entirety, which pertained to elevators, dumbwaiter, escalators, and moving walks (Volume 1, Appendix Chapter 30) and derived from Ord. No. NS-2182, § 6, adopted January 19, 1993 and Ord. No. NS-2273, § 12, adopted December 18, 1995.  
Sec. 8-183. - Grading Permit Exemptions (Volume 2, Appendix J, Section J103.2). 
Section J103.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section J103.2. Exemptions: A grading permit shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Grading of less than 50 cubic yards in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties. 
2.  Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code. 
3.  Cemetery graves. 
4.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
5.  Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities. 
6.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties. 
7.  Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional. 
8.  An excavation of less than 50 cubic yards that (1) is less than 2 feet in depth or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than 5 feet in height and steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (50 percent slope). 
9.  A fill less than 1 foot in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 3 feet in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. NS-2905, § 3, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-184. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 26, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former section 8-184 in its entirety, which pertained to excavation and grading—fees (volume 1, appendix chapter 33), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2182, § 7, adopted January 19, 1993, and Ord. No. NS-2273, § 13, adopted December 18, 1995.  
Secs. 8-185—8-189. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1806, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, repealed § 8-190 which deleted provisions relating to Ch. 51 in the Appendix of the building code pertaining to elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and moving walks. Former § 8-190 derived from Ord. No. NS-1214, § 7, adopted July 1, 1974 and Ord. No. NS-1573, § 15, adopted April 20, 1981.  
Sec. 8-191. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1806, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, repealed § 8-191 which deleted provisions relating to Ch. 53 in the Appendix of the building code pertaining to energy conservation in new building construction. Former § 8-191 derived from Ord. No. NS-1573, § 16, adopted April 20, 1981.  
Secs. 8-192—8-199. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SECURITY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-200. - Application and scope. 
The provisions of this security ordinance shall apply to all activities for which a building permit is required. 
Additions, alterations and repairs: Fifty (50) percent more of the building's current valuation. When additions, alterations or repairs within any twelve-month period exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of any existing building or structure, each building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures. 
All applicable state and local fire codes must be adhered to. No portion of this division shall supersede any local, state or federal laws, regulations or codes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1794, § 1, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-201. - Definitions of technical terms. 
The following terms used in this division shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Approved means certified as meeting the requirements of this division by the enforcing authority or his authorized agents, or by other officials designated by the enforcing authority to give approval on a particular matter dealt with by the provisions of this division with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or device. 
Auxiliary locking device is a secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security. 
Bolt is a metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or "thrown") either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to prevent a door from moving or opening. 
Bolt projection (or bolt throw ) is the distance from the edge of the door, at the bolt center line, to the farthest point on the bolt in the projected position, when subjected to end pressure. 
Burglary resistant glazing means those materials as defined in Underwriters Laboratories Bulletin 972. 
Commercial or industrial building is a building, or portion thereof, used for a purpose other than dwelling. 
Component, as distinguished from a part, is a subassembly which combines with other components to make up a total door or window assembly. For example, the primary components of a door assembly include: Door, lock, hinges, jamb/wall, jamb/strike and wall. 
Cylinder is the subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler mechanism and the keyway. A double cylinder lock is one which has a key-actuated cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door. 
Cylinder core or cylinder plug is the central part of a cylinder containing the keyway, which is rotated by the key to operate the lock mechanism. 
Cylinder guard is a hardened metal ring or plate surrounding the otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to resist cutting, drilling, prying, pulling, or wrenching with common tools. 
Deadbolt is a lock bolt which does not have a spring action as opposed to a latch bolt, which does. The bolt must be actuated by a key and/or a knob or thumb turn and when projected becomes locked against return by end pressure. 
Dead latch is a spring actuated latch bolt having a beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure. 
Door assembly means a unit composed of a group of parts or components which make up a closure for a passageway through a wall. For the purposes of this division, a door assembly consists of the following parts: Doors, hinges, locking device or devices; operation contracts (such as handles, knobs, push plates); miscellaneous hardware and closures; the frame, including the head, threshold, and jambs plus the anchorage devices to the surrounding wall and a portion of the surrounding wall extending thirty-six (36) inches from each side of the jambs and sixteen (16) inches above the head. 
Door stops are the projections along the top and sides of a door jamb which check the door's swinging action. 
Double cylinder deadbolt is a deadbolt which can be activated only by a key from either the interior or exterior of the building. 
Dwelling is a building or portion thereof designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings. 
Flushbolt is a normal manual, key, turn operated or automatic releasing metal throwbolt, normally used on inactive door(s) that is attached to the top and bottom of the door and engages in the head and threshold of the frame. 
Fully tempered glass means those materials meeting or exceeding ANSI Standard 297.1—Safety Glazing. 
Inactive leaf or door means either leaf or door of a pair of doors which has no surface mounted hardware and which receives and holds the latch or bolt of the primary locking system. 
Jamb is the vertical members of a door frame to which the door is secured. 
Jamb/strike means that component of a door assembly which receives and holds secure the extended lock bolt; the strike and jamb used together are considered a unit. 
Jamb/wall is that component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and secured; the wall and jamb used together are considered a unit. 
Key-in-knob is a lockset having the key cylinder and other lock mechanisms contained in the knob. 
Latch or latch bolt is a beveled, spring-actuated bolt, which may or may not have a deadlocking device. 
Lock or lockset is a keyed device (complete with cylinder, latch or deadbolt mechanism, and trim such as knobs, levers, thumb turns, escutcheons, etc.) for securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. 
Locked indicator is a device indicating whether the lock set (deadbolt, etc.) is locked or open. 
Locking device is a part of a window or sliding door assembly which is intended to prevent movement of the movable sash or door. 
Minimum maintained means measurable light level at furthest point from lighting source at ground level. 
Multiple-family dwelling is a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one (1) or more persons living independently of each other, including hotels, motels, apartments, duplexes, town houses, and condominiums. 
Panic hardware is a latching device on a door assembly for use when emergency egress is required due to a fire or other threat to life safety. Such devices are designed so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of an emergency when a pressure not to exceed fifteen (15) pounds is applied to the releasing device in the direction of exit travel. Such releasing devices are bars or panels extending not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the width of the door and placed at heights suitable for the service required, not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-four (44) inches above the floor. 
Part, as distinguished from component, is a unit (or subassembly) which combines with other units to make up a component. 
Primary locking device is the single locking system on a door or window unit whose function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion. 
Private dwelling or single-family dwelling is a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family. 
Rail is the horizontal members of a sash frame. A meeting rail is one which mates with a rail of another sash or framing member of the window frame when the sash is in the closed position. 
Sash is an assembly of stiles, rails, and, sometimes, muntins assembled into a single frame which supports the glazing material. A fixed sash is one which is not intended to be opened. A movable sash is intended to be opened. 
Sill is the lowest horizontal member of a window frame. 
Single cylinder deadbolt is a deadbolt lock which is activated from the exterior by a key and from the interior by a know, thumb-turn, lever or similar mechanism. 
Solid core door means a door composed of solid wood or compressed wood equal in strength to solid wood construction. 
Stile is a vertical framing member of a window or door. A meeting stile is one which mates with a stile of another sash, or a vertical framing member of a door or window frame when the sash is in the closed position. 
Strike is a metal plate attached to or mortised into a door jamb to receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or deadbolt in order to secure the door to the jamb. 
Swinging door means a door hinged at the stile or at the head and threshold. 
U.L listed means tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
Vandal resistant cover is a protective cover constructed of either acrylic, polycarbonate or wire mesh which totally encloses the light source. The wire mesh must have a maximum ¼-inch mesh. The polycarbonate and acrylic must have a minimum ½-inch thickness. The purpose of the cover is to discourage the willful destruction of the light source. 
Visibility corridor is an opening of at least a ten-inch square and shall be located a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches and not to exceed fifty (50) inches above ground level. 
Window assembly is a unit composed of a group of parts or components which make up a closure for an opening in a wall or roof (including the anchorage) to control light, air, and other elements. 
Window frame is that part of a window which surrounds and supports the sashes and is attached to the surrounding wall. The members include side jambs (vertical), head jamb (upper, horizontal), sill and mullions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1436, § 1, 8-21-78; Ord. No. 1794, § 2, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-202. - Definition of "enforcing authority". 
As used in this division, the term "enforcing authority" shall mean the building official and his authorized representatives. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1794, § 3, 10-14-85; Ord. No. NS-1900, § 6, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-203. - Enforcement. 
The enforcing authority is hereby empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this division relating to physical security requirements for buildings in the City of Santa Ana. Plans and specifications for proposed construction must be approved, by the enforcing authority in accordance with the provisions of this division. No building permit is to be finally approved or utility release given unless the applicant for said permit or release has satisfied the enforcing authority that applicant has complied with this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-1794, § 4, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-204. - Violations and penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, move, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the City of Santa Ana or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78)  
Sec. 8-205. - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
Materials, methods of construction or structural design limitations provided for in this division are to be used unless an exception is granted. 
The use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this division may be allowed, provided any such alternate method or material has been approved by the enforcing authority prior to use. 
Further, other sound methods of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this division may be allowed provided such alternative has been approved by the enforcing authority prior to use. 
The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate provided that they find the proposed design to be satisfactory and the material and method of work offered is for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this division in quality, strength, effectiveness, crime resistance, durability and safety. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78)  
Sec. 8-206. - Appeals. 
The Uniform Code appeals board shall have the power and be required to hear appeals regarding determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, and to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this division in the event of a dispute. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1596, § 3, 9-8-81) 
Cross reference— Uniform Code appeals board established, § 2-450  
Sec. 8-207. - Keying requirements. 
Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have locks using combinations which interchange free from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies within such tract or commercial development. Every applicant shall be required to provide the enforcing authority with written confirmation of compliance with the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78)  
Sec. 8-208. - Garage-type doors. 
(a)  Garage-type doors, which are either rolling overhead, solid overhead, swinging, sliding, or accordion style doors shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Wood doors shall have panels a minimum of five-sixteenths ( 5/16 ) inch in thickness with the locking hardware being attached to the support framing. 
(2)  Aluminum doors shall be a minimum thickness of .0215 inches and riveted together a minimum of eighteen (18) inches on center along the outside seams. There shall be a full width horizontal beam attached to the main door structure which shall meet the pilot, or pedestrian access, door framing within three (3) inches of the strike area of the pilot or pedestrian access door. 
(3)  Fiberglass doors shall have panels a minimum of six (6) ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven (7) feet. Panels above seven (7) feet and panels in residential structures have a density of not less than five (5) ounces per square foot. 
(b)  Where sliding or accordion doors are utilized, they shall be equipped with guide tracks which shall be designed so that the door cannot be removed from the track when in the closed and locked position. 
(c)  Doors that exceed sixteen (16) feet in width shall have two (2) lock receiving points, one (1) located on each side of the door. Doors not exceeding sixteen (16) feet shall have one (1) lock receiving point placed on either side of the door. A single bolt may be used in the center of the door with the locking point located either in the floor or door frame header. 
(d)  All overhead or swinging doors shall be equipped with slidebolts which shall be capable of utilizing padlocks with a minimum nine-thirty-seconds ( 9/32 ) inch shackle. 
(1)  The entire slidebolt assembly shall be constructed of case-hardened steel and shall have a frame a minimum of .120 inches in thickness, and a bolt diameter a minimum of one-half (½) inch, and shall protrude at least one and one-half (1½) inches into the receiving guide. 
(2)  Slide bolt assemblies shall be attached to the door with bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior. Rivets shall not be used to attach such assemblies. 
(e)  Padlocks used with exterior mounted slide bolts shall have a hardened steel shackle a minimum of nine-thirty-seconds ( 9/32 ) inch in diameter with heel and toe locking and a minimum five (5) pin tumbler operation. The key shall be nonremovable when in an unlocked position. 
(f)  Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five (5) pin tumbler operation with the bolt or locking bar extending into the receiving guide a minimum of one (1) inch. 
(g)  Pedestrian access doors contained in garage type doors shall comply to the standards set forth in section 8-211 (b) or (e). 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1794, § 5, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-209. - Windows and sliding glass doors. 
The following requirements must be met for windows and sliding glass doors: 
(a)  Except as otherwise specified in section 8-210 (Special residential building provisions) and section 8-211 (Special commercial building provisions), all openable exterior windows and sliding glass doors shall comply with the tests as set forth in section 8-212 (Tests). 
(b)  Louvered windows shall not be used when any portion of the window is less than twelve (12) feet vertically or six (6) feet horizontally from an accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform or similar structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78)  
Sec. 8-210. - Special residential building provisions. 
The following special provisions shall apply to all residential dwellings. 
(a)  All exterior swinging doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches, or with panels not less than nine-sixteenths ( 9/16 ) inch thick. 
(b)  Any swinging door leading from a garage into a residence shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-eighths (1 3/8 ) inches. 
(c)  The above-described doors shall be equipped with a single cylinder deadbolt having a minimum projection of one (1) inch and an embedment of at least three-fourths (¾) inch into the strike receiving the bolt. The bolt shall be constructed so as to resist cutting tool attacks. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth (¼) inch diameter. 
The provisions of this subsection do not apply where panic hardware is required or an equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority. Further, a dual locking mechanism, constructed so that both deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob or lever, may be utilized provided it meets all other specifications for locking devices. 
(d)  Installation and construction of frames and jambs for exterior swinging doors shall be as follows: 
(1)  Door jambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner that no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening for a vertical distance of six (6) inches each side of the strike. Finger joints are prohibited within twelve (12) inches vertically of any locking device. 
(2)  In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs at door lock height for three (3) stud spaces each side of the door openings. Trimmers shall be full length from the heads to the floor with solid backing against soles plates. 
(e)  The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with metal flushbolt(s) having a minimum embedment of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
(f)  Glazing in exterior doors or within forty (40) inches of a door locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistance glazing. 
(g)  Hinges for outswinging exterior doors shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. 
This requirement shall also apply to exterior hinges on any swinging door which leads from a garage into a residence. 
(h)  Strikeplates shall be constructed of minimum sixteen (16) U.S. gauge steel, bronze or brass a minimum of three and one-half (3½) inches in length and secured to the jamb with screws a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches in length. 
(i)  All front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide angle one hundred eighty (180) degree door viewer, except where clear vision panels are installed. 
(j)  When panic hardware is required by the Uniform Building Code or Title 24, California Administrative Code, it shall be equipped and installed as follows: 
(1)  Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two (2) locking points on each door, one (1) located at the header, the other at the threshold of the door; or 
(2)  On single doors, panic hardware may have one (1) locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the door frame. The door shall have an astragal constructed of steel .125 inches thick which shall be attached with nonremovable bolts or welded to the outside of the door. The astragal shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches vertically above and below the latch of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide and extend a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door. 
(3)  Double doors containing panic hardware shall have a full length steel astragal attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them but not interfere with the operation of either door. 
(k)  The following provisions for address markings shall apply to residential dwellings: 
(1)  All residential structures shall display a street number in a prominent position so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numbers shall be four (4) inches in height, of a color contrasting to the background and located so they may be clearly seen and read. If the structure has rear vehicle access, numbers shall be placed there as well. 
(2)  At each driveway entrance to a multiple-family dwelling complex or a private residential community which has access from a public roadway, there shall be an illuminated diagrammatic representation (plot plan) of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the building units within the complex. 
(3)  In multiple-family dwelling complexes, any building having a separate identifying factor other than the street number shall be clearly identified in the manner described in subsection (k), infra. Each individual unit of residence shall have a unit identifying number, letter or combination thereof displayed upon the door. 
(4)  Buildings shall be numbered with the approval of the enforcing authority. 
(5)  This section shall not prevent supplementary numbering such as reflective numbers on street curbs or decorative numbering but this shall be considered supplemental only and shall not satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Maps of the complex shall be furnished to the police and fire departments upon completion of construction. The maps shall include building identification and unit identification. 
(l)  All exterior doors shall be equipped with a lighting device which shall provide a minimum maintained one (1) footcandle of light at ground level during hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal resistant covers. 
(m)  Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be equipped with lighting devices which shall provide a minimum maintained one (1) footcandle of light at ground level during hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal resistant covers. 
(n)  All parking lots, carports, garages and parking structures of multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be equipped with lighting devices which will provide a minimum maintained one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface during hours of darkness. Subterranean parking lots shall maintain lighting twenty-four (24) hours a day. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal resistant covers. 
(o)  All exterior required lighting devices shall be placed at a height which will fully illuminate an average adult. 
(p)  In multiple-family dwelling complexes where a common laundry is supplied, the laundry room's access door shall be equipped with a window, self closure device and self locking door lock which can be manually disengaged on the interior. Lighting shall be maintained inside the laundry room during hours of darkness. 
(q)  When access to or within a multiple-family dwelling complex or private residential community is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or fire fighting purposes, a key override is to be installed in an accessible location. The key override shall be mastered to both fire department and police department keys. 
(r)  All skylights on the roof of any residential structure shall be provided with rated burglary resistant glazing. 
(s)  Passenger elevators, the interiors of which are not completely visible when car door(s) is open, shall have mirrors so placed as to make visible the whole of the elevator interior to prospective passengers outside the elevator. 
(t)  Whenever a mail slot is located within forty (40) inches of the primary locking device on any exterior door, it shall be covered by an interior hood which will discourage manipulation of the primary locking device. 
(u)  All exterior block wall fencing of multiple-family dwelling complexes shall have intervals providing visibility corridors, which will allow visibility of the interior from outside the wall, and these visibility corridors shall be placed at regular intervals. These will be required on the side facing the street only. 
(v)  Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs shall be fully enclosed with sheet metal to a height of ten (10) feet. This covering shall be locked against the ladder with a case hardened hasp, secured with nonremovable screws or bolts and a padlock with a minimum three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch hardened steel shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five (5) pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. Hinges on the cover will be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin type hinges. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1436, § 2, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1794, § 6, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-211. - Special commercial building provisions. 
(a)  Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels, solid wood or metal doors shall be constructed or protected as follows: (electronic sliding doors are prohibited) 
(1)  Wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches. Hollow metal doors shall be constructed of a minimum equivalent to sixteen (16) U.S. gauge steel and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict collapsing of the door around the locking device. 
(2)  Except when double cylinder deadbolts are utilized or safety glazing is required by Chapter 54 of the Uniform Building Code, any glazing installed within forty (40) inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
a.  Fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch mesh secured with nonremovable bolts on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; and framing for iron or steel grills shall be by one (1) inch by one-fourth (¼) inch flat metal secured by nonremovable bolts; or 
c.  The glazing shall be covered with iron or steel bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one (1) inch by one-fourth (1 x ¼) inch flat metal, spaced not more than five (5) inches apart and secured with nonremovable bolts. 
d.  Items b. and c. above shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. 
(b)  All swinging exterior doors with the exception of aluminum frame swinging doors shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  A single or double door shall be equipped with a double or single cylinder deadbolt. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one (1) inch and be constructed so as to repeal cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths (¾) inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth (¼) inch in diameter. All deadbolts will be equipped with a locked indicator. Exposed installation screws on double cylinder deadbolts shall be nonremovable. The provisions of this subsection do not apply where (1) panic hardware is required, or (2) an equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority. Locking devices shall be mounted at a height of not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty-four (44) inches above the finished floor. 
(2)  Hinges for outshowing doors shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. 
(3)  Whenever a mail slot is located within forty (40) inches of the primary locking device on any exterior door it shall be covered by an interior hood which will discourage manipulation of the primary locking device. 
(4)  Strikeplates shall be constructed of minimum sixteen (16) U.S. gauge steel, bronze or brass, a minimum of three and one-half (3½) inches in length and secured to the jamb with screws a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches in length. 
(c)  All exterior double doors shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with automatic releasing metal flushbolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch into the header and threshold of the door frame or by panic hardware which contains a minimum of two (2) locking points, one (1) located at the header the other at the threshold of each door. 
(2)  Double doors shall have a full length astragal, constructed of steel a minimum of .125 inch thick which will cover the opening between the doors. The astragal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide, and extent a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with nonremovable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten (10) inch centers. 
(d)  Aluminum frame swinging doors shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The jamb on all aluminum frame swinging doors shall be so constructed or protected to withstand one thousand six hundred (1,600) pounds of pressure in both a vertical distance of three (3) inches and a horizontal distance of one (1) inch each side of the strike, so as to prevent violation of the strike. 
(2)  Aluminum frame swinging doors shall be equipped with a two-point locking mechanism consisting of deadbolt having a minimum bolt projection of one and one-half (1½) inches, or a hook shaped or similar bolt that engages the strike sufficiently to prevent spreading and a metal automatic releasing threshold bolt having a minimum embedment of five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch into the floor. The deadbolt lock shall have a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers, and a cylinder guard and shall be equipped with a locked indicator. 
(e)  Panic hardware, whenever required by the Uniform Building Code or Title 24, California Administrative Code, shall be equipped and installed as follows: 
(1)  Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two (2) locking points on each door, one (1) located at the header, the other at the threshold of the door; or 
(2)  On single doors, panic hardware may have one (1) locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the door frame. The door shall have an astragal constructed of steel .125 inch thick which shall be attached with nonremovable bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches vertically above and below the latch of the panic hardware. The astrogal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide and extend a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. 
(3)  Double doors containing panic hardware shall have a full length astragal constructed of steel, attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door. 
(f)  Installation and construction of frames and jambs for exterior swinging doors shall be as follows: 
(1)  Door jambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner that no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening for a vertical distance of six (6) inches each side of the strike. Finger joints are prohibited. 
(2)  In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs at door lock height for three (3) stud spaces each side of the door openings. Trimmers shall be full length from the heads to the floor with solid backing against sole plates. 
(g)  In multiple occupancy office buildings all entrance doors to individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements for exterior doors. 
(h)  In multiple occupancy buildings, interior walls dividing the individual suites shall not end at the false ceiling but shall continue to the real roof. 
(i)  Exterior transoms or windows shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve (12) feet above ground or adjacent to any pedestrian walkway. Accessible windows and transoms having a pane or opening exceeding ninety-six (96) square inches, with the smallest dimension exceeding six (6) inches, and not visible from a public or private thoroughfare shall be protected in the following manner: 
(1)  Fully tempered glass or burglary resistant glazing; or 
(2)  The following window barriers may be used but shall be secured with bolts, which are nonremovable from the exterior: 
a.  Interior or exterior steel or iron bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one by one-quarter (1 x ¼) inch flat metal spaced not more than five (5) inches apart and securely fastened; or 
b.  Interior or exterior iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch metal with not more than a two (2) inch mesh and securely fastened. 
(3)  The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. 
(j)  Roof openings shall be equipped as follows: 
(1)  All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be provided with: 
a.  Rated burglary resistant glazing; or 
b.  Iron or steel bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one by one-fourth (1 x ¼) inch flat metal spaced not more than five (5) inches on center to cross the narrowest dimension of the opening being covered. If the narrowest dimension of that opening exceeds eighteen (18) inches, cross members shall be welded into place, not more than eighteen (18) inches apart beginning with a cross member at the center of the opening. Cross members shall be welded to each and every bar it crosses. The entire bar assembly shall be mounted inside the skylight and shall be attached to the building structure by means of machine bolts spaced not more than sixteen (16) inches apart or attached by means of an equivalent method approved by the enforcing authority; or 
c.  A steel or iron grill of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch metal with a maximum two (2) inch mesh mounted inside the skylight and secured by bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior. 
d.  These requirements do not apply on any structure with a height of thirty-five (35) feet or more where there is no readily available roof access as determined by the enforcing authority. 
(2)  All hatchway openings on the roof or any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows: 
a.  If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen (16) U.S. gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, attached with screws. 
b.  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts which are attached by nonremovable bolts. 
c.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
(3)  All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six (96) square inches on the roof or exterior walls of any commercial building shall be secured by covering same with either of the following: 
a.  Iron or steel bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one by one-fourth (1 x ¼) inch flat metal spaced no more than five (5) inches apart and securely fastened; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch metal with a maximum two (2) inch mesh and securely fastened. 
c.  If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior. 
d.  The above must not interfere with venting requirements, creating potentially hazardous conditions to health and safety, or conflict with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or Title 19, California Administrative Code. 
(k)  Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs shall be fully enclosed with sheet metal to a height of ten (10) feet. This covering shall be locked against the ladder with a case hardened hasp, secured with nonremovable screws or bolts and a padlock with a minimum three-eighth ( 3/8 ) inch hardened steel shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five (5) pin tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. Hinges on the cover will be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
(l)  A building located within eight (8) feet of utility poles, trees or similar structures which allow access to the building's roof, windows or other openings shall have such access area barricaded or fenced with materials to deter human climbing. 
(m)  The following standards for lighting and address markings shall apply to commercial buildings: 
(1)  The address number of every commercial building shall be located and displayed so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six (6) inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any business which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building. 
(2)  All exterior doors shall be equipped with a lighting device which shall provide a minimum maintained one (1) footcandle of light at ground level during hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal resistant covers. 
(3)  All parking lots, and access thereto, providing more than ten (10) parking spaces and for use by the general public, shall be provided with a minimum maintained one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface from dusk until the termination of business every operating day. At all other hours of darkness, a minimum maintained .25 footcandles of light shall be provided at ground level. 
(4)  Exterior lighting shall not shine away from subject property. 
(n)  Interior night lighting shall be maintained in those areas that are visible from the street (ground floors only). 
(o)  All exterior block wall fencing shall have intervals providing visibility corridors which will allow visibility of the interior from outside the wall, and these visibility corridors shall be placed at regular intervals. This applies only to block walls visible from the street. 
(p)  Passenger elevators, the interiors of which are not completely visible when the car door(s) is open, shall have mirrors so placed as to make visible the whole of the elevator interior to prospective passengers outside the elevator. 
(q)  When access to or within a commercial complex is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving or fire fighting purposes, a key override is to be installed in an accessible location. The key override shall be mastered to both the fire department and police department keys. 
(r)  Any structure four (4) stories in height or greater will have a repeater installed in its roof. 
(s)  Establishments having specific type inventories shall be protected by the following alarm service: 
(1)  Silent alarm system with a central station hook-up and required twenty-four-hour supervised service: 
a.  Jewelry store—Manufacturing, wholesale or retail. 
b.  Any establishment manufacturing, storing or selling firearms and ammunition. 
c.  Establishments selling or storing wholesale liquor, tobacco or drugs. 
d.  Facilities selling or storing furs. 
e.  Precious metal storage facilities. 
f.  Banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions. 
(2)  Silent alarm system not requiring a central station hookup or supervised service: 
a.  Liquor stores. 
b.  Pawnshops. 
c.  Establishments manufacturing, storing or selling electronic equipment. 
d.  Establishments dealing in coins and stamps. 
e.  Establishments manufacturing, storing or selling industrial tool supplies. 
f.  Establishments manufacturing, storing or selling cameras. 
(3)  Local or audible alarm system: 
a.  Antique dealers. 
b.  Art galleries. 
c.  Service stations. 
d.  Food markets. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the use of an alarm system providing a higher level of security than that which is required. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1502, § 1, 10-1-79; Ord. No. NS-1794, § 7, 10-14-85)  
Sec. 8-212. - Tests. 
(A)  Tests, general. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, or his designated agent, of a building or structure falling within the provisions of this division to provide the enforcing authority with a written specification performance test report indicating that the materials utilized meet the minimum requirements. 
(2)  Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this division or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this division, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the enforcing authority may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by any agency which is approved by the enforcing authority. 
(3)  Specimens shall be representative, and the construction shall be verified by assembly drawings and bill of materials. Two (2) complete sets of manufacturer or fabricator installation instructions and full-size or accurate scale templates for all items and hardware shall be included. 
(B)  Sliding glass door tests/procedures. 
(1)  The construction and size of the test door assemblies, jambs and headers, and all hardware components shall be representative of that for which acceptance is desired. The door assembly and mounting in the support fixture shall simulate the rigidity normally provided to a door assembly in a building by the ceiling, floor and walls. 
(2)  Sample doors submitted for testing shall be glazed. Panels shall be closed and locked with the primary locking device only. 
(3)  Tests shall be performed on the samples in the following order: 
(a)  With the panels in the test position, a concentrated load of eight hundred (800) pounds shall be applied to the vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door. With the load removed, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(b)  With panels in the test position, a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds shall be applied to the vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds is applied to the same area of the same stile in a direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the building. With the load applied, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as directed in Test (1), infra. 
(c)  Repeat test (b) substituting eight hundred (800) pounds for the indicated fifty (50) pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
(d)  With the panels in the test position, a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds shall be applied to the vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds is applied to the same stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the door. With the load applied, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(e)  Repeat Test (d) substituting eight hundred (800) pounds for the indicated fifty (50) pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
(f)  With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door frame, a concentrated load of eight hundred (800) pounds shall be applied separately to each vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door. With the load removed, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(g)  With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door frames, a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds shall be applied to the vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds is applied to the same area of the same stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the interior side of the door. With load applied, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(h)  Repeat Test (g) substituting eight hundred (800) pounds for the indicated fifty (50) pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
(i)  With the movable panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door panel, a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds shall be applied to the vertical stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the door while, simultaneously, and additional concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds is applied to the same area of the same stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the door. With the load applied, determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(j)  Repeat Test (i) substituting eight hundred (800) pounds for the indicated fifty (50) pounds. Perform the manipulation tests with the load removed. 
(k)  For inside sliding doors, repeat Test (d) while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds at the end of the movable bottom rail near the meeting stiles inward. For outside sliding doors, repeat Test (d) while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of fifty (50) pounds at the end of the movable bottom rail near the meeting stiles and outward. 
(l)  Lift, push, pull, or otherwise manipulate by hand the door relative to the clearances within the frame while attempting to open the door. This test shall be conducted continuously for five (5) minutes. Examine the assembly and determine a method and position for inserting a tool through the assembly from the outside so as to contact the primary locking device or the latch. Two (2) different tools shall be used: A knife or spatula with a thin blade approximately one-thirty-second ( 1/32 ) inch thick, not more than one (1) inch wide and no longer than six (6) inches; and a piece of stiff steel wire with a diameter of approximately one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) inch. Determine whether it is possible to insert the wire or manipulate with either of these tools so as to unlock the door within a five-minute time period. 
(m)  With the following tools: 
1.  A knife or spatula with a thin blade approximately one-thirty-second ( 1/32 ) inch thick, not more than one (1) inch wide, and no longer than six (6) inches; and 
2.  A straight or Phillips screwdriver with a maximum six (6) inch shaft. 
Remove from the door assembly all screws, glazing heads, or other mechanical fasteners which can be removed readily from the exterior within a time limit of five (5) minutes. Determine if the primary locking device can be unlocked or entry gained by manipulation as described in Test (1), infra. 
(4)  Fixed panels. Fixed panels shall be fastened in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Tests shall be performed in the following order: 
(a)  With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of three hundred (300) pounds shall be applied at midspan of the fixed jambstile in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to remove the fixed panel from the frame jamb pocket. With the load applied, determine if entry can be gained by manipulation as described in subsection (B)(3)(1), infra. 
(b)  With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of three hundred (300) pounds shall be applied at midspan of the fixed jambstile in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to remove the fixed panel from the frame jamb pocket while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of one hundred fifty (150) pounds is applied at midspan of the fixed panel interlock stile in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass which would tend to disengage the meeting stiles. With this load applied, determine if entry can be gained by manipulation as described in subsection (B)(3)(1), infra. 
(c)  Repeat Test (a) with the fixed panel lifted upward to its full limit within the confines of the door frame. The lifting force need not exceed one hundred fifty (150) pounds at the bottom of the exterior face of the meeting stile. With this load applied, determine if entry can be gained by manipulation as described in subsection (B)(3)(1), infra. 
(5)  A sliding door assembly shall fail these tests if at any time during or after the test, the sliding door assembly does not remain engaged, intact, and in the closed and locked position or by manipulating an exposed component; or if one can enter through displaced or damaged portions. 
(6)  The report shall include the following: Identification of the samples tested; type, size, location, and number of locking devices; type, location, and number of anchors; type and thickness of glazing material and an indication of whether or not the subject passed the test. The report shall also indicate at what point the assembly fails. The report shall be certified to be a true copy by the testing laboratory and shall be forwarded direct from the laboratory to the enforcing authority. 
(C)  Window classifications. 
(1)  Type A window assemblies incorporate one (1) or more sashes that open by sliding in the plane of the wall in which the window is installed. 
(2)  Type B window assemblies incorporate one (1) or more framed sashes which are hinged at or near two (2) corners of the individual sash and open toward the exterior of the wall. 
(3)  Type C window assemblies incorporate one (1) or more sashes which open toward the interior and are hinged at or near two (2) corners of the sash. 
(4)  Type D window assemblies incorporate one (1) or more sashes which are hinged or pivot near the center so that part of the sash opens into the interior wall and part opens toward the exterior. 
(D)  Window tests/procedures. 
(1)  Window assemblies shall be mounted following the manufacturer's installation instructions. Install the window assembly in a test fixture which simulates the wall construction required by Chapter 25 of the Uniform Building Code. The unit shall be fully glazed. The sash shall be closed and locked with the primary locking device only. 
(2)  Tests for Type A window assemblies shall be performed in the following order: 
(a)  With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(b)  With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within six (6) inches of the locking device in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five (75) pounds is applied in the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the interior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(c)  With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five (75) pounds is applied to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(d)  With the sliding sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(e)  With the sliding sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five (75) pounds is applied to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass towards the interior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(f)  With the sliding sash lifted upward to the full limit within the confines of the window frame, a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within six (6) inches of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window while, simultaneously, an additional concentrated load of seventy-five (75) pounds is applied to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass toward the exterior side of the window. With the load removed, apply the manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra. 
(g)  For inside sliding windows, repeat Test (f) while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of twenty-five (25) pounds inward at the end of the movable bottom rail near the meeting stile opposite the lockstile. For outside sliding windows, repeat Test (f) while simultaneously applying a concentrated load of twenty-five (25) pounds in the same direction as the perpendicular load inward at the end of the movable bottom rail near the meeting stile opposite the lock stile outward. 
(h)  Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (B)(3)(m), supra. 
(3)  The tests for Types B and C window assemblies shall be performed in the following order: 
(a)  With the swinging sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of one hundred (100) pounds within three (3) inches of each end of the rail or stile which is opposite the hinged side, in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the glass that would tend to open the window. 
(b)  Repeat Test (a) and simultaneously apply a concentrated load of one hundred (100) pounds on the outside within one (1) inch of the end of the stile or rail which is opposite the hinged side, in a direction parallel to the plane of the glazing which would tend to disengage the lock. 
(c)  With the swinging sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds on the rail or stile containing the locking device within six (6) inches of the lock. 
(d)  Repeat Test (b) while simultaneously applying Test (c). The manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra, shall be applied in Tests (a), (b) and (d) to the sash with the load removed. 
(e)  Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (B)(3)(m), supra. 
(4)  Tests for Type D window assemblies shall be performed in the following order: 
(a)  With the sash in the normal position, simultaneously apply a concentrated load of one hundred (100) pounds within three (3) inches of the ends of each rail or stile which is perpendicular to the pivot sides in the direction that would tend to open the sash. 
(b)  With the sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of one hundred (100) pounds on the rail or stile containing the pivot within one (1) inch of the pivot in a direction parallel to the pivots. 
(c)  Repeat Test (b), applying the load to the opposite rail or stile. 
(d)  With the sash in the normal position, apply a concentrated load of two hundred (200) pounds on the rail or stile containing the locking device within six (6) inches of the lock. 
(e)  Repeat Test (d) while simultaneously applying the load specified in Test (b). Repeat Test (d) while simultaneously applying the load specified in Test (c) above. The manipulation test described in subsection (B)(3)(1), supra, shall be applied in Tests (a), (b), (c) and (d) above to the sash with the load removed. 
(f)  Perform the disassembly and manipulation test as described in subsection (B)(3)(m), supra. 
(5)  A window assembly shall fail these tests if at any time during or after the tests, the assembly does not remain engaged, intact, and in the closed and locked position, or by manipulating exposed component; or if one can enter through displaced or damaged portions. 
(6)  The report shall contain a description of the results of the test performed in accordance with the test methods above. The report shall include the following: Identification of the samples tested; type, location, and number of anchors; type and thickness of glazing material and an indication of whether or not the subject passed the test. The report shall also indicate at what point the assembly fails. The test report shall bc certified to be a true copy by the testing laboratory and shall be forwarded direct from the laboratory to the enforcing authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-1424, § 1, 6-5-78)  
Secs. 8-213—8-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-290. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, including the following appendices thereto: A, B, D, I and J, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Plumbing Code"), together with subsequent supplements or amendments, which shall become effective, adopted and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless otherwise specified. The plumbing code is adopted and incorporated by reference as fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the plumbing code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the plumbing code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2016 edition of the "Plumbing Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2016 or later edition of the plumbing code. The plumbing code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city plumbing code. 
(Code 1952, § 8200; Ord. No. NS-545, 10-16-61; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 15, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-1212, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. NS-1414, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1576, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1809, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1901, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2078, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 8, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 14, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 22, 23, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 17, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 27, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 23, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 4, 12-6-16 )  
Secs. 8-291—8-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-300. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 9, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-300, which pertained to application and scope and derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Sec. 8-301. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 28, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former section 8-301 in its entirety, which pertained to authority having jurisdiction (section 203.0), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2760, § 18, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Secs. 8-302—8-307. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 11, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-302—8-307, which pertained to various plumbing code administration provisions and derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1809, §§ 3—5, adopted Nov. 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-1901, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 1, 1987; and Ord. No. NS-2078, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 1990.  
Sec. 8-308. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 29, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former section 8-308 in its entirety, which pertained to permit required (appendix chapter 1 section 103.1.1), and derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1809, § 6, adopted November 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2078, § 3, adopted September 17, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 12, adopted January 19, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 16, adopted December 18, 1995, and Ord. No. NS-2760, § 19, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Secs. 8-309—8-312. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 13, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-309—8-312, which pertained to permits, applications and fees therefor, etc., and derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974, and Ord. No. NS-1414, §§ 2—4, adopted Apr. 17, 1978.  
Sec. 8-313. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 17, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-313, which pertained to expiration of plan review, plumbing code Section 30.4, and derived from Ord. NS-1809, § 7, adopted Nov. 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2078, § 4, adopted Sept. 17, 1990; and Ord. No. NS-2182, § 14, adopted Jan. 19, 1993.  
Secs. 8-314—8-316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1414, § 5, enacted April 17, 1978, repealed §§ 8-313—8-316, derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974. Said sections pertained to plumbing and plan check fees, refund of fees, reinspection fees, and violation investigation fees.  
Secs. 8-317, 8-318. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 15, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-317 and 8-318, which pertained to work to be inspected and notification and derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 3, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Secs. 8-319—8-328. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1212, § 4, adopted July 1, 1974, renumbered Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 2 as Div. 3. 
 
Secs. 8-329—8-333. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974, repealed §§ 8-329—8-333, amending the first paragraph under Part One and Sections 1.1—1.4 of the plumbing code. Said sections were derived from Code 1952, §§ 8201—8204; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, adopted April 19, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1147, § 16, adopted Nov. 6, 1972.  
Secs. 8-334—8-336. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-337. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-337, amending Section 1.7 of the plumbing code, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 8205; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, adopted April 19, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1147, § 17, adopted Nov. 6, 1972.  
Secs. 8-338, 8-339. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-340. - Underground Installation (California Plumbing Code Section 313.5). 
Section 313.5 of the Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
313.5. Piping in the ground shall be laid on a firm bed for its entire length. Building drains, sewers and storm drain piping systems in the ground, and designed and approved at less than one (1) percent grade, shall be laid on a continuous firm bed, certified by a registered soils engineer as having a compaction level of not less than ninety (90) percent density. Where support is otherwise provided, it shall be approved per Section 301.2 of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2182, § 16, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 18, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 24, 25, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 21, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 30, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 5, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 5, adopted December 6, 2016 , amended § 8-340, to read as set out herein. Previously § 8-340 was titled "Piping in the ground (California Plumbing Code Section 314.3)."  
Sec. 8-341. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 31, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former section 8-341 in its entirety, which pertained to horizontal piping (California Plumbing Code Section 314.7), and derived from Ord. No. NS-2273, § 19, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 26, 27, adopted February 3, 2003, and Ord. No. NS-2760, § 123, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Sec. 8-342. - Suspended piping support (California Plumbing Code, Table 313). 
Table 313.3 of the Plumbing Code is amended by adding footnote 2 to the requirements for horizontal piping of all materials specified in Table 313.3 of the California Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2273, § 20, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 28, 29, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 25, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 24, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 6, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 6, adopted December 6, 2016 , amended § 8-342, to read as set out herein. Previously § 8-342 was titled "Suspended piping support (California Plumbing Code, Table 313.1)."  
Secs. 8-343—8-352. - Reserved.  
Secs. 8-353—8-356. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974, repealed §§ 8-353—8-356 amending Sections 1.15—1.18 of the plumbing code. Said sections were derived from Code 1952, §§ 8207, 8208; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, adopted April 19, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1147, §§ 19, 21, adopted Nov. 6, 1972.  
Secs. 8-357—8-365. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-366. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-366, repealing Sections 2.1—2.11 of the plumbing code, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 8209, and Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, adopted April 19, 1965.  
Secs. 8-367—8-369. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-370. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1414, § 5, enacted April 17, 1978, repealed § 8-370, amending Section 613 of the plumbing code. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1212, § 5, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Secs. 8-371—8-391. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-392. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2078, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-392, which pertained to board of appeals (Section 20.14 of the plumbing code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1596, § 4, adopted Sept. 8, 1981.  
Secs. 8-393—8-397. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-398. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974 repealed § 8-398 amending Section 1001 of the plumbing code. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1147, § 23, adopted Nov. 6, 1972.  
Sec. 8-399. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2078, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-399, which pertained to hangers and supports (Section 316(b) of the plumbing code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1901, § 4, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-400. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 32, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former section 8-400 in its entirety, which pertained to water piping in buildings (California Plumbing Code Section 609.3.1), and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, §§ 18, 24, adopted April 6, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 24, adopted November 6, 1972; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 21, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 30, 31, adopted February 3, 2003, and Ord. No. NS-2760, § 27, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Sec. 8-401. - Building supply pipe (California Plumbing Code Section 610.8 using Table 610.4). 
Section 610.8 of the Plumbing Code is amended to read as follows: 
610.8 Size of meter and building supply pipe using Table 610.4. The size of the meter and the building supply pipe shall be determined as follows: 
1.  Determine the available pressure at the water meter or other source of supply. 
2.  Add or subtract depending on positive or negative elevation change, ½ psi for each foot of difference in elevation between such source of supply and the highest water supply outlet in the building or on the premises. 
3.  Use the "pressure range" group within which this pressure will fall using Table 610.4. 
4.  Select the "length" column that is equal to or longer than the required length. 
5.  Follow down the column to a fixture unit value equal to or greater than the total number of fixture units required by the installation. 
6.  Having located the proper fixture unit value for the required length, sizes of meter and building supply pipe as found in the two left-hand columns shall be applied. 
No building supply pipe shall be less than three-quarters (3/4) inch (20 mm) in diameter. 
Each single family residential structure shall be served with a main water supply pipe of not less than one (1) inch I.D. 
Two (2) hose bibs served by three-quarter (3/4) I.D. pipe or larger shall be provided; one serving the front yard and one serving the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. NS-1147, § 25, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 22, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 32, 33, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 29, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 25, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-402. - Building supply pipe (California Plumbing Code, Table 610.4). 
Table 610.4 of the plumbing code is amended by changing the note 2 to read as follows: 
Building Supply, three-quarter (3/4) inch (20 mm) nominal size minimum, - 1" minimum diameter for each single-family residential structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1006, § 19, 4-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 26, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 23, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 34, 35, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 31, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 26, 11-18-13)  
Secs. 8-403, 8-404. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2078, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed §§ 8-403—8-409, which amended Sections 410(a), 503(a), 1004(a), 406(a), Exceptions, No. 4, 1213(e), (h), and 1214(a) of the plumbing code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1809, §§ 8—10, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, and Ord. No. NS-1901, §§ 5—11, adopted June 1, 1987. Subsequently, Ord. No. NS-2273, § 24, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, re-enacted § 8-405.  
Sec. 8-405. - Grade, support, and protection of building sewers (Section 718.1). 
Section 718.1 of the California Plumbing Code is amended by adding the following paragraph thereto: 
Building sewer piping systems designed for grades of less than one (1) percent shall be designed by a registered civil engineer. The engineer shall be responsible for supervising the installation and shall certify in writing that the sewer installation is in compliance with the City-approved plan, relative to line and grade. 
(Ord. No. NS-2273, § 24, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 33, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 27, 11-18-13)  
Secs. 8-406—8-409. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2078, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed §§ 8-403—8-409, which amended Sections 410(a), 503(a), 1004(a), 406(a), Exceptions, No. 4, 1213(e), (h), and 1214(a) of the plumbing code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1809, §§ 8—10, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, and Ord. No. NS-1901, §§ 5—11, adopted June 1, 1987. Subsequently, Ord. No. NS-2273, § 24, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, re-enacted § 8-405.  
Sec. 8-410. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 36, adopted February 3, 2003, repealed § 8-410 in its entirety, which pertained to minimum plumbing facilities (appendix c, footnote 11) and derived from Ord. No. NS-2006, § 1, adopted May 1, 1989 and Ord. No. NS-2182, § 17, adopted January 19, 2003.  
Secs. 8-411—8-419. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-420. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-420, amending Section 1107(a) of the plumbing code, was repealed by Ord. No. 1212, § 2, adopted July 1, 1974. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 21, adopted April 6, 1970.  
Secs. 8-421—8-555. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-556. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Mechanical Code, 2016 edition (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "California Mechanical Code" "Mechanical Code" or "mechanical code"), together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless otherwise specified. The mechanical code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the mechanical code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the mechanical code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2016 edition of the "Mechanical Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2016 or later edition of the mechanical code. The mechanical code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city mechanical code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1006, § 24A, 4-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 28, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-1211, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. NS-1415, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1577, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1810, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1902, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2077, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 18, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 25, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 37, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 34, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 33, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 28, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 7, 12-6-16 )  
Secs. 8-557—8-560. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, §§ 34—37, adopted November 15, 2010, repealed the former sections 8-557—8-560 in their entirety, which pertained to permits; required (appendix chapter 1, section 112.1), violations and penalties (appendix chapter 1, section 111.0), and fees (appendix chapter 1, section 115 and table no. 1-1), respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1596, § 5, adopted September 8, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1810, §§ 2, 3, adopted November 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2077, §§ 2—4, adopted September 17, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 19, adopted January 19, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2273, §§ 26—28, adopted December 18, 1995, and Ord. No. NS-2760, §§ 35—37, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Secs. 8-561—8-563. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2077, § 6, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, in part repealed §§ 8-561—8-563, which amended Sections 1105(a), 503(c) and 2214 of the mechanical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1902, §§ 2—4, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-564—8-569. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-570. - Ducts—Material (Section 602.1). 
Section 602.1 of the mechanical code is amended to read as follows: 
602.1 General. Supply air, return air, and outside air for heating, cooling, or evaporative cooling systems shall be conducted through duct systems constructed of metal in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible. Rectangular ducts two (2) inches w.g. shall comply with the SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible. Ducts, plenums, and fittings shall be permitted to be constructed of concrete, clay, or ceramics when installed in the ground or in a concrete slab, provided the joints are tightly sealed. 
In other than Group A, E, H, I, L, and R occupancies, high-rise buildings, and other applications listed in Section 1.11.0 regulated by the Office of the State Fire Marshal, corridors shall not be used to convey air to or from rooms if the corridor is required be of fire-resistive construction in accordance with the Building Code. In Group A, E, H, I, L, and R occupancies, high-rise buildings, and other applications listed in Section 1.11.0 regulated by the Office of the State Fire Marshal, corridors shall not be used to convey air to or from rooms except where permitted in accordance with Section 1018.5 of the California Building Code. 
Exception: [OSHPD 1, 2, 3 & 4] (See Section 407.4.1.3). 
Not permitted for [OSHPD 1, 2, 3 & 4] Concealed building spaces or independent construction within buildings shall be permitted to be used as ducts or plenums. 
When gypsum products are exposed in ducts or plenums, the air temperature shall be restricted to a range from 50° F (10° C) to 125° F (52° C), and moisture content shall be controlled so that the material is not adversely affected. For the purpose of this section, gypsum products shall not be exposed in ducts serving as supply from evaporative coolers, and in other air-handling systems regulated by this chapter when the temperature of the gypsum product will be below the dew point temperature. 
See Chapter 8 for limitations on combustion products venting systems extending into or through ducts or plenums. 
See Chapter 5 for limitations on environmental air systems exhaust ducts extending into or through ducts or plenums. 
Exhaust ducts under positive pressure and venting systems shall not extend into or pass through ducts or plenums. For appliance vents and chimneys, see Chapter 8. 
EXCEPTION: Supply air duct, on the discharge side of an evaporative cooler, shall be conducted through rigid metal ducts constructed as set forth in SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible, and unless prohibited by structural conditions shall be graded in the direction of the supply outlet. Factory-made air ducts complying with U.L. Standard No. 181 shall be limited to installation in a vertical position only. 
Note: Vertical shall be defined as not more than forty-five (45) degrees from the vertical. 
(Ord. No. NS-2182, § 20, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 30, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 38, 39, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 40, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 39, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 30, 11-18-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2760, § 40, adopted December 3, 2007, changed the reference in the title of § 8-570 from "Ducts—Material (Section 601.1)" to "Ducts—Material (Section 602.1)."  
Secs. 8-571—8-609. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-610. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2077, § 6, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-610, which pertained to location of cooling equipment (Section 1202 of the mechanical code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 29, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1211, § 1, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Secs. 8-611—8-619. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-620. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2077, § 6, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-620, which pertained to location of evaporative cooling systems (Section 1302 of the mechanical code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 30, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. 1211, § 1, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Secs. 8-621—8-629. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-630. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2077, § 6, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-630, which pertained to location of absorption refrigerating equipment (Section 1404 of the mechanical code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 31, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1211, § 1, adopted July 1, 1974.  
Secs. 8-631—8-666. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-667. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Electrical Code 2016 Edition and the administrative provisions set forth herein, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Electrical Code") together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless specifically adopted prior to that date, of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The electrical code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the electrical code set forth in this chapter of this code that specifically amend the electrical code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2016 edition of the "Electrical Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2016 or later edition of the electrical code. The electrical code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city electrical code. 
Annex which are adopted pursuant to this section are as follows: 
Informative Annex A, Product Safety Standards 
(Code 1952, § 8300; Ord. No. NS-493, § 1, 1-16-61; Ord. No. NS-793, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1006, § 31A, 4-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1416, § 2, 6-27-78; Ord. No. NS-1579, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1811, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1903, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2153, § 1, 1-6-92; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 21, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 31, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 40, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 41, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 40, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 31, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 8, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-668. - Materials, methods or requirements (in general). 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 41, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-669. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of these provisions, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
Approved, as to materials, equipment and method of construction, refers to approval by the building official as the result of investigation and tests conducted by the building official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or scientific organizations. 
Approved agency is an established and recognized agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, when the agency has been approved by the building official. 
Chief electrical inspector shall be the person providing expertise for the building official in the area of electrical regulations. 
Code enforcement agency is the department, division or agency of this jurisdiction charged with the function of code enforcement and shall be under the administration and operational control of the building official. 
Firewall is the same as an area separation wall as used in the building code. 
Listed and listing are terms referring to equipment and materials which are shown in a list published by an approved testing agency, qualified and equipped for experimental testing an maintaining and adequate periodic inspection of current productions and which listing states that the material or equipment complies with accepted national standards which are approved or standards which have been evaluated for conformity with approved standards. 
Multiple occupancy building is a building having more than one tenant and may be of single or mixed-use groups as classified by the building code. 
Occupancy is the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 42, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-670—8-679. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-680. - Application to existing electrical systems and equipment. 
(a)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to an electrical system and equipment without requiring the existing electrical system and equipment to comply with all the requirements of this Code, provided the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that required for a new electrical system and equipment and provided further that no hazard to life, health or safety will be created by such additions, alterations or repairs. 
(b)  Existing installations. Electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this Code may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such electrical system and equipment. 
(c)  Changes in building occupancy. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of any building or structure undergoing a change in use or occupancy, as defined in the building code, shall comply with the requirements of this Code which are applicable to the new use or occupancy. 
(d)  Maintenance. All electrical systems and equipment, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe and hazard-free condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by this Code, shall be maintained in conformance with this Code. The owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the electrical system. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building official may cause any electrical system to be reinspected. 
(e)  Moved building. Electrical systems and equipment which are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this Code for new installations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 43, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-681. - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the building official. 
The building official may approve any alternate, provided that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this Code and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims regarding the use of alternates. The details of an action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 44, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-682. - Modifications. 
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases, provided that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this Code impractical and the modification is in conformity with the intent and purpose of this Code, and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of actions granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 45, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-683. - Tests. 
(a)  Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of the provisions of this code or evidence that materials or construction do not conform to the requirements of this code, the building official may require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the building official shall determine test procedures. 
(c)  All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for the retention of public records. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 46, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-684. - Powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this Code. For such purposes, the building official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the appointing authority, the building official may appoint a chief electrical inspector and other related technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. 
(c)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official or an authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or an authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by such codes, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, the building official shall first present proper credentials or request entry. If such building or premises in unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry were refused, the building official or an authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the building official or an authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner or occupant or other persons having charge, care or control of the building or premises shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(d)  Stop orders. Whenever work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(e)  Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies. The building official or authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect electric power or energy service supplied to the building, structure or building service equipment therein regulated by this code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall whenever possible notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or electrical system or equipment of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action, and shall notify the serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of the disconnection immediately thereafter. 
(f)  Authority to condemn electrical system and equipment. Whenever the building official ascertains that an electrical system or equipment regulated in this code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the building official shall order in writing that such electrical system or equipment either be removed or restored to safe condition, whichever is appropriate. The written notice itself shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. Persons shall not use or maintain defective electrical system or equipment after receiving notice. 
When equipment or an installation is to be disconnected, a written notice of such disconnection and causes thereof shall be given within twenty-four (24) hours of the order to disconnect to the serving utility, the owner and occupants of the building, structure or premises. 
When an electrical system or equipment is maintained in violation of this Code and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation. 
(g)  Connection after order to disconnect. persons shall not make connections from an energy or power supply nor supply power to an electrical system or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of the electrical system or equipment. 
This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of a person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure or building service equipment therein for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be held as assuming such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this Code or approvals issued under this code. 
(h)  Reserved. 
(i)  Cooperation of other officials and officers. The building official may request, and shall receive so far as is required in the discharge of duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 47, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-685. - Unsafe electrical systems or equipment. 
Electrical systems or equipment regulated by this code which are unsafe, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Use of electrical systems or equipment regulated by this code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. 
Unsafe electrical systems or equipment are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or an alternate procedure as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the building official or other employee or official of this jurisdiction as designated by the governing body may institute other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 48, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-686. - Permits required. 
(a)  Except as specified in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, alter, repair, move, convert or maintain any electrical equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure, each office suite, and each unit in a commercial or industrial building, from the building official. 
(b)  Exempt work. An electrical permit shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug and to be connected to an approved receptacle when the cord or cable is permitted by this Code. 
(2)  Residential temporary decorative lighting. 
(3)  Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control device. 
(4)  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets thereof. 
(5)  Repair or replacement of any over current device of the required capacity in the same location. 
(6)  Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems. 
(7)  Taping joints. 
(8)  Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories. 
(9)  The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets. 
(10)  A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility. 
(c)  Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 49, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-687. - Application for permit. 
(a)  To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application thereof in writing on a form furnished by the code enforcement agency for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as required in subsection (b). 
(5)  Be signed by permittee, or authorized agent. 
(6)  Give such other data and information as may be required by the building official. 
(b)  Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams and other data shall be submitted in one (1) or more sets with each application for a permit. The building official may require plans, computations, and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such. The building official may waive the submission of plans, calculations, etc., if the building official finds that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Code. 
(c)  Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
Plans for buildings more than two (2) stories in height of other than groups R, division 3 and M occupancies shall indicate how required structural and fire-resistive integrity will be maintained where a penetration will be made for electrical and communication conduits, pipes and similar systems. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 50, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-688. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Issuance. The application, plans and specifications, and other data, filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified in the city fee resolution have been paid, the building official shall, therefore, issue a permit to the applicant. 
When the building official issues a permit, the plans and specifications shall be endorsed in writing or stamped "APPROVED." Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the building official, and all work regulated by this Code shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of an electrical system before the entire plans and specifications for the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this Code. The holders of such permits shall proceed at their own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure, or building service will be granted. 
(b)  Retention of plans. One (1) set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the building official until final approval of the work covered therein. One (1) set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 51, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-689. - Permit fees. 
The fee for each electrical permit shall be as set forth in the miscellaneous fee resolution of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 52, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-690. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. All electrical systems and equipment for which a permit is required by this Code shall be subject to inspection by the building official, and the electrical system shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the building official. 
It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the electrical system to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for the expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to permit inspection. When the installation of an electrical system and equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection shall be made. Electrical systems and equipment regulated by this Code shall not be connected to the energy source until authorized by the building official. 
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
(b)  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one (1) working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the building official. 
It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspections required by this Code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
(c)  Operation of electrical equipment. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of any electrical system or equipment installed to replace existing equipment. The request for inspection of such equipment must have been filed with the building official not more than forty-eight (48) hours after such replacement work is completed and before any portion of such electrical system is concealed by any permanent portion of the building. 
(d)  Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections required by this Code, the building official may make or require other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws that are enforced by the code enforcement agency. 
(e)  Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This provision is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. 
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. 
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application thereof in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with Table No. 3-A. 
In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 53, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-691. - Connection approval. 
(a)  Energy connections. An electrical system or equipment regulated by this Code for which a permit is required shall not be connected to a source of energy or power until approved by the building official. 
(b)  Temporary connections. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the electrical system or equipment to the source of energy or power for the purpose of testing the equipment, or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. NS-2522, § 54, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-692—8-699. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1416, §§ 3, 4, enacted June 27, 1978, repealed former Div. 2, setting forth amendments to the National Electrical Code, 1968 Edition, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Div. 2, relative to administration and additional requirements. Former Div. 2 was derived from Code 1952, §§ 8301—8333; Ord. No. NS-493, adopted Jan. 16, 1961; Ord. No. NS-546, adopted Nov. 6, 1961; Ord. No. NS-793, adopted April 19, 1965; Ord. No. NS-983, adopted Oct. 20, 1969; Ord. No. NS-1006, adopted April 6, 1970; and Ord. No. NS-1213, adopted July 1, 1974. 
Cross reference— Underground utility installation §§ 34-82 et seq., 41-626. 
 
Sec. 8-700. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 55, adopted February 3, 2003, repealed § 8-700 in its entirety, which pertained to the board of appeals (section 203) and derived from Ord. No. NS-2182, § 22, adopted January 19, 1993 and Ord. No. NS-2273, § 32, adopted December 18, 1995.  
Secs. 8-701—8-704. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-705. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 23, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-705, which pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-706—8-710. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-711. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 56, adopted February 3, 2003, repealed § 8-711 in its entirety, which pertained to required permits (section 301(a)) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1811, § 4, adopted November 18, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2153, § 2, adopted January 6, 1992; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 24, adopted January 19, 1983, and Ord. No. NS-2273, § 33, adopted December 18, 1995.  
Secs. 8-712, 8-713. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 25, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-712 and 8-713, which pertained to issuance and applications for permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 5, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-714. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-714 in its entirety. Former § 8-714 pertained to annual permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 6, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-715, 8-716. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 25, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-715 and 8-716, which pertained to license requirement and commencement of work relative to permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Sec. 8-717. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-717 in its entirety. Former § 8-717 pertained to penalties for failing to obtain a permit and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1811, § 7, adopted Nov. 11, 1985; and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 2, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-718. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 25, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-718, which pertained to nontransferability of permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Sec. 8-719. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-719 in its entirety. Former § 8-719 pertained to temporary permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 3, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-720—8-722. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 25, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-720—8-722, which pertained to expiration, revocations and suspensions and fees relative to permits and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1579, § 2, adopted Apr. 20, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1811, §§ 8—10, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, and Ord. No. NS-2153, § 3, adopted Jan. 6, 1992.  
Sec. 8-723. - Expiration of plan review. 
Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2153, § 4, 1-6-92; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 26, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 34, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 57, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-724. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2522, § 58, adopted February 3, 2003, repealed § 8-724 in its entirety, which pertained to reinspections and derived from Ord. No. NS-2273, § 35, adopted December 18, 1995.  
Sec. 8-725. - Fee schedule (Table No. 3-A). 
Table No. 3-A of the administrative provisions of the electrical code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2273, § 36, 12-18-95)  
Secs. 8-726, 8-727. - Reserved.  
Secs. 8-728—8-730. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 27, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-728—8-730, which pertained to hidden installations, inspections and corrections, and temporary connections and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1811, §§ 11—13, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-731—8-739. - Reserved.  
Secs. 8-740, 8-741. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 27, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former §§ 8-740 and 8-741, which pertained to standards for the installation of electrical equipment and approval of equipment and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1811, § 14, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 4, June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-742. - Used materials. 
Previously used materials shall not be reused without the written approval obtained in advance from the building official. 
(Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, 6-27-78; Ord. No. NS-1811, § 15, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-743. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 27, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-743, which pertained to nameplates and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-744—8-746. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-747. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 8-747, which pertained to underground installation of utility service lines and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978 and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 16, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, was repealed by § 3 of Ord. No. NS-1955, adopted Apr. 18, 1988.  
Secs. 8-748—8-764. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-765. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 27, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-765, which pertained to change of occupancy classification and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-766—8-768. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-769. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 27, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-769, which pertained to relocated buildings and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 4, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-770—8-799. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Secs. 8-800—8-802. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-803. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-803 in its entirety. Former § 8-803 amended Section 90-1(a) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Sec. 8-804. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-805. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1811, § 17, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, repealed § 8-805, which amended Section 90-2(a) of the electrical code. Former § 8-805 was derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-806—8-814. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-815. - Conductors (Section 110.5). 
Section 110.5 of the California Electrical Code is amended by adding a sentence to read as follows: 
All sections of this California Electrical Code allowing the use of aluminum conductors are subject to the limitation that no aluminum conductor smaller than No. 4 AWG shall be used. 
(Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, 6-27-78; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 37, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 59, 60, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 43, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 42, 11-15-10)  
Secs. 8-816—8-820. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-821. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-821 in its entirety. Former § 8-821 amended Section 210-1 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Sec. 8-822. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-823. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-823 in its entirety. Former § 8-823 amended Section 210-19(c) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-824—8-827. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-828. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-828 in its entirety. Former § 8-828 amended Section 210-52(f) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1579, § 3, adopted Apr. 20, 1981; and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 18, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-829. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-829 in its entirety. Former § 8-829 amended Section 210-70(a) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1579, § 4, adopted Apr. 20, 1981; and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 19, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-830. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-830 in its entirety. Former § 8-830 amended Section 210-70 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1903, § 5, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-831—8-837. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-838. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-838 in its entirety. Former § 8-838 amended Section 215-2(a) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1811, § 20, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-839. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-839 in its entirety. Former § 8-839 amended Article 215 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-840—8-842. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-843. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-843 in its entirety. Former § 8-843 amended Section 220-4 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1579, § 4, adopted Apr. 20, 1981; and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 6, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-844—8-853. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-854. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-854 in its entirety. Former § 8-854 amended Section 230-43 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 7, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-855. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-856. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-856 in its entirety. Former § 8-856 amended Section 230-71 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-857—8-861. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-862. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-862 in its entirety. Former § 8-862 amended Section 250-81 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1811, § 21, adopted Nov. 18, 1985, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 8, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-863. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-863 in its entirety. Former § 8-863 amended Section 250-83 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1811, § 22, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-864—8-866. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-867. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-867 in its entirety. Former § 8-867 amended Section 250-115 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-868—8-911. - Reserved  
Sec. 8-912. - Wiring Methods. 
Section 230.43 of the California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
230.43 Wiring Methods for 1000 Volts, Nominal, or Less. Service entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this Code covering the type of wiring method used and shall be limited to the following methods: 
(1)  Open wiring on insulators 
(2)  Type IGS cable 
(3)  Rigid metal conduit (RMC) 
(4)  Intermediate metal conduit (IMC) 
(5)  Wireways 
(6)  Busways 
(7)  Auxiliary gutters 
(8)  Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (PVC) 
(9)  Cablebus 
(10)  High density polyethylene conduit (HDPE) 
(11)  Nonmetallic underground conduit with conductors (NUCC) 
(12)  Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit (RTRC) 
( Ord. No. NS-2905, § 11, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-913. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-913 in its entirety. Former § 8-913 amended Section 300-13(b) of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-914, 8-915. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed §§ 8-914 and 8-915 in their entirety. Former §§ 8-914 and 8-915 deleted Sections 333-1—333-12 and 334-1—334-24 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1811, §§ 23, 24, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-916—8-932. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-933. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 8-933, amending Chapter 3 of the electrical code by deleting Article 334, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1579, § 6. adopted April 20, 1981. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-934—8-940. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-941. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 38, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-941, which pertained to uses permitted, electrical code Section 336-3, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-2153, § 5, adopted Jan. 6, 1992.  
Sec. 8-942. - Uses not permitted (Section 334.12). 
Section 334.12 of the California Electrical Code is amended to read as follows: 
Sec. 334.12. Uses Not Permitted. 
(A)  Types NM, NMC and NMS. Types NM, NMC and NMS cables shall not be permitted as follows: 
1.  In any multifamily dwelling or other structure not specifically permitted in 334.10(1), (2), and (3). 
2.  Exposed in dropped or suspended ceilings in other than one- and two-family and multifamily dwellings 
3.  As service-entrance cable 
4.  In any nonresidential building or structure 
5.  In theatres and similar locations 
6.  In motion picture studios 
7.  In storage battery rooms 
8.  In hoist ways or on elevators or escalators 
9.  Embedded in poured cement, concrete, or aggregate. 
10.  In hazardous (classified) locations, except where specifically permitted by other articles in this Code. 
(B)  Types NM and NMS. Types NM and NMS cables shall not be installed in the following: 
1.  Where exposed to corrosive fumes or vapors 
2.  Where embedded in masonry, concrete, adobe, fill, or plaster 
3.  In a shallow chase in masonry, concrete, or adobe and covered with plaster, adobe, or similar finish 
4.  In wet or damp locations 
(Ord. No. NS-2153, § 6, 1-6-92; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 61, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 45, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 44, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, §§ 32, 33, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 10, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-943. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-943 in its entirety. Former § 8-943 deleted Section 336-10 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 9, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-944. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-945. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1579, § 6, enacted April 20, 1981, repealed § 8-945, amending Article 336 of the electrical code by deleting therefrom Section 336-11. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS 1416, § 5, enacted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-946—8-960. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-961. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-961 in its entirety. Former § 8-961 amended Section 348-1 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 10, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-962—8-971. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-972. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-972 in its entirety. Former § 8-972 amended Section 350-2 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1903, § 11, adopted June 11, 1987.  
Sec. 8-973. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-973 in its entirety. Former § 8-973 amended Section 370-19 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1903, § 12, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Secs. 8-974—8-1017. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1018. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-1018 in its entirety. Former § 8-1018 amended Section 410-8 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-1019—8-1024. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1025. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-1025 in its entirety. Former § 8-1025 amended Section 422-5 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-1579, § 5, adopted Apr. 20, 1981.  
Secs. 8-1026—8-1079. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1080. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2153, § 7, adopted Jan. 6, 1992, repealed § 8-1080 in its entirety. Former § 8-1080 amended Section 600-1 of the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. NS-1416, § 5, adopted June 27, 1978.  
Secs. 8-1081—8-1155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-1156. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, together with the appendices and code standards therein (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Housing Code"), together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on each new official publication date of the housing code. The housing code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the housing code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the housing code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-1997 edition of the "Housing Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 1997 or later edition of the housing code. The housing code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city housing code. 
(Code 1952, § 8700; Ord. No. NS-793, § 3, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-1147, § 14, 11-6-72; Ord. No. NS-1215, § 1, 7-1-74; Ord. No. NS-1417, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1580, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1808, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1904, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2079, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 28, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 39, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 62, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-1157—8-1159. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1160. - Authority (Section 201.1). 
Section 201.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Authority . The building official is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code, and the health officer shall enforce those portions of the code as they apply to sanitation, maintenance, ventilation, use or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. NS-1417, § 2, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 40, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 8-1161. - Right of entry (Section 201.2). 
Section 201.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Right of Entry . Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official, the health officer or their authorized representatives have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises substandard as defined in Section 202 of this code, the building official, the health officer or their authorized representatives may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official or the health officer by this code; provided that if such building or premises be occupied, they shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, they shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official, the health officer or their authorized representatives shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the building official, the health officer or their authorized representatives for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. Any person violating this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1417, § 3, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 41, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 8-1162. - Appeals board (Section 203). 
Section 203 of the housing code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1596, § 6, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-2079, § 2, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-1163. - Violations (Section 204). 
Section 204 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 204. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, tenant, or subtenant, or as the agent of any of the foregoing, to erect, construct, enlarge, equip, use, occupy or maintain any substandard building or any other building or structure which is in violation of this code, or to cause or permit the same to be done. 
(Ord. No. NS-1894, § 1, 4-6-87)  
Secs. 8-1164—8-1169. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1170. - Substandard buildings (Section 1001). 
Section 1001 of the Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1001—Definition. 
"Substandard building" shall mean that term as defined in Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, as the same now exists and as it may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1894, § 2, 4-6-87; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 42, 12-18-95)  
Secs. 8-1171—8-1225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-1226. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the Uniform Sign Code, 1997 edition (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Sign Code") together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on each new official publication date of the sign code. The sign code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the sign code set forth in this chapter of this code that specifically amend the sign code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-1997 edition of the "Sign Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 1997 or later edition of the sign code. The sign code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city sign code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1418, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1575, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1807, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1905, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2080, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 29, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 43, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 63, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-1227—8-1247. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Secs. 8-1248, 8-1249. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1250. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2080, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-1250, which pertained to prohibiting immoral or unlawful advertising (Section 102 of the sign code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 51, adopted Apr. 6, 1970; and Ord. No. NS-1418, § 2, adopted Apr. 17, 1978.  
Secs. 8-1251—8-1259. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1260. - Existing signs (Section 102). 
Section 102 of the Uniform Sign Code is hereby amended by adding another paragraph to read as follows: 
Existing signs authorized and constructed in accordance with a previous ordinance are exempt from the provisions of Chapters 4 through 13, inclusive, provided that no such sign shall be altered, enlarged, reconstructed, or repaired (except for normal maintenance) unless it is made to conform to all requirements of this article for a new sign. 
(Ord. No. NS-1006, § 52, 4-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1418, § 3, 4-17-78)  
Secs. 8-1261—8-1264. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1265. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2080, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-1265, which prohibited advertising on public property (Section 102 of the sign code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 53, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1418, § 4, adopted Apr. 17, 1978.  
Secs. 8-1266—8-1269. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1270. - Authority (Section 103.1). 
Section 103.1 of the Uniform Sign Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1006, § 54, 4-6-70; Ord. No. NS-1418, § 5, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1807, § 2, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 44, 12-18-95)  
Secs. 8-1271—8-1279. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1280. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2182, § 30, adopted Jan. 19, 1993, repealed former § 8-1280, which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 55, adopted Apr. 6, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1418, § 6, adopted Apr. 17, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-2080, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 1990.  
Secs. 8-1281—8-1289. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1290. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2080, § 4, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-1290, which pertained to wall signs (Section 903 of the sign code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 57, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1418, § 7, adopted Apr. 17, 1978.  
Secs. 8-1291—8-1299. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1300. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2080, § 4, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-1300, which pertained to projecting signs (Section 1003(a) of the sign code) and derived from Ord. No. NS-1006, § 56, adopted Apr. 6, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1418, § 8, adopted Apr. 17, 1978.  
Sec. 8-1301—8-1548. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2080, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed former Div. 3 of this article, relative to signs adjacent to freeways and on Main Street, which consisted of §§ 8-1549—8-1558 and derived from §§ 8441.1—8441.6, 8442 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-881, § 1, adopted June 19, 1967, and Ord. No. NS-897, § 2, adopted Oct. 19, 1967. 
 
Secs. 8-1549—8-1759. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - HOUSE MOVING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-1760. - Title of article. 
This article shall be referred to and may be cited as the House Moving Code of the city.  
Sec. 8-1761. - Relocation permit—Required. 
No person shall move any building into the city, or relocate any building within the city, without first obtaining a separate building moving permit for each building from the building official. 
(Code 1952, § 8600; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 1, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1762. - Same—Application. 
To obtain a relocation permit the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose by the director of building safety. Every such application shall contain or have appended thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name of street and official house number, the name of the tract or block number and zone-use legend, the lot number and its dimensions, where the building to be moved is to be placed. 
(2)  The proposed use or occupancy for the building. 
(3)  The tract, block, lot, zone-use and official address at the building's existing location. 
(4)  All dimensions and the structural type of the building. 
(5)  The nature of the repairs and any alterations or additions. 
(6)  The complete valuation of the proposed work. 
(7)  A plot drawn to a scale of not larger than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch to the foot, shall be filed with the application. Such plot plan shall indicate with dimensions all existing and proposed building locations, yards and setbacks. 
(8)  A plan of the building to be moved shall be filed with the application, and such plan shall show all necessary structural and sanitary details as required by the building official. 
(Code 1952, § 8601; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 2, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1763. - Same—Inspection and report prior to issuance. 
Within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the application provided for in section 8-1762, the building official shall cause an inspection to be made of the building so proposed to be moved and prepare a written report of any deviations from the code disclosed by said inspection. 
(Code 1952, § 8602; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-2084, § 1, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-1764. - Same—Granting or denying. 
If the building official determines that said building in all respects complies with the building, electrical, plumbing and housing codes of the city, he shall grant the relocation permit. 
If the building official determines that said building does not comply with the minimum requirements contained in the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, housing code, or mechanical code, but that such failure to reach said minimum requirements can be satisfactorily repaired, he may grant the relocation permit on condition that the applicant for said permit, and the owner of the land to which it is proposed to move said building, sign an agreement to repair said building in such a manner as to bring the same up to code requirement. 
If the building official determines that the items in which the building fails to meet said code requirements are matters which do not endanger public health or safety and that, in his opinion, said building does not endanger the health or safety of the community in which it is proposed to relocate the same, he may grant the permit without requiring that the minimum standards of said codes be met in those particulars mentioned and waived by him in his report. 
(Code 1952, § 8603; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 3, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2084, § 2, 9-17-90)  
Secs. 8-1765—8-1767. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2084, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed §§ 8-1765—8-1767, which pertained to appeals, and fees for filing and inspection and derived from §§ 8604, 8610 and 8612 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1957; Ord. No. NS-236, § 1, adopted Mar. 18, 1957; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 34, adopted Dec. 9, 1974; and Ord. No. NS-1906, §§ 4—6, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-1768. - Completion bond—Required; amount; waiver. 
No relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall first post with the building official, in addition to the clean-up bond required in section 8-1773, a bond executed by the owner of the premises where the building or structure is to be located, as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety; which shall be in form joint and several, shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the cost of foundation, utility connections, street and walk improvements to city standards and other requirements, plus twenty-five (25) percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of such relocation permit as estimated by the building official. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may post a bond executed by the said owner, as principal, and which is secured by a deposit of cash or cashier's check in the amount named above, and conditioned as required in the case of a surety bond; such a bond as so secured is hereinafter called a "cash bond" for the purposes of this section. Said bond may be waived by the building official in any case where the building official shall determine that the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the regularly occupied business premises of a house mover or that of moving a building on the same lot or to adjacent property of the same owner; but the exceptions herein made shall not apply unless the building official finds that no such security is necessary in order to assure compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1952, § 8605; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 7, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1769. - Same—Conditions. 
Every bond posted pursuant to section 8-1768 shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  That all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the director of building safety. 
(2)  That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time limit specified in the relocation permit; or if no time limit is specified, within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the relocation permit. The time limit herein specified or the time limit specified in any such permit may be extended for good and sufficient cause by the building official. No such extension of time shall be valid unless in writing, and no such extension shall release any surety from any bond. 
When an application has been granted and such bond posted and approved, the building official shall issue the relocation permit. 
(Code 1952, § 8606; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 8, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2084, § 4, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-1770. - Same—Default in performance of conditions; notice to be given. 
(a)  Whenever the building official shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit and completion bond, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be performed, or failing therein, must pay to the city, the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice plus an additional sum equal to twenty-five (25) percent of said estimated cost. Upon the receipt of such monies, the building official shall proceed in such manner as he deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure and accounting to the surety for the money so paid. The cost of supervision, twenty-five (25) percent of the amount fixed may be held by the city. 
(b)  If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default as provided above shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not obtained within the time specified, the building official shall proceed without delay and without further notice to use the cash deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be done, by contract or otherwise, in his discretion. The balance, if any, shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work plus twenty-five (25) percent thereof. 
(c)  When any default has occurred on the part of the principal under the preceding provisions, the surety shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, of demolishing the building or structure and clearing, cleaning and restoring the site. If the surety defaults, the building official shall have the same option and the cost plus twenty-five (25) percent shall be a charge against the bond. 
(Code 1952, § 8607; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 9, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1771. - Same—Period; access to premises. 
(a)  The term of such bond shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof, and shall end upon the completion, to the satisfaction of the building official, of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof signed by the building official, a copy of which shall be sent to any surety or principal upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  The building official, the surety, and the duly authorized representatives of either, shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit and bond, the surety, or any person employed or engaged in its behalf, or the building official or any person employed or engaged in his behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. It shall be unlawful for the owner or his representatives, successors or assigns, or any other person, to interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent, of any surety, or of the city, engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued after default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof. 
(Code 1952, § 8609; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 10, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1772. - Same—Exceptions to requirement. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 8-1768 through 8-1771 relating to the posting of bonds shall not apply where the building or structure is to be moved to a location outside the limits of the city. In such cases, if the building official finds that the building or structure is so constructed and in such condition that it may be removed with safety, the permit shall be issued without the requirement of a bond. 
(b)  The provisions of sections 8-1763 through 8-1765 and 8-1768 through 8-1771, both inclusive, shall not apply to accessory buildings of four hundred (400) square feet or less, provided the building official shall first find that such building is structurally sound and in such condition that it may be moved with safety. The permit in such cases shall be issued without requirement of a bond. 
(Code 1952, § 8608; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 11, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1773. - Clean-up bond. 
The clean-up bond referred to in section 8-1768 shall be in an amount determined by the building official to be sufficient to guarantee that all building materials from the removed building shall be brought to ground level, all the excavations filled, and all debris covered or removed from the lot from which a building was removed, within a period of six (6) months of the date the relocation permit was granted, unless a written extension of time be granted by the building official. All applicable provisions of section 8-1770 shall apply to the clean-up bond herein provided for. Said bond may be a surety bond or a cash bond, as provided for in section 8-1768, for the completion bond. 
(Code 1952, § 8611; Ord. No. NS-230, § 1, 2-18-57; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 12, 6-1-87)  
Secs. 8-1774—8-1794. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY PROTECTION AND DAMAGE INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 8-1795. - Equipment approval. 
No permit shall be issued to allow the moving of any building along any street unless the street superintendent has inspected applicant's equipment and approved same, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No building shall be moved, the highest point of which at any time during operation of moving, extends to a height of more than twenty-five (25) feet above the surface of the street, unless a request to move such building, stating the overall height thereof and the route upon the streets of the city over which it will be moved, shall first have been filed with the council and the council, after a report from the building official, the park superintendent and the street superintendent, shall grant special permission for such moving by minute order. Such minute order may be made and conditioned upon the subsequent approval of one (1) or more of the city employees and officials from whom a report is herein required. The requirements set forth in this paragraph are in addition to and not in lieu of any other requirements contained in this division governing the moving of buildings or structures upon the streets of the city. 
(2)  No building shall be moved upon any truck having metal tires unless the total weight resting upon the surface of the street shall not exceed six hundred (600) pounds upon any inch of width of tires. 
(3)  No building weighing more than nine (9) tons shall be moved upon any truck equipped with pneumatic or solid tires. 
(4)  No building shall be moved upon rollers unless planks are placed under said rollers to such width and in such manner as to protect the surface of the street from damage. 
(5)  No building shall be moved unless moved upon rollers as provided in this division or upon a truck having wheels equipped with pneumatic or solid rubber or metal tires. 
(6)  No building shall be moved unless there is at all times a clear space of at least five (5) feet between said building and the curb of the street. 
(7)  No building shall be allowed to remain stationary on any street intersection, or upon any street, in such manner as to obstruct the access to any fireplug, standpipe or other fire fighting appliance located upon or adjacent to such street. 
(8)  No building shall be moved or allowed to remain stationary upon any public street during the period between thirty (30) minutes before sunset and thirty (30) minutes after sunrise, unless red lanterns are kept lighted during said period at each corner of said building. 
(9)  The chief of the fire department shall be notified twice during each twenty-four (24) hours of moving of the exact location of the building. 
(Code 1952, § 8614; Ord. No. NS-1906, § 13, 6-1-87)  
Sec. 8-1796. - Deposit for public utility services—Required. 
Before the issuance of any relocation permit, the applicant shall in addition to other fees required, deposit with the street superintendent the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus the estimated cost of services of all public utilities to be affected by such moving, and the charges made for the permit to be issued. From said deposit for public utilities the following deductions shall be made: 
The sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each twenty-four (24) hours, or fraction thereof, during which said building referred to in the permit occupies any portion of a public street in the operation of moving, in excess of the first twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1952, § 8615)  
Sec. 8-1797. - Same—Refund of excess. 
After the completion of said moving, the street superintendent shall refund to the applicant any remaining amount not chargeable hereunder. 
(Code 1952, § 8623)  
Sec. 8-1798. - Same—Bond to cover balance above deposit. 
Should the cash deposit in this division provided for be inadequate to pay the respective claims, the bond provided for in this division shall be subject to said payment and shall insure the same. 
(Code 1952, § 8621)  
Sec. 8-1799. - Same—Appeal. 
If a house mover believes that the estimate or statement furnished by any utility or municipality for protecting its property on the streets is excessive, he may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. The council shall hear such matters and determine whether said estimate or statement is excessive, and in case it finds it so to be the council shall fix such sum as it deems adequate for said house mover to deposit, and the sum so fixed by the council shall be deducted by the street superintendent from the money deposited by the applicant in lieu of the estimate or statement and paid to the claimant. 
(Code 1952, § 8622; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 35, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 8-1800. - Permit—License and bond required. 
Any person applying for a permit to move any building having a total floor space of more than two hundred (200) square feet must first procure a license from the city and file with the city clerk a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the form approved by the city attorney, conditioned that if the principal shall fail to fully pay the city and any person who shall suffer any damage that may be done to the streets or improvements thereon or to any person or property of any description as a result of the moving of such building, the surety will pay for such damage not exceeding the amount of such bond. Said bond shall further provide that the damage covered by same may be recovered upon such bond by civil action in the name of the city or person so injured. 
(Code 1952, § 8616)  
Sec. 8-1801. - Same—Fees for moving buildings. 
Fees for permits to move buildings over the streets of the city shall be charged in amounts which the city council shall establish by resolution. 
(Ord. No. NS-1254, § 1, 3-10-75) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1254, § 1, amended § 8-1801 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment said section was derived from Code 1952, § 8617, and established the fee for moving a building under 500 feet. Section 2 of Ord. No. NS-1254 repealed § 8-1802, establishing the fee for moving a building out of the city, derived from Code 1952, § 8620.  
Sec. 8-1802. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 8-1801.  
Sec. 8-1803. - Removal of trees or poles—Payment of cost by house mover. 
The street superintendent shall deduct from said deposit required from persons desiring to move any building having a total floor space of more than two hundred (200) square feet as aforesaid, the cost of the services rendered by any employee of the city in protecting, trimming or cutting any trees along the route of moving. In the event that it becomes necessary to remove or replace, or otherwise change any poles, conduits, standards, wires or other property of public utilities in the streets, which are placed and located according to law, franchise or regulations of the public utilities commission of the state, governing such locations, the reasonable expenses of removal and replacement of same shall be borne by the house mover, provided the person owning or controlling such poles, wires, etc., shall have filed with the street superintendent an estimate of said cost within forty-eight (48) hours after the time of the service of the notice of application for building moving permit, as hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1952, § 8618)  
Sec. 8-1804. - Same—Payment of cost by owner. 
Whenever such poles, wires, etc., are placed with less clearance than that provided in the ordinances, laws and regulations pertaining to such matters, the expense of removal and replacement shall be borne by the person owning or operating the same. 
(Code 1952, § 8619)  
Secs. 8-1805—8-1899. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE 
 
Sec. 8-1900. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "dangerous building code" or the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings"), together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on each new official publication date of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The dangerous building code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the dangerous building code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the dangerous building code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-1997 edition of the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 1997 or later edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city dangerous buildings code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1148, § 1, 12-4-72; Ord. No. NS-1419, § 1, 4-17-78; Ord. No. NS-1574, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1813, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1907, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2081, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 31, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 45, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 64, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-1901—8-1903. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2081, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed §§ 8-1901—8-1903, which pertained, respectively, to construction of terms, validity, and effect of article upon prosecutions, licenses, bonds, etc., and derived from Ord. No. NS-1148, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 1972, and Ord. No. NS-1813, § 2, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-1904. - Board of appeals (Section 205). 
Section 205 of the uniform dangerous buildings code is deleted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1596, § 7, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-2081, § 4, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 32, 1-19-93)  
Secs. 8-1905—8-1949. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2212, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 1994, changed the title of Ch. 8, Art. X from "Property Maintenance of Multiple Family Buildings" to "Property Maintenance." 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-1950. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and to protect the city's neighborhoods against blighting and deteriorating influences or conditions that contribute to the downgrading of neighborhood aesthetics and property values by establishing minimum standards, in addition to standards contained in other laws, rules and regulations, for the maintenance of all residential building exteriors, premises and vacant land. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-1908, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2212, § 2, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 8-1950.5. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this article. 
Building means a building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, or leased for shelter or support. 
Premises means a lot or parcel of land either vacant or upon which a building is situated, including any portion thereof, improved or unimproved, and adjacent streets, sidewalks, parkways and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-2212, § 3, 1-18-94)  
Sec. 8-1951. - Maintenance of buildings and premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, entity or agent of the same, that owns, leases, occupies or has any type of possessory interest in any real property, vacant or not, including but not limited to, commercial, industrial, residential or other property or real property having any type of commercial, industrial, residential or other type of building, unit, or, structure on the premises, to maintain or allow such premises, building, unit, or structure in such a manner that any of the following conditions exist thereon: 
(a)  Clotheslines or similar clothes drying devices and clothing or household fabrics hung, dried, or aired in any location which is visible from a public street. 
(b)  Any driveway, private sidewalk, or similar hard surfacing intended for pedestrian traffic which is debilitated, broken, damaged, or uneven to such a degree as to pose a hazard to pedestrians. 
(c)  Any wall, fence, or hedge maintained in such condition or deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons; leaning fences; fences or walls with missing or damaged slats or blocks; fence materials which are warping, splitting or buckling; aged coatings which are unsightly due to chipping or peeling; or walls or fences repaired with materials dissimilar from the original. 
(d)  Patios and balconies utilized for the storage of household items, except furniture designed for outdoor use, barbecues, and plants including plant racks and stands. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-1813, § 3, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1908, § 2, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2212, § 4, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 65, 2-3-03)  
Sec. 8-1952. - Maintenance of property; abatement of nuisances by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(a)  All or any part of premises found by the building official to be maintained in violation of section 8-1951 are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(b)  The procedures set forth in Chapter 17 shall not in any manner, however, limit or restrict the city from enforcing criminal sanctions under section 8-1951 or other city ordinances or state law, or limit the city from abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-1813, § 4, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-1953. - Failure to request a public hearing. 
In the absence of a request by the property owner for a public hearing within ten (10) days of the date of service of the notice of abatement as set forth in Chapter 17 of this Code, and upon the expiration of the period for abatement of the public nuisance by the owners and no abatement having occurred to the satisfaction of the building official, the city council may by resolution declare the condition a public nuisance and order a designated officer of the city to abate the public nuisance and order that the cost of any such abatement be assessed against the premises and collected in the manner provided in Chapter 17 of this Code. 
If the city council determines that the property is to be abated then the abatement shall proceed in the manner set forth in section 17-25 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-1813, § 5, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-1954. - Noncompliance with the notice to abate; recordation. 
(a)  If compliance is not had with the notice to abate within the time specified therein, and no request for a public hearing has been properly and timely filed pursuant to section 17-23 of this Code, and the city council having declared the condition a public nuisance, the city manager shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the premises and certifying (i) that the premises have been found to be maintained as a public nuisance in violation of this chapter of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, (ii) that the owner has been so notified, and (iii) that there having been no compliance with nor timely request for a public hearing, and the city council having declared the premises to be a public nuisance, the required rehabilitation, demolition or repair will be performed by the City of Santa Ana and the cost thereof will be assessed against the property as a lien equal in priority to a lien for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(b)  After the nuisance has been abated by the city the assessment proceedings shall be conducted according to the provisions of Article III of Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79)  
Sec. 8-1955. - Violation and penalty. 
Any owner, lessee, or person having an ownership or possessory interest in premises or a building subject to this article, who violates any of the provisions of section 8-1951 of this article, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and for a second conviction within a period of one (1) year, by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one (1) year, by a fine of not exceeding four hundred dollars ($400.00). Each day, or portion thereof, that any person described above violates any of the provisions of section 8-1951 shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1511, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-2246, § 1, 4-3-95)  
Secs. 8-1956—8-1959. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROACTIVE RENTAL ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 8-1960. - Title. 
This Division of Chapter 8 is known as the "Proactive Rental Enforcement Program" may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this Division". 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1961. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Proactive Rental Enforcement Program (PREP) is to promote public health, safety, and welfare through a system of proactive code enforcement involving residential rental property within the City of Santa Ana. This code enforcement effort is designed to ensure continued compliance with Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 8 and 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (SAMC or Code), the Housing Code, the California Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical Codes which, as adopted by the City of Santa Ana, govern substandard building conditions. The implementation of this program also promotes environments in which unhealthy conditions and life safety hazards are reduced for occupants of residential rental property by identifying and correcting code violations which result in: a threat to occupants' safety, a threat to a building's structural integrity including plumbing, heating and electrical systems, and a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  Intent. The intent of this Division is to proactively identify substandard conditions on residential housing property and in residential housing units located thereon; to ensure the preservation, rehabilitation or abatement of rental housing that does not comply with State and local building and housing laws and with maintenance standards established by this Division or is unsafe to occupy; to ensure the health and safety of residents of the City of Santa Ana living in rental housing units. It is the intent of this program to address conditions that are immediate hazards or clearly present a threat to human life, health or safety. Such conditions will receive full and rapid enforcement. Significant code violations that are not immediate hazards to human life, health or safety will be subject to full enforcement proceedings however, reasonable time periods shall be established for compliance. 
In accordance with the provision of Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code, chapter 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, the Housing Code, the California Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Mechanical Codes, it is not the intent of this program to require mandatory retrofits of existing conditions which were built or installed according to code requirements in effect at the time of building or installation and have been maintained in a good and safe manner, unless the retrofitting is required by ordinance as adopted by the City of Santa Ana. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1962. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Division, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings set forth below: 
"City" means the City of Santa Ana, a charter city and municipal corporation. 
"Executive Director" means the Executive Director of the Planning and Building Agency of the City, who is hereby authorized to carry out responsibilities under this Division, including making rules and regulations and adopting guidelines as may be necessary to aid in the clarification and enforcement of the provisions of this division, or his/her designee. 
"Leasehold" or "leasehold interest" as applied to any real property shall mean any person who possesses or shares an estate in realty held under lease. As applied to any dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof located on such real property, the term "leaseholder" and/or "leasehold interest" shall mean any person who possesses or shares in a contract for exclusive possession or control of any such dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof for a limited time. 
"Leaseholder-lessor" shall mean any person, including the duly authorized agent of such person, who, while in possession of a leasehold or leasehold interest in any residential real estate, acts as a lessor by engaging in the subleasing, subletting, providing, exchanging or trading of any such real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof without loss of leasehold. 
"Person" shall mean, without limitation, corporations of every kind, all firms and companies, partnerships of every kind, private trusts, real estate investment trusts, estates, associations, joint ventures, limited liability companies of every kind, cooperatives, all other types of business entities defined or authorized under federal and state laws, receivers, trustees, guardians or other representatives appointed by order of any court, and any natural individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city as the duly authorized agent of any of the foregoing. 
"Property Owner" means that person or entity, including such person's duly authorized agent, holding a vested ownership interest in a given property, whether recorded or unrecorded, including any person appearing as the owner of record of the real property on the most current deed recorded in the Orange County Recorder's Office on the day of inspection and acting as an Owner-lessor. Property owner shall include any person holding a leasehold interest acting as a Leaseholder-lessor on the day of inspection, including such person's duly authorized agent. In addition, Property Owner shall also mean any person holding equitable title in a given property pursuant to a land sale contract, including such person's duly authorized agent. 
"Owner-lessor" shall mean any person, including the duly authorized agent of such person, who, while an owner or while having an ownership interest in any residential real estate, acts as a lessor by engaging in the leasing, renting, providing, exchanging or trading of any such real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof without loss of ownership. 
"Owner's representative" means the property owner's duly authorized agent, including but not limited to, property manager or other person who has charge or control over a rental housing property or a rental housing unit on behalf of the property owner. 
"Occupant" means any person who occupies a unit, whether as an owner, tenant, co-tenant, lessee, or permittee of the owner, regardless of any lease agreement. 
"Premises" shall include all lands, buildings, accessory buildings or structures erected or modified, equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith, and any personal property affixed to or otherwise used for the purpose of transacting and carrying on any business on such premises. 
"Rental housing property" means a parcel of real property, as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll as maintained by the assessor of the County of Orange, upon which at least one rental housing unit is maintained. "Rental housing property" includes the premises upon which a rental housing unit is located, including parking areas, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. 
"Rental housing unit" means a dwelling unit, building, structure, premises or portion thereof that is being, or is intended to be, rented, leased, subleased, sublet, provided, exchanged or traded, without loss of ownership for the immediate or planned purpose of dwelling, sleeping, lodging, boarding or other such occupancy, accommodation or general residency. Examples of rental housing units covered by this division include dwelling units in apartment complex buildings and apartment houses, dwelling units in duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and fiveplexes, dwelling units in condominiums, dwelling units in townhomes, dwelling units in planned unit developments, and dwelling units comprised of single family residences. "Rental housing unit" does not include units used for transient lodging such as dormitories, group homes, rooming or boarding houses, hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast facilities. 
"Reportable Violations" means those housing code violations which under this program shall give the City cause to issue an Administrative Citation, a Notice of Violation or Notice and Order. 
"Substandard condition" means the presence of any one or more of the following conditions on rental housing property: (i) any condition that constitutes a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Sections 3479-3480; (ii) any condition of deterioration or disrepair that creates a substantial adverse impact on neighboring properties; (iii) any violation of the City of Santa Ana Municipal Code that creates a substantial adverse impact on neighboring properties, such as graffiti or abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles (or parts thereof); or (iv) any condition not in compliance with the Building Standards Codes, as adopted in Chapter 8 of this Code, including the building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes, the California Fire Code, or the State Housing Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 et seq.). A substandard condition includes, but is not limited to, the following enumerated conditions: 
A.  Property, whether improved or not, which is not kept substantially clean and free from accumulations including, but not limited to, overgrown, dead trees, weeds or other vegetation, rank growth, rubbish, junk, garbage, litter, debris, flyers or circulars. 
B.  Buildings or structures which are unpainted or the exterior paint is substantially worn off; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require an owner to paint a building where the architectural style indicates it was intended to be unpainted, such as a brown shingle building. 
C.  Buildings or structures or significant sections thereof including, but not limited to, awnings, canopies, exterior stairs, roof, foundation, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, or walkways which are substantially deteriorated or defaced, or windows which are missing or broken. For the purposes of this section, "defaced" includes, but is not limited to, writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti." 
D.  Property which contains, in the outdoor area, any refrigerator, washing machine, sink, stove, heater, boiler, tank or any other household equipment, machinery, furniture, or item, appliance or appliances, boxes, lumber, dirt or debris, trash, garbage or refuse cans, or any items other than those commonly stored outdoors, or any parts of such items. This subsection does not prohibit machinery installed in the rear setback areas for household or recreational use, furniture designed and used for outdoor activities, trash cans in the front yard during the twenty-four hour period allowed for garbage pick-up, and garbage bins or debris boxes. 
Notwithstanding the above definition, public nuisances pertaining to unsafe buildings, structures, or property conditions, as defined by the Building Standards Codes, the California Fire Code, and/or the State Housing Law, shall not constitute a substandard condition for purposes of this Division and shall remain within the exclusive enforcement authority of the Building Official to the extent required by state and local law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1963. - Application/scope. 
A.  The provisions of this Division shall apply to all owners of one (1) or more residential rental dwelling units or rental housing property located within the City of Santa Ana, unless exempt as provided in this Division. 
B.  The provisions of this Division are supplementary and complementary to other provisions of this Code and applicable statutes. Nothing in this Division may be construed to limit any existing right of the City to abate nuisances or to enforce any provisions of applicable law, statute, or this Code, including provisions of uniform codes adopted by reference in this Code. These provisions include, but are not limited to, the California Building Standards Codes, as adopted in Chapter 8 of this Code, including the building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes, the California Fire Code, and the State Housing Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 et seq.); and zoning requirements listed in chapter 41 of this Code. 
C.  The provisions of this Division shall not apply to legal accessory dwelling units, rooms rented to single individuals in an owner-occupied single-family residence, hotel or motel units subject to the hotel visitors' tax and mobile home parks. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1964. - Regulations Non-Exclusive. 
The provisions of this Division regulating residential rental dwelling units are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance with this Division shall not excuse non-compliance with any other applicable provision, requirement, or regulation of this Code or any applicable state and federal law. Nothing in this Division shall limit or preclude inspection conducted by the fire department inspectors for compliance with fire codes. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1965. - Responsibility for Maintenance. 
Every owner of a rental housing unit or rental housing property in the City shall: 
A.  Maintain the rental housing unit and the rental housing property so that no substandard condition exists at the rental housing unit or on the rental housing property; 
B.  Correct all substandard conditions before a re-inspection occurs; and 
C.  Be liable for violations of this division regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party concerning the rental housing unit and/or its rental housing property. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1966. - Exemptions. 
A.  The following rental housing units shall be exempt from the requirements of this Division: 
1.  Legal accessory dwelling units and/or rooms rented to single individuals in an owner-occupied single family residence. 
2.  Rental housing units comprised of a single-family residence or other undivided single residential rental premises as between an owner or leaseholder and any individual immediately related by blood, adoption or marriage to said owner or leaseholder, as approved by law, where the remuneration rendered to said owner or leaseholder does not exceed the cost of maintaining said premises, as set forth in this Code. 
3.  Eligibility for the fee exemptions herein provided is restricted to property owners who are natural persons and whose ownership of or leasehold interest in said residential rental property is undivided. 
4.  A property owner or leaseholder claiming a fee exemption under this section shall have the burden of furnishing to the Executive Director such information as the Executive Director may require to support the claim of eligibility for exemption. 
B.  Gold Seal Incentive Program. If a Property Owner's rental housing property or rental housing unit qualifies for the Gold Seal Incentive Program (as further described in Exhibit A (the "Gold Seal Incentive Program Outline") incorporated herein by this reference as though fully set forth, the Property can be exempt from the periodic regulatory inspection fee for three (3) years. In order to qualify for the incentive program, a rental property owner must pass all parts of a three-stage process, as described more fully in exhibit A. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1967. - Fees. 
A.  The following fees are established and shall be imposed upon the owners of rental housing properties: 
1.  Rental Housing Inspection Fee. A non-proratable regulatory inspection fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be assessed annually on a July 1 st to June 30 th fiscal year basis to each owner of residential rental property within the City of Santa Ana to cover the cost of administering and enforcing the provisions of the proactive rental enforcement program. Except where otherwise provided under the terms of this Division, the Rental Housing Inspection Fee shall be payable 30 days in advance of each fiscal year period. The Property Owner shall have the responsibility for payment of this fee. 
2.  Re-inspection Fee. The City may, at the discretion of the Executive Director, charge a property owner a re-inspection fee only on the third and subsequent visit to a property for a specific violation. In the event a Rental Housing Property Re-Inspection Fee is assessed during the aforementioned fiscal year period it shall be billed and the fee shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days. 
3.  Permit Fees. Regular permit fees shall be charged upon issuance of permits required for any alteration or repairs to a structure or its utilities as required by the Santa Ana Municipal Code, the Housing Code, Health and Safety Codes and the California Code of Regulations. The Executive Director is authorized to establish procedures for the collection of Permit Fees and any delinquent fees plus interest. 
B.  The City Council shall establish the amounts of the foregoing fees by resolution. 
C.  The Rental Housing Inspection Fee shall first be billed and become due and payable July 1, 2016 for all known "Rental Housing Units" which exist within the City of Santa Ana upon the effective date of this ordinance and such fees shall be deemed past due and delinquent after July 31, 2016. For each subsequent year such fees shall be billed before the last business day in the month of May and shall be due by the last day in the month of June following and deemed delinquent thereafter. Where a newly established, or previously unknown, or previously exempt rental housing property or rental property unit is made known to, or is discovered by the City, or otherwise becomes eligible for payment of the Rental Housing Inspection Fee during the aforementioned fiscal year period it shall be billed and the fee shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days. 
D.  When the last day of the month in which any fee penalty or late interest charge required to be paid pursuant to this Division is due falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or state or national holiday, or City Hall closure day, the payment of such fee may be made without penalty on the first working day of the succeeding month. For the purpose of this Division, postmarks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting envelope contains a post office cancellation indicating not later than the date due, or in the case of a weekend or holiday, or City Hall closure day, not later than the first following working day. 
E.  Whenever any other payment of any fee required to be paid is received after the time prescribed and such payment was deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for the receipt thereof, the Executive Director shall regard such payment as having been timely received. Where said due date falls on a weekend, holiday, or City Hall closure day then payment of said fee may be deemed timely if received on the next City business day following in accordance with the criteria established in subsection (D) above. 
F.  To effectively and equitably implement the purpose and intent of the general provisions of this division the Executive Director, in his or her discretion, may vary the strict procedural, enforcement, collection, or other administrative requirements of this Division. In addition to all other authority conferred upon him or her, the Executive Director shall have the power, for good cause shown, to waive or reduce any penalty or late interest imposed, or fee demanded. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1968. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-1969. - Penalties for Delinquent Payment of Fees. 
For failure to fully pay any required fee(s) when due, the Executive Director shall add the following penalties: 
A.  Ten dollars ($10.00) or ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance of said fee(s), whichever is greater, on the past due date thereof; 
B.  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) or fifteen (15) percent of the unpaid balance of said fee(s), whichever is greater, on the first day of the second month after the due date thereof; 
C.  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the unpaid balance of said fee(s), whichever is greater, on the first day of the third month after the due date thereof; and 
D.  Fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty (50) percent of the unpaid balance of said fee(s), whichever is greater, on the first day of the fourth month after the due date thereof. 
The maximum amount of delinquent penalty, exclusive of late interest, shall not exceed an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the fee(s) past due. Notification of delinquent past due fee(s) will be given by first class mail no later than the fifteenth day of each month after the month in which said fee(s) first became delinquent, until the maximum penalty is imposed. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1970. - Penalties—Added to Fee. 
Any penalties hereinabove assessed for delinquent past due fees, exclusive of interest, upon attaining a combined amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the amount of such fee shall become merged with the fee payable hereunder and shall be considered as a part thereof for all collection purposes. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1971. - Late Interest. 
In addition to the past due delinquency penalties imposed in Section 8-1969, any Rental Property Owner that fails to pay the Rental Housing Unit Fee due shall pay interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or portion thereof, exclusive of penalties, on the amount of the unpaid fee, from the date on which payment first became past due and delinquent until paid-in-full or otherwise satisfied. Provided however, that pursuant to Section 8-1970 penalties upon attaining a combined amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the fee due are merged with the fee payable hereunder and any additional interest charged from such date on shall be charged on the combined amount past due and delinquent until paid in full or otherwise satisfied. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1972. - Notice of Inspection. 
A.  The City shall serve written notice of pending inspection on the property owner at least fifteen (15) days prior to the inspection. Such notice will be mailed via first-class mail to the owner and to the owner's representative (if any) at the owner's and owner's representative's addresses, as they appear on the owner's current business license. Such notice will request that the owner call and schedule an inspection within fifteen (15) days. If an owner fails to call to schedule an inspection appointment, the City will send the owner a fifteen (15) day notice of the scheduled date and time of the inspection. This notification requirement is waived however, if the property owner and the City mutually agree upon the date and time of an inspection or re-inspection. 
B.  The owner or the owner's representative must notify the occupants or lessees of the date and time of the interior inspection or otherwise obtain legal access to the unit/s pursuant to the terms of the applicable lease or rental agreement. 
C.  If the occupant or lessee of a rental housing unit does not consent to entry for inspection, the Executive Director is authorized to seek approval of an inspection warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the inspection to take place. The owner shall not be penalized or fined for the failure of a lessee to afford access to a rental housing unit which is the subject of such an inspection, provided that the owner and/or the owner's representative cooperates with the Executive Director. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1973. - Inspections. 
The frequency with which a property is inspected over a four (4) year period shall be determined by the Executive Director, however inspections shall be performed at least once every four years (unless exempt as set forth in this Division). 
A.  Level One Inspection. Under the Level One Inspection, only the exterior and/or common areas of the property will be inspected with all violations being cited. This inspection will be done in accordance with a uniform procedure and will involve a standardized checklist of those items which will be evaluated on each property. The checklist will include violations involving any visible substandard and health and safety conditions; general property maintenance violations; and any other violations of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. These violations may include: 
a.  Poorly maintained landscaping. 
b.  Lack of address on structure. 
c.  Trash and debris. 
d.  Inoperative vehicles. 
e.  Trash containers in public view. 
f.  Lack of paint on wood surfaces. 
g.  Balcony storage. 
h.  Deteriorated driveways, porches, landings and balconies. 
i.  Deteriorated stairs, guardrails, railings and handrails. 
j.  Illegal storage. 
k.  Unapproved structural/plumbing/electrical/mechanical exterior alterations. 
l.  Other unsightly conditions. 
B.  Level Two Inspection. The Level Two Inspection may be used on multi-family properties and will consist of an exterior inspection of all structures and common areas, and an interior inspection of twenty (20%) percent of selected units. This exterior and interior inspection will be done in accordance with a uniform procedure of those items which will be evaluated in each unit. The exterior inspection will include the checklist of violations listed under the Level One Inspection and the interior inspection will include a checklist of: 
a.  Unapproved structural/plumbing/electrical/mechanical interior alterations. 
b.  Deteriorated plumbing, electrical, mechanical or structural systems. 
c.  Deteriorated walls and floors. 
d.  Other substandard conditions as noted in Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3. 
C.  Level Three Inspection. The Level Three Inspection will consist of an interior inspection of all units on multi-family properties or an interior inspection of the home on single family properties. This is the most complete level of inspection and will be done in accordance with a uniform procedure and will involve a standardized checklist of those items which will be evaluated in each unit. This checklist will be consistent with the Level One Inspection and the Level Two Inspection. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1974. - Notification of Inspection Results. 
Within thirty (30) days following an inspection performed under this division in which any violations are found, the city will send to the property owner, by first class mail, a formal notice listing all violations found. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1975. - Compliance. 
A property owner who has been issued a Notice of Violation, Administrative Citation or Notice and Order must correct all reportable violations within the specified timeframes listed on the Administrative Citation, Notice of Violation or Notice and Order. Before initiating any correction of the substandard condition or conditions identified in the formal notice/s by the City to comply, the Owner or the Owner's representative of the rental housing unit shall obtain all necessary permits and pay all required fees for the permits, including, without limitation, any penalty imposed by this Code by reason of any repair, improvement or maintenance which had been done in the past without a required permit, inspection or final City approval. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1976. - Failure to Comply. 
When a Property Owner receives an Administrative Citation, a Notice of Violation or a Notice and Order, s/he is required to make all necessary repairs outlined in such notice in the prescribed compliance period. If a Property Owner fails to comply within the specified timeframe, s/he may be subject to civil citation fines or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the Municipal Code. The use of the administrative citation fines in place of other remedies shall be at the sole discretion of the City (SAMC section 1-21). Issuance of administrative citation fines shall not be deemed a waiver of any other enforcement remedies found within this Code including the referral of a Notice of Violation and/or Notice and Order being referred to the City Attorney's Office for legal action. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1977. - Appeals. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Santa Ana Municipal Code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a "request for hearing" form and returning it to the City within fifteen (15) days from the date the administrative citation is served or deemed to have been served as indicated in section 1-21 of this Code. Such "request for hearing" forms shall be made available at no charge by the Planning and Building Agency. A failure to file a timely "request for hearing" shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the citation and to seek judicial review (SAMC section 1-21.8). 
B.  A Property Owner may initiate an administrative appeal to the Executive Director regarding the notices, violations, citations and/or fees that the Property Owner has received in conjunction with a property inspection as performed under the provisions of this program at set forth in Chapter 3 (Uniform Hearing and Appeal Procedure). 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1978. - Penalty for Violation. 
Every violation of the provisions of this Division shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day any violation of any said provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the City may seek injunctive relief and civil penalties in court for violations of this Division. The remedies provided for in this Division shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other remedies available under any other federal, state or local laws. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1979. - Relocation Costs. 
If any lessee is displaced from a rental housing unit after an order to vacate issued by the Executive Director because a violation is of such a nature that the immediate health and safety of the lessee is endangered, the costs and expenses of relocating the lessee from the unit are and shall be the responsibility of the owner to the extent required by State law (Health & Safety 17975-17975.10) and in accordance with the terms of the lessee's rental agreement, if any.  
Sec. 8-1980. - Removal of Tax Benefit. 
If, after a notice and order to repair has been issued, and the property owner fails to correct the violation, the City may utilize any administrative or legal remedy available. Further, the City intends to utilize the provisions of Section 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to encourage the elimination of substandard conditions in rental housing. Said section provides for the disallowance for state income tax purposes of interest, depreciation, taxes, or amortization deductions, which are derived from the ownership of rental housing which is not in compliance. The City is also authorized to use the remedies set forth in State Housing Law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 )  
Sec. 8-1981. - Nonpayment of Fee; Assessment of Fee Debt by Public Lien; Recording and Enforcement of Liens; Recording Service Fee. 
A.  Recording of a Certificate of Lien. If any fee amount, including penalties, late interest, and any administrative fees or fines required to be paid under this Division is not paid when due, the Executive Director, or any duly authorized employee of the City acting as his or her designated agent, may record or cause to be recorded, in the office of the Orange County Recorder, a certificate which specifies the amount due, the name and address of the person liable for the same, a statement that the Executive Director has complied with all provisions of this Division in the determination of the amount required to be paid, and a legal description of the real property owned by such person. From the time of the recording of the certificate, the amount required to be paid together with penalties, interest, and administrative fees owing constitutes a lien upon all real property in the county owned by such person or thereafter acquired before the lien expires. The lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a public lien and shall continue for ten (10) years from the filing of a certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
B.  Recording Service Fee. Whenever the Executive Director in his or her discretion determines that the recording of a certificate of lien is desirable to secure and effectuate the collection of any amount required to be paid under the terms of this Division, then a recording service fee shall be applicable in the amount as specified by resolution of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 ) 
DIVISION 2—EXHIBIT A
GOLD SEAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
1.  BACKGROUND 
The Incentive program is a mechanism that positively affects the quality of rental housing in the City of Santa Ana. The program provides a monetary and marketing incentive for rental property owners to abide by a set of minimum criteria - criteria that is, in some cases, over and above that which is required by law, 
Monetary Incentive - Owners of rental property who apply and qualify for the program are exempt from the regulation inspection fee. 
Marketing Incentive - Owners of rental property who apply and qualify for the program are presented with materials to utilize when marketing their units. 
2.  ELIGIBILITY 
All rental properties in the City of Santa Ana that pay a current regulation inspection fee are eligible for the incentive program. A property with any one of the following conditions is ineligible for the incentive program: 
A.  Unpaid regulatory inspection fee 
B.  Outstanding code violations 
Application Fees — Application fees will not be charged for the first 100 applications. After the first 100 applications are processed, staff will evaluate whether or not an application fee should be charged as a disincentive for frivolous filings. 
3.  QUALIFYING FOR THE INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
In order to qualify for the incentive program, a rental property owner must pass all parts of a three-stage process. 
Level One - The rental property owner will notify the City that he/she wishes to apply for the incentive program and fill out the appropriate application. This will initiate a review and evaluation of the property's management practices. Owners will be asked to provide the necessary information and documentation to verify that they currently adhere to the following five good management practices: 
Good Management Practices: 
a)  Owner abides by all fair housing laws 
b)  Owner uses a formal method to screen all potential residents 
c)  Owner utilizes a written rental agreement that contains specific criteria 
d)  Owner utilizes written "House Rules" 
e)  Owner performs "walk-throughs" at the beginning and end of each tenancy 
Specific criteria necessary for verification of the "good management practices" shall be outlined in the program implementation policy. 
Each management practice must be passed in order to advance to Level Two and is subject to on-site verification during the Level Two Inspection. 
Level Two - Only owners who have passed Level One of this program will be eligible to initiate Level Two. This stage consists of an exterior inspection of the property and verification of the current use of the good management practice materials submitted by the owner during Level One. The criteria for this exterior inspection is listed under "Violation Checklist" and the inspector evaluating the exterior conditions will do so with the goal that such conditions should be in an "above average" to "superior" condition and collectively the property should be in exceptional condition. The criteria and/or specific materials necessary for the on-site verification of the good management practices shall be outlined in the program implementation policy and the property owner shall be made aware of the materials necessary prior to the Level Two Inspection. 
A property must have a 100% pass rating of the criteria listed under "Violation Checklist, Exterior/Common Area, Must Pass Items" and have an overall 85% pass rating of rest of the criteria in order to clear approval of Level Two and advance to Level Three of the incentive program. 
Level Three - Only owners who have passed Level Two of this program will be eligible to initiate Level Three. This stage consists of an interior inspection of rental units. The criteria for this inspection is listed under "Violation Checklist, Interior Areas" and the inspector evaluating the Interior conditions will do so with the goal that such conditions should be in an "above average" to "superior" condition and collectively the property should be in exceptional condition. 
A maximum of 10% of the dwelling units in a complex (rounded up on any fraction) will be inspected (but no less than one unit). The units to be inspected will be selected by the inspector from a list of at least 20% of the units on the property (vacant and/or occupied) selected by the owner. 
A property must achieve a score of 85% or higher to achieve passage of this stage of the incentive program. 
Prioritization of Applications - Applications will be reviewed in the order they are received. Incentive benefits will be awarded on a first come basis by qualification date. Twenty percent of the properties qualifying for the benefits must contain 15 units or less and 20% must contain 16 units or more, The remaining sixty percent may be from either category. 
Applicants whose properties qualify for the Gold Seal benefit but who cannot receive exemption due to a lack of available funding will be placed on a priority list by certification date. Should funding become available, these priority applicants will only be required to pass a Level One Inspection to qualify for the available funds. The certification period will begin on the date they pass all the required program incentive criteria. 
4.  AWARDING THE "GOLD SEAL" 
Only owners who have achieved passage of all three levels will qualify for the monetary and marketing incentives granted to exceptional properties under the Gold Seal incentive program. 
Once granted, the Gold Seal will be valid for four (4) years and will run with the property, not with the ownership, during that time. However, it is the responsibility of the new owner to notify the City of the transfer of ownership and to continue to meet the obligations of the program. After 4 years, in order for a property to continue to receive the benefits of the Gold Seal Incentive Program, the owner must reapply for the program and completely requalify through the process outlined in this document. 
5.  DELAYED EXEMPTIONS 
Applicants who fall to meet the established qualification deadline to be certified for the Gold Seal benefit may be qualified for the award when the applicant can provide proof that a processing delay on the part of the City was the cause for them missing the deadline. 
6.  QUALIFICATION EXEMPTION 
On occasion a property may be documented to have exemplary management practices, but such efforts are negated by special circumstances beyond the owner's/manager's control (such as property location, gang activity or external vandalism) which prevent the property from qualifying. In some rare cases and only at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Manager, certain properties may be qualified for the benefits of the incentive program because of special circumstances. 
7.  LOSS OF INCENTIVE PROGRAM PRIVILEGES 
If a qualified property has deteriorated to the point that it is no longer exceptional, the Code Enforcement Manager may choose to re-evaluate the property and, if necessary, revoke the property's incentive program privileges, Program privileges would cease on the date the revocation occurs. Such properties would not be eligible for the incentive program benefits for a period of twelve (12) months beginning with the date of revocation. Property owners whose property privileges have been revoked may not reapply during the twelve (12) months they are on suspension. The privileges of requalifying properties will not be effective until the beginning of the next fiscal year following the twelve (12) month suspension, 
8.  APPEALS 
Those owners who have applied for the incentive program but do not qualify or have failed may appeal such decisions to the Executive Director or his/her designee. The decision of the Executive Director, or his/her designee, shall be final. 
GOLD SEAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM
VIOLATIONS CHECKLIST 
EXTERIOR/COMMON AREAS 
Must Pass Items (100% on applicable items): 
1.  Poor landscaping - no ground cover, dirt areas, unsightly, dead trees, overgrown yard. 
2.  Excessive chipped/peeling paint. 
3.  Graffiti. 
4.  Damaged/unsightly fences. 
5.  Unauthorized enclosed balconies/patios. 
6.  Unpermitted/Illegal lock(s) on required exit(s). 
EXTERIOR/COMMON AREAS 
Must Pass Items (85% or higher on applicable items): 
7.  Deteriorated/substandard roofing. 
8.  Unsafe pools — pools with algae, unsafe pool fences and pool gates. 
9.  Loose or unsafe stairs, handrails or guardrails. 
10.  Unsafe or severely damaged decking/subfloor on balconies above ground level 
11.  Unapproved building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical alterations. 
12.  Excessive broken sprinklers. 
13.  Torn window/door screens. 
14.  Uneven sidewalks and/or walkways. 
15.  Dirty hallways, sidewalks or walkways. 
16.  Illegal fences. 
17.  Unsightly window coverings. 
18.  Deteriorated driveways, blocked driveways, excessive oil on driveways. 
19.  Excessive or unsightly storage on balconies or patios. 
20.  Drying clothes on fences or bushes. 
21.  Loitering on property. 
22.  House furniture in common/public areas. 
23.  Remaining evidence of sewage spill. 
24.  Dirty building exterior. 
25.  Illegal storage under carports. 
26.  Inoperable vehicles. 
27.  Vehicles for sale. 
28.  Street or unit numbers missing. 
29.  Banners without permits. 
GOLD SEAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM
VIOLATIONS CHECKLIST 
EXTERIOR/COMMON AREAS 
Must Pass items (85% or higher on applicable items): 
30.  Storage on roof 
31.  Broken/missing mailboxes. 
32.  Cracks or holes in siding. 
33.  No manager office sign. 
34.  Inoperative exit signs. 
35.  Business on property without proper permits. 
36.  Dirty common areas/play areas. 
37.  Dirty awnings. 
38.  Excessive trash/debris throughout common areas. 
39.  Dirty trash bins, excessive trash lying outside trash enclosure. 
40.  Trash containers in unapproved locations. 
41.  Unapproved security screen doors. 
42.  Broken or missing fire extinguishers. 
43.  Leaking plumbing. 
44.  Hazardous electrical condition(s). 
45.  Damaged exterior doors. 
46.  Damaged shutters. 
47.  Stairs, handrails, guardrails in need of paint. 
INTERIOR AREAS 
Must Pass Items (100% on applicable Items): 
1.  Missing smoke detector in bedroom(s). 
2.  Missing smoke detector in hallway(s) adjacent to bedroom(s) 
3.  Missing carbon monoxide detector. 
4.  Uncapped gas line(s). 
5.  Lack of hot/cold running water. 
6.  Sleeping in closet or kitchen. 
7.  Unapproved/unsafe light fixture(s). 
8.  Unlicensed commercial activity in unit. 
9.  Unapproved security bars on windows. 
10.  Loose or unsafe stairs, handrails or guardrails. 
11.  Unpermitted water heater change-out. 
12.  Interior hoarding conditions. 
13.  Unapproved building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical alterations. 
GOLD SEAL INCENTIVE PROGRAM
VIOLATIONS CHECKLIST 
INTERIOR AREAS 
Must Pass Items (85% or higher on applicable items): 
14.  Illegal lock or latch on exterior doors(s). 
15.  Lock and/or hasps on bedroom door(s). 
16.  Clogged/leaking plumbing. 
17.  Inoperative electrical outlet(s)/improper wiring. 
18.  Severely deteriorated floor covering/sub-flooring. 
19.  Lack of/inoperable heating. 
20.  Smoke detector(s) inoperative/not provided. 
21.  Unapproved structural alterations. 
22.  Cockroach/rodent infestation. 
23.  Missing/severely damaged switch/plug cover(s). 
24.  Broken tub/shower glass. 
25.  Electrical appliances(s) used in unapproved exterior location. 
26.  Unsightly balcony storage, 
27.  Laundry drying on patio or balcony. 
28.  Trash chute and/or surrounding are not in sanitary condition. 
29.  Deteriorated/water damaged interior walls(s). 
30.  Deteriorated/water damaged ceiling(s). 
31.  Dire, need of paint on interior walls. 
32.  Severely deteriorated cabinets or drawers 
33.  Blocked bedroom emergency exits(s). 
34.  Cover plates missing on wall heater. 
35.  Unvented fuel burning heater. 
36.  Damaged interior door(s). 
37.  Peeling paint on walls or ceilings. 
38.  Grossly deteriorated/insanitary countertops. 
39.  Inoperative bathroom ventilation. 
40.  Interior of unit filthy/insanitary. 
41.  Occupants in unit exceed number on rental agreement. 
42.  Items hanging from sprinkler head and/or lines. 
43.  Deteriorated window covering(s). 
44.  Inoperable kitchen exhaust vent. 
	Gold Seal Program 
	2016 Ordinance Exhibit A 
 
( Ord. No. NS-2898, § 5, 5-17-16 ) 
_____ 
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ABANDONED, VACANT AND/OR DEFAULTED MORTGAGE PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 8-1982. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the city council, through the adoption of this division, to establish a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security of abandoned, defaulted and/or vacant properties; to establish a property registration program for such properties, and to set forth guidelines for the maintenance of such properties. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2957 , § 5, 11-20-18)  
Sec. 8-1983. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division the following terms, phrases and words, shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Abandoned" means any real property that is vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, and (1) is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or (2) is the subject of a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or (3) was conveyed to the current owner under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
"Abatement order" means a notice of violation, notice and order, or administrative citation. As used in this chapter, the terms "abate" and "abatement" means action to repair, replace, remove, destroy, terminate, or otherwise remedy the condition or activity in question by such means and in such manner as is necessary in the interests of the health, safety or welfare of the public. (Section 17-4) 
"Accessible property" means real property that is accessible to the public, either, in general or through an open and unsecured door, window, gate fence, wall, etc. 
"Accessible structure" means a building or structure that is not secured or is open in such a way as to allow public or unauthorized access to the interior. 
"Administrative penalty payment due date" means the date that is the 10th day after the issuance of an abatement order, a notice of violation issued pursuant to section 1-21.7(1). 
"Agreement" means any written instrument that transfers or conveys title to residential or commercial real property from one owner to another after a sale, trade, transfer or exchange. 
"Beneficiary" means a lender participating in a real property transaction that holds a secured interest in the real property in question identified in a deed of trust. 
"Buyer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for real property via an agreement. 
"Dangerous building" means any building or structure reasonably deemed by authorized city staff to represent a violation of any provision specified in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, International Property Maintenance Code, and California Health and Safety Code section 17920.3. 
"Days" means calendar days. 
"Deed of trust" means an instrument whereby an owner of real property, as trustor, transfers a secured interest in the real property in question to a third party trustee, as security for a loan issued in the context of a real property transaction. This definition applies to any and all subordinate deeds of trust; i.e., 2 nd trust deed, 3 rd trust deed, etc. 
"Deed in lieu of foreclosure" means a recorded instrument that transfers ownership of property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
"Default" means the material breach of, or failure to fulfill, a legal or contractual duty arising from or relating to a deed of trust. 
"Distressed" means any building, structure or real property that is subject to a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessors lien sale and/or any real property conveyed via a foreclosure sale resulting in the acquisition of title by an interested beneficiary of a deed of trust, and/or any real property conveyed via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, regardless of vacancy. 
"Enforcement official" means the city manager, the building official, and/or any employee or agent of the city designated and/or charged with enforcing this Code, including but not limited to applicable codes adopted by reference therein. 
"Evidence of vacancy" means any real property condition that independently, or in the context of the totality of circumstances relevant to that real property would lead a reasonable enforcement official to believe that a property is vacant or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Such real property conditions include but are not limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; past due utility notices or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters; the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation; and/or statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
"Foreclosure" means the legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien. 
"Local" means within forty (40) driving miles of the subject building, structure or real property. 
"Neighborhood standard" means the condition of real property that prevails in and through the neighborhood where an abandoned building, structure or real property is located. When determining the neighborhood standard no abandoned or distressed building, structure or real property shall be considered. 
"Notice of default" means a recorded instrument that reflects and provides notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust, and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale. 
"Notice of trustee's sale" means a document prepared and recorded by the trustee that sets forth the day, date and time of the trustee's sale, describes the property to be sold, and gives an estimate for the unpaid debt on the deed of trust secured by the property. 
"Out of area" means in excess of forty (40) road or driving miles of the subject building, structure or real property. 
"Owner" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real property. 
"Owner of record" means any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized assessment roll produced by the Orange County Recorder's Office. 
"Property" means any unimproved or improved real property designed or permitted to be used for commercial, residential or dwelling purposes, or portion thereof, including but not limited to building or structures located on said real property, regardless of condition. 
"Registrable property" means any real property located in the city, whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale, or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage has been cured. 
"Residential building" means any improved real property, or portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, including buildings and structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered under any circumstances for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential," whether or not said property is legally permitted and zoned for such use. 
"Secure" means such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that assist in rendering real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to repairing fences and walls, chaining/pad locking gates, the repairing or boarding of doors, windows or other openings. Such measures shall be implemented in conformance with all applicable standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
"Tax assessor's lien sale" means the sale, conducted by the Assessor of Orange County, of tax liens for delinquent taxes on the property. 
"Trustee" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity holding a deed of trust securing an interest in real property for the benefit of the beneficiary. 
"Trustor" means any owner/borrower identified in a deed of trust, who transfers an interest in real property to a trustee as security for payment of a debt by that owner/borrower. 
"Vacancy/vacant" means any building, structure or real property that is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1984. - Duty to record instrument for property transfer. 
Within ten (10) days of a property transaction involving a change in the identity of an owner or the owner of record, or alternatively a transfer/assignment of a loan or deed of trust secured by residential or commercial property, each beneficiary and trustee engaged in said transaction or transfer/assignment shall record, with the Orange County Recorder's Office, an instrument evidencing such transaction, transfer or assignment. This instrument shall reflect the identity, mailing address and telephone number of the trustee and beneficiary responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust in question. This duty/obligation shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1985. - Registration. 
A.  Each beneficiary and trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the city, shall perform an inspection of the property that is security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor prior to recording a notice of default or similar instrument with the Orange County Recorder's Office, and must comply with Civil Code section 2923.5, as amended from time to time. 
B.  If such inspection shows that the property is abandoned, the owner, beneficiary or trustee shall, within ten (10) days of the inspection, register the property with the city's code enforcement division on forms provided by the city. 
C.  If the property is occupied but distressed, the trustee and beneficiary or a designee shall inspect the property on a monthly basis until: 
1.  The trustor or another party remedies the default; or 
2.  The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, deemed abandoned and registered subject to subsection B. 
D.  The registration required pursuant to subsection B. shall contain the identity of the beneficiary and trustee, the direct mailing address (no postal box address), email address and phone number of the beneficiary and trustee and, in the case of a corporate or out of area beneficiary or trustee, the local property management company, if any, responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property in question. 
E.  The registration pursuant to subsection B. shall be renewed annually. 
F.  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
G.  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this division as long as they remain vacant and/or abandoned. 
H.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter must make a written report to the city's code enforcement division of any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
I.  If the mortgage on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five (5) days of the transfer must register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new mortgagee or trustee and are due and payable with their initial registration. 
J.  If the mortgagee owner of a foreclosed real property sells or transfers the property to a non-arm's length related person or entity, the transferee is subject to all the terms of this article and within five (5) days of the transfer must register the property and pay a registration fee in accordance with this article. Any previous unpaid annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new registrable property owner and are due and payable with their initial registration. 
K.  As long as the property is registrable it shall be inspected by the mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in the property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration. 
L.  Mortgagees who have existing registerable property on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived have thirty (30) calendar days from the effective date to register the property with the City, or its designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2957 , § 6, 11-20-18)  
Sec. 8-1986. - Maintenance requirements. 
It is declared a public nuisance for any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any abandoned property to cause, permit, or maintain any property condition contrary to any provision of this chapter. The following maintenance standards shall apply to any registrable property: 
A.  Any registrable property shall be maintained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and Code Chapters 16, Chapter 41, the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, International Property Maintenance Code and California Health and Safety Code section 17920.3. 
B.  Registrable property shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, excessive foliage growth, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspaper, circular flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state or local law), discarded personal items including but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
C.  Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar marking in accordance with Article IV of Chapter 10 of this Code. Any removal or painting over of graffiti shall be with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
D.  Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation and standards listed in section 41-609 "Landscape," and abide by the planning and public works division landscape standards. Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
E.  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that water remains clear and free of pollutants, mosquito larvae, and debris, or alternatively shall be drained and kept dry. In either case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements set forth in Article XIII of this chapter and minimum state standards, whichever is more restrictive. 
F.  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of obligations set forth in any covenants conditions and restrictions and/or homeowner's association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
G.  An enforcement official may allow exceptions to the maintenance standards set forth in this section for registrable property that is under construction and/or repair, that is diligently pursued for at least three (3) business days per week, and is undertaken in compliance with all applicable laws including but not limited to city permitting requirements. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2957 , § 7, 11-20-18)  
Sec. 8-1987. - Security requirements. 
A.  Abandoned and vacant properties shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
B.  Securing of abandoned property includes but is not limited to closing and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means re-glazing or boarding the window. 
C.  If the abandoned property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the abandoned property is maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws. 
D.  The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than 18? × 24?, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet, and shall contain the following verbiage: "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY ___________," and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number)." 
E.  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street of the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily subject to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. 
F.  The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this division. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company's responsibility to bring the property into compliance. 
G.  The duties and obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1988. - Additional authority. 
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this division, the city shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee, owner or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to secure and reduce the visual decline of the property. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1989. - Fees. 
An annual non-refundable foreclosed vacant property registration fee shall be paid to city at the time of registration, annually thereafter on January 1 st each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due. If the foreclosed and/or abandoned property is sold or transferred within a calendar year to a new bank/owner it will need to register the foreclosed and/or abandoned property; the annual fee is not transferrable. The fee for registering and re-registering a foreclosed and/or abandoned property shall be set, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. The amount of the fee shall not exceed the cost of administering the provisions of this chapter. 
Additional hourly inspection fees as set forth in the city's miscellaneous fee resolution may be levied on a property for staff time to inspect and enforce the provision of this Code when a complaint has been filed on a property subject to this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1990. - Enforcement. 
A.  Any violation of this division shall be treated as a strict liability offense; a violation shall be deemed to have occurred regardless of a violator's intent. 
B.  Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity, that owns, leases, occupies, controls or manages any abandoned property and causes, permits, or maintains a violation of the chapter as to that property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
C.  This section is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights and remedies available to the city pursuant to this Code. As an alternative to the violation and penalty specified in this section, the city attorney or enforcement official may pursue any other right or remedy permitted by this Code, including, but not limited to, commencement of any civil action, or administrative action to abate the condition of a property as a public nuisance pursuant to sections 1-21 through 1-21.9. 
D.  If an enforcement officer determines that the owner of abandoned property has failed to maintain that property as obligated under California Civil Code Section 2929.3 and in accordance with this chapter, the city may impose a civil fine against the owner of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, or an amount set by the city's miscellaneous fee schedule as amended from time to time, for each day that the owner fails to maintain the property commencing on the day following the expiration of the period to remedy the violation as set forth in the notice provided pursuant to subsection E. 
E.  If the city chooses to impose a fine pursuant to subsection D., it shall give notice of the alleged violation to the owner. The notice shall include a description of the conditions that gave rise to the violation, and notice of the city's intent to assess a civil fine if action to correct the violation is not commenced within a period of not less than fourteen (14) days and completed within a period of not less than thirty (30) days. The notice shall be mailed to the name and address provided in the deed or other instrument for mailing future tax statements, or, if none, to the return address provided on the deed or other instrument. 
F.  The city shall provide a period of not less than thirty (30) days for the legal owner to remedy the violation prior to imposing a civil fine. notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may provide less than thirty (30) days' notice to remedy a condition before imposing a civil fine if the entity determines that a specific condition of the property threatens public health or safety and provided that notice of that determination and time for compliance is given. 
G.  The city shall provide an owner who wishes to contest any fines imposed pursuant to subsection D. a hearing and opportunity to be heard in accordance with the procedures for administrative citations contained in chapter 1.14. 
H.  Payment of the administrative and civil penalties shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1991. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this division may appeal a determination made hereunder in the manner specified with respect to appeals under section 1-21.8 through 1-21.9 or chapter 3. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 8-1992. - Joint and several liability. 
The duties/obligations specified in this division shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. 
( Ord. No. NS-2927, § 3, 10-17-17 )  
Secs. 8-1993—8-1999. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 45, adopted November 15, 2010, changed the title of article XI from "Earthquake hazard reduction in existing buildings" to "Property maintenance code." 
 
Sec. 8-2000. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code (hereinafter referred to as the "Property Maintenance Code"), together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on each new official publication date of the International Property Maintenance Code, of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The said Code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the property maintenance code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amends the property maintenance code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2015 edition of the "Property Maintenance Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2015 or later edition of the property maintenance code. The property maintenance code, as thus amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city property maintenance code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1518, 2-19-80; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 46, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 66, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 46, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 45, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 34, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 12, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-2001. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 47, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2001, which pertained to scope and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980.  
Sec. 8-2002. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 47, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2002, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980; Ord. No. NS-1598, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1673, § 1, adopted March 14, 1983; and Ord. No. NS-1909, § 1, adopted June 1, 1987.  
Sec. 8-2003. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 47, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2003, which pertained to rating classification and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980, and Ord. No. NS-1673, § 2, adopted March 14, 1983.  
Sec. 8-2003.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 47, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2003.1, which pertained to alternative determination of rating classification and derived from Ord. No. NS-1673, § 3, adopted March 14, 1983.  
Sec. 8-2003.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 47, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2003.1, which pertained to pre-notice and derived from Ord. No. NS-1673, § 4, adopted March 14, 1983.  
Sec. 8-2004. - Administration. 
(a)  Notification. The building official shall serve notice ordering the owner of each building within the scope of this article to cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a licensed civil or structural engineer or licensed architect. If the building is found to be deficient under the standards established by this article, the owner shall cause said building to be structurally altered so as to conform to those standards or cause it to be demolished. 
The notice or order shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by first class mail, return receipt requested, upon the owner as shown in the last equalized assessment roll, and upon each tenant, if any, who is occupying the building, or any portion thereof, on the date such notice is mailed or served. Failure of any tenant to receive such order or notice shall not in any manner invalidate any of the proceedings taken by the building official pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
The aforesaid order shall direct that the structural analysis together with the necessary plans and calculations be submitted to the building safety division for review within two hundred and seventy (270) days after service of the order. The order shall specify that permits required to accomplish the necessary structural alterations shall be obtained not later than one (1) year after the service of the order, and that the building be corrected to meet the minimum requirements of this article, or be demolished, not later than three (3) years after such service. The necessary alterations shall commence within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the date that the permit was issued. 
(b)  Recordation. At the time when the building official serves the aforesaid order, the building official shall file with the office of the county recorder of the County of Orange a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of Santa Ana Municipal Code, Article XI of Chapter 8, "Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings." The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been notified and ordered to structurally analyze the building and to structurally strengthen or demolish it where compliance with Article XI is not exhibited. 
If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this article, or is found to be structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by this article, the building official shall file with the office of the county recorder a certificate terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of Santa Ana Municipal Code, Article XI of Chapter 8, "Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings." 
(c)  Appeal from order. Any owner or tenant of the building may appeal the building official's initial order and determination so long as such appeal is filed within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the service of the aforesaid order. The filing and form of appeal, the processing of the appeal, the scheduling and noticing of said appeal for hearing, the effect of a failure to appeal, the scope of hearing of said appeal, and the procedure for conducting the hearing of any such appeal, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapters 5 and 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as said Uniform Code is adopted by reference pursuant to the provisions of Article IX of Chapter 8 of this Code. In case of any inconsistency between the provisions of this subsection and the provisions of Chapters 5 and 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, the provisions of this subsection shall control. 
(d)  Enforcement. If the owner or tenant fails to comply with any order issued by the building official within any of the time limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or with any order or decision rendered by the planning commission, the building shall be deemed to constitute a dangerous building and the provisions of Chapters 7, 8, and 9 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as said uniform code is adopted by reference in Article IX of Chapter 8 of this Code, shall be applicable. Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor shall be punished in the manner set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1518, 2-19-80; Ord. No. NS-1598, § 2, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 48, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 8-2004.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 49, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2004.1, which pertained to partial repairs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1673, adopted March 14, 1983.  
Sec. 8-2004.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 49, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2004.5, which pertained to extensions by adjoining building owners and derived from Ord. No. NS-1598, § 3, adopted Sept. 8, 1981.  
Sec. 8-2005. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 49, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2005, which pertained to analysis and design of structures and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980, and Ord. No. NS-1598, § 4, adopted Sept. 8, 1981.  
Sec. 8-2006. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 49, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2006, which pertained to materials of construction and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980; Ord. No. NS-1598, § 5, adopted Sept. 8, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1673, § 6, adopted March 14, 1983; and Ord. No. NS-2182, § 33, adopted Jan. 19, 1993.  
Sec. 8-2007. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2273, § 49, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 8-2007, which pertained to information required on plans and derived from Ord. No. NS-1518, adopted Feb. 19, 1980, and Ord. No. NS-1673, § 7, adopted March 14, 1983.  
Secs. 8-2008—8-2499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SOLAR ENERGY CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-2500. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the Solar Energy Code, 2009 Edition, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Uniform Solar Energy Code" or "Solar Energy Code") save and except that portion entitled "Part I, Administrative," together with subsequent supplements, amendments, or editions, which upon the date of official publication, shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code, unless otherwise specified, of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The solar energy code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials Uniform Solar Energy Code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials Uniform Solar Energy Code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2009 edition of the "Solar Energy Code" shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2009 or later edition of the solar energy code. The solar energy code as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city solar energy code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81; Ord. No. NS-1814, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1910, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2082, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 34, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 50, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 67, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 47, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 46, 11-15-10)  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-2501. - Application and scope. 
The provisions of the solar energy code of the City of Santa Ana, hereinafter referred to as "this code," shall apply to all new construction, relocated buildings, and to any alterations, repairs, or reconstruction, except as provided for otherwise in this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2502. - Administrative authority and assistants. 
Whenever the term "administrative authority" is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the building official of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81; Ord. No. NS-1814, § 2, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2503. - Assistants. 
Whenever the term "assistant" is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the senior plumbing inspector, plumbing inspector, or other inspectors of the permit and inspection services department of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81; Ord. No. NS-1814, § 3, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2504. - Duties of the administrative authority. 
The administrative authority is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2505. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the administrative authority or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe as defined in this code, the administrative authority or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the administrative authority by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the administrative authority or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the administrative authority or his authorized representative for the purposes of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2506. - Dangerous and insanitary condition. 
(a)  Any portion of a solar system found by the administrative authority to be insanitary and a hazard, as defined herein, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Where a nuisance exists or a solar system is maintained in violation of this code or any notice issued pursuant to this section, the administrative authority shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and, where necessary, shall seek such abatement in the manner provided by law. Every such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner, agent, or person responsible for the premises in which such condition exists and shall specify the date or time for compliance with such order. 
(c)  Refusal, failure, or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this code. 
(d)  When any solar system is maintained in violation of this code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or where a nuisance exists in any building or on a lot on which a building is situated, the administrative authority shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation of nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2507. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of the solar energy code shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, and in addition, all procedures for the correction of illegal conditions shall apply. 
Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. 
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the administrative authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error. 
Every permit issued by the administrative authority under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half (½) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2508. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, remove, alter, repair, or replace any solar system in a building or premises without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the administrative authority. 
(b)  No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his employ. 
EXCEPTION : Replacement of any component part which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable requirements of this code shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2509. - Application for permit. 
Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. 
When required by the administrative authority for the enforcement of any provision of this code, plans, specifications, drawings or such information as deemed necessary shall be filed and approved before the issuance of any permit for the installation of any solar system. 
Not less than two (2) sets of collected plans and specifications shall be filed before approval is given by the administrative authority. 
When the plans and specifications do not comply with provisions of this code, the necessary changes or revisions shall be made thereto. 
If the administrative authority determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions, or information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fee as hereinafter fixed. 
After approval, one (1) set of plans shall be retained by the administrative authority and the other set shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept at the job site of such building or work at all times during which the work authorized is in progress. 
The approval of any plans or specifications shall not be construed to sanction any violation of this code. 
No person shall deviate materially from any approved plans or specifications or fail, neglect, or refuse to comply therewith unless permission to do so has been obtained from the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 8-2510. - Cost of permit. 
Every application for a permit to do work regulated by this code shall state in writing, on the application form provided for that purpose, the character of work proposed to be done and the amount and kind in connection therewith, together with such information, pertinent thereto, as may be required. 
Such applicant shall pay for each permit, at the time of issuance, such fee as is established by resolution of the city council. 
Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this code without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the administrative authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged. 
Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1578, § 1, 5-4-81; Ord. No. NS-1814, § 4, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2082, § 2, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-2511. - Solar energy system review process. 
(a)  Definitions. As used herein the following terms shall mean the following: 
1.  Electronic submittal shall mean the utilization of one or more of the following: e-mail, internet or facsimile. 
2.  Solar easement shall mean the right of receiving sunlight across real property of another for any solar energy system. Any instrument creating a solar easement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)  A description of the dimensions of the easement expressed in measurable terms, such as vertical or horizontal angles measured in degrees, or the hours of the day on specified dates during which direct sunlight to a specified surface of a solar collector, device, or structural design feature may not be obstructed, or a combination of these descriptions; 
(2)  The restrictions placed upon vegetation, structures, and other objects that would impair or obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement; and, 
(3)  The terms or conditions, if any, under which the easement may be revised or terminated. 
3.  Solar energy system shall mean either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or for water heating. 
(2)  A structural design feature of a building, including either of the following: 
(A)  Any design feature whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
(B)  Any photovoltaic device or technology that is integrated into a building, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic windows, siding, and roofing shingles or tiles. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter applies to the permitting of all solar energy systems. Solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(c)  Eligibility. 
1.  The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements which solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
2.  The solar energy system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
3.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
i.  Verify to the City's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation. 
ii.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
(d)  Review/Issuance Process. 
1.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist pursuant to Section (c)(2) above, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
2.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits. 
3.  City building permit approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the solar energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
4.  If the property is located within a historical district, is listed on any historic register or has entered into a Mills Act Agreement, the applicant shall schedule a consultation with the Planning Manager or his/her designee pertaining to the proposed work. 
(e)  Inspections. 
1.  For a solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required. 
2.  If a solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
( Ord. No. NS-2884, § 3, 9-15-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2950 , § 3, 6-19-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2950 , § 3, renamed § 8-2511 from "small residential rooftop solar energy system review process" to "solar energy system review process."  
Secs. 8-2512—8-2599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-2600. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2009 edition, save and except that portion entitled "Part I, Administrative" (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code"), of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code set forth in this chapter of this Code that specifically amend the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code. Any previously enacted, unrepealed provision of this Code that amended a pre-2009 edition of the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code shall also be construed as amending the applicable provision of the 2009 or later edition of the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code. The uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code, as amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city swimming pool, spa and hot tub code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-1911, § 1, 6-1-87; Ord. No. NS-2083, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 35, 1-19-93; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 51, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 68, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 48, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 47, 11-15-10)  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 8-2601. - Application and scope. 
The provisions of the Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code of the City of Santa Ana, hereinafter referred to as "this code," shall apply to all new construction, and to alterations, repairs, reconstruction and maintenance except as provided for otherwise in this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 36, 1-19-93)  
Sec. 8-2602. - Administrative authority and assistants. 
Whenever the term "administrative authority" is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the building official of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2603. - Assistants. 
Whenever the term "assistant" is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the senior plumbing inspector, plumbing inspector, or other inspector of the building safety division of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2273, § 52, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 8-2604. - Duties of the administrative authority. 
The administrative authority is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2605. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the administrative authority or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which make such building or premises unsafe as defined in this code, the administrative authority or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the administrative authority by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the administrative authority or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after demand is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the administrative authority or his authorized representative for the purposes of inspection and examination pursuant to this code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2606. - Dangerous and insanitary condition. 
(a)  Any portion of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub system found by the administrative authority to be insanitary and a hazard, as defined herein, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Where a nuisance exists or a swimming pool, spa or hot tub system is maintained in violation of this code or any notice issued pursuant to this section, the administrative authority shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and, where necessary, shall seek such abatement in the manner provided by law. Every such order shall be in writing, addressed to the owner, agent, or person responsible for the premises on which such condition exists and shall specify the date or time for compliance with such order. 
(c)  Refusal, failure, or neglect to comply with any such notice or order shall be considered a violation of this code. 
(d)  When any swimming pool, spa or hot tub system is maintained in violation of this code and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or where a nuisance exists in any swimming pool, spa or hot tub or on premises on which a swimming pool, spa or hot tub is situated, the administrative authority shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation of nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2607. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, and in addition, all procedures for the correction of illegal conditions shall apply. 
Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this code occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as herein provided. 
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. 
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the administrative authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error. 
Every permit issued by the administrative authority under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided, further, that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year. Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2083, § 2, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 8-2608. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, remove, alter, repair, replace or maintain any swimming pool, spa or hot tub system in a building or premises without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the administrative authority. 
(b)  No person shall allow any other person to do or cause to be done any work under a permit secured by a permittee except persons in his employ. 
Exception : Replacement of any component part which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable requirements of this code shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85; Ord. No. NS-2182, § 37, 1-19-93)  
Sec. 8-2609. - Application for permit. 
Any person legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done, and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. 
When required by the administrative authority for the enforcement of any provision of this code, plans, specifications, drawings or such information as deemed necessary shall be filed and approved before the issuance of any permit for the installation of any swimming pool, spa or hot tub system. 
Not less than two (2) sets of corrected plans and specifications shall be filed before approval is given by the administrative authority. 
When the plans and specifications do not comply with provisions of this code, the necessary changes or revisions shall be made thereto. 
If the administrative authority determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions, or information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this code, he shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fee as hereinafter fixed. 
After approval, one (1) set of plans shall be retained by the administrative authority and the other set shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept at the job site of such building or work at all times during which the work authorized is in progress. 
The approval of any plans or specifications shall not be construed to sanction any violation of this code. 
No person shall deviate materially from any approved plans or specifications or fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the administrative authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2610. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2083, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-2610, which pertained to cost of permit and derived from Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 8-2611. - Failure to obtain permit. 
Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this code without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work, provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the administrative authority that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit therefor before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as herein provided shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, 11-18-85)  
Sec. 8-2612. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2083, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 1990, repealed § 8-2612, which pertained to equipment foundations and enclosures and derived from Ord. No. NS-1812, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1985.  
Secs. 8-2613—8-2699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - LIVE/WORK UNITS 
 
Sec. 8-2700. - General. 
Other provisions of this Code notwithstanding, a structure located in a C3A zone and intended for use as a "live/work" community, as defined by section 41-101.5 of this Code shall conform with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this division is to provide alternative building standards to assist and make feasible the reuse of existing buildings as combined living and working space for artists as allowed by the California Health and Safety Code § 17958.11. 
(2)  CBC compliance. Any items not addressed in this Code shall comply with current California Building Code requirements. 
(3)  Occupancy classification. A live/work space shall be considered as an R occupancy in accordance with California Building Code section 310.1. The R occupancy need not be separated from the workspace of which it is a part. 
(4)  Live/work space. One (1) or more live/work spaces may be established in a building, provided the use or occupancy conforms to the requirements of the California Building Code or alternative standards contained in this Code. 
Residential use is defined as a living/sleeping space, kitchen, bathroom and closet areas. The minimum area of a live/work space shall be seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. The minimum areas dedicated to residential purposes shall comply with California Building Code sections 310.6 or 310.7 and section 41-404 of this Code. 
(5)  Prohibited uses. No hazardous activity such as, but not limited to, welding, open flame, or storage of flammable liquids shall occur in a live/work space without specific written approval from the fire department and the building official. 
(Ord. No. NS-2335, § 1, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 8-2701. - Alternative standards. 
(a)  Exits. 
(1)  The occupant load of a live/work space shall be based upon one (1) occupant per three hundred (300) square feet. Two (2) exits shall be required from each space when the occupant load exceeds ten (10) people. 
(2)  Each live/work space above the second floor shall have access to two (2) stairway exits. An existing fire escape may be used as one (1) of the required exits, provided it complies with California Building Code Appendix Chapter 34. An operational test performed by the fire department is required prior to occupancy by any tenant. 
(3)  Mezzanine areas with more than two thousand (2,000) square feet require two (2) exits. 
(4)  The emergency egress from sleeping rooms, as required by California Building Code section 310.4, may be provided from openings located in the working space of a live/work unit, provided that the spaces are contiguous and located on the same story. 
(b)  Sleeping loft. The section of the live/work space designated as a sleeping area shall comply with current California Building Code requirements when the sleeping area encompasses seventy (70) square feet or more. Any loft area with less than seventy (70) square feet is not considered a habitable room and does not need to conform to California Building Code headroom and stairway requirements. 
(c)  Corridors. Existing corridors shall comply with California Building Code Appendix Chapter 34. New corridors shall comply with the current California Building Code. 
(d)  Sound transmission and energy conservation. Sound transmission control and energy insulation are not required. 
(e)  Light and ventilation. California Building Code section 310.5, regarding natural light and ventilation requirements for habitable spaces, shall apply to the actual habitable space provided. 
(f)  Toilet, shower and bath. Live/work spaces may share a code-required toilet, shower, or bath space, provided each live/work space has direct access to the toilet, shower, or bath from a public corridor. 
(g)  Plumbing. Where extensions of existing drain and vent lines are to be installed, plastic piping, complying with California Plumbing Code Section 701.1.2a, may be used. Sizing must comply with Table 7.5 of the California Plumbing Code. Where plastic piping is used, a sign shall be posted in each live/work space indicating plastic piping has been installed and cautioning against disposal of corrosive substances. 
(h)  Electrical. 
(1)  Electrical receptacle outlets shall be located throughout the live/work space in accordance with California Electric Code section 210.52. 
(2)  The kitchen and countertops shall be served by at least two (2) twenty (20) amp dedicated circuits. 
(3)  Each live/work space in an existing building shall be provided with a minimum of sixty (60) ampere service or feeder ampacity. Each tenant must have access to the over current protective devices serving that tenant space. 
(4)  If electrical comfort heating is provided, electrical calculations, based on section 8-667 of this Code, shall be required. 
(i)  Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed throughout the live/work spaces in accordance with California Building Code section 310.9. 
(j)  Title 24 and ADA requirements. Disabled access requirements for live/work quarters located in the existing structures shall comply with Title 24, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(k)  Elevators. Freight elevators may substitute for passenger elevators, if disabled access requirements or equivalent facilitation is approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. NS-2335, § 2, 11-3-97; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 69, 2-3-03)  
Secs. 8-2702—8-2799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - RESIDENTIAL CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-2800. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "Residential Code" or "California Residential Code"), (together with subsequent supplements or amendments shall become effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless otherwise specified), of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the Clerk of the Council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The Residential code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city, except for the changes to the Residential code set forth in this chapter that specifically amends the Residential Code. The Residential code, as thus amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city Residential code. 
Appendices which are adopted pursuant to this section, are as follows: 
Appendix H, Patio Covers 
Appendix J, Existing Buildings and Structures 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 48, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 35, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 13, 12-6-16 )  
Secs. 8-2801—8-2809. - Reserved. 
_____ 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 8-2810. - Climatic and geographic design criteria (Table R301.2(1)). 
Table R301.2(1) is revised to read: 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN TEMP e 	ICE 
BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED h 	FLOOD HAZARDS g 	AIR 
FREEZING INDEX i 	MEAN 
ANNUAL TEMP j 
	Speed d 
(mph) 	Topographic effects 		Weathering a 	Frost line Depth b 	Termite c 					
Zero 	110 	No 	D 2 or E 	Negligible 	12-24" 	Very Heavy 	43 	No 	See Exhibit B 	0 	60 
 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s. 
a.  Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b.  The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade. 
c.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(A)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4. 
e.  Temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official. 
f.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended. 
h.  In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.htrnl. 
j.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
k.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 49, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 36, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 14, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 8-2811. - Masonry stem walls (Section R403.1.3). 
Section R403.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 masonry stem walls without solid grout and vertical reinforcing are not permitted. 
Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings which are three stories or less in height and constructed with stud bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are permitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 50, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 37, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-2812. - Definitions (Section 202). 
Section 202 Definitions is hereby revised by adding "Hazardous Fire Area" as follows: 
HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Includes all areas identified within California Fire Code Section 4906.2 and other areas as determined by the Fire Code Official as presenting a fire hazard due to the presence of combustible vegetation, or the proximity of the property to an area that contains combustible vegetation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 38, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-2813. - Building planning (Chapter 3). 
(a)  Section R309.6 Fire sprinkler attached garages, and carports with habitable space above is hereby amended by modifying the exception as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing carports and/or garages that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8. 
(b)  Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems is hereby amended by modifying the exception as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8. 
(c)  Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems is hereby amended by modifying the exception as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic sprinkler system unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8. 
(d)  Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure is hereby revised as follows: 
Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure and California Fire Code Section 903.3.5.3. 
(e)  Section R319 Site Address is hereby revised as follows: 
R319 Site Address. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 39, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-2814. - Chimneys and fireplaces (Chapter 10). 
Section R1001.13 Chimney spark arresters is hereby added as follows: 
R1001.13 Chimney spark arresters. All chimneys attached to any appliance or fireplace that burns solid fuel shall be equipped with an approved spark arrester. Chimneys serving outdoor appliances or fireplaces shall be equipped with a spark arrester. The spark arrester shall meet the requirements of Section 2113.9.2 of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 40, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-2815. - Referenced standards (Chapter 44). 
(a)  NFPA 13, 2013 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.8.3 is hereby amended as follows: 
6.8.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The FDC shall contain a minimum of two 2 ½" inlets. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½" inlets shall be provided. 
(2)  Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby amended as follows: 
8.3.3.1. When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
1.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.7 
2.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
3.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
4.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
(3)  Section 8.17.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
8.17.1.1.1 Residential Waterflow Alarms. A local water-flow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, where provided. Group R occupancies not requiring a fire alarm system by the California Fire Code shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be minimum of 15 DBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 DBA with all intervening doors closed, whichever is greater. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
(4)  Section 11.1.1.2 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.2 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new occupancy. 
(5)  Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the Fire Code Official: 
1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3)  Utilize the Orange County Fire Authority water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
(6)  Section 23.2.1.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
Section 23.2.1. 1 Where a waterflow test is used for the purposes of system design, the test shall be conducted no more than 6 months prior to working plan submittal unless otherwise approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  NFPA 13R 2013 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler System in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.16.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
6.16.1 A local water-flow alarms shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system where provided. Group R occupancies containing less than the number of stories, dwelling units or occupant load specified in Section 907.2.8 of the 2010 California Fire Code as requiring a fire alarm system shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 dBA with all intervening doors closed, whichever is greater. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
There shall also be a minimum of one exterior alarm indicating device, listed for outside service and audible from the access roadway that serves that building. 
(c)  NFPA 13D 2013 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 4.1.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3 Stock of Spare Sprinklers 
(2)  Section 4.1.3.1 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.1. A supply of at least two sprinklers for each type shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced. 
(3)  Section 4.1.5.2 [4.1.3.2] is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.2 The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property. 
(4)  Section 4.1.3.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.3 The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed 100° F (38° C). 
(5)  Section 4.1.3.4 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.4 A special sprinkler wrench shall be provided and kept in the cabinet to be used in the removal and installation of sprinklers. One sprinkler wrench shall be provided for each type of sprinkler installed. 
(6)  Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised as follows: 
7.1.2 The system piping shall not have a separate control valve unless supervised by a central station, or remote station alarm service 
(7)  Section 7.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.6 Alarms. Exterior alarm indicating device shall be listed for outside service and audible from the street from which the house is addressed. Exterior audible devices shall be placed on the front or side of the structure and the location is subject to final approval by the fire code official. Additional interior alarm devices shall be required to provide 55 dBA or 15 dBA above ambient, whichever is greater. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA, whichever is greater. Audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
Exception: 
1.  When an approved water flow monitoring system is installed, interior audible devices may be powered through the fire alarm control panel. 
2.  When smoke detectors specified under CBC Section 907.2.11 are used to sound an alarm upon waterflow switch activation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 41, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 8-2816. - Vehicular gates (Appendix O). 
SECTION AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads is added as follows: 
AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads. The installation of gates or other barriers across a required fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements set forth in the 2013 California Fire Code Section 503.6. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 42, 11-18-13)  
Secs. 8-2817—8-2899. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
 
Sec. 8-2900. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "California Green Building Standards Code"), (effective, adopted, and incorporated by reference into this Code on the date specified by the state building standards commission, unless otherwise specified), of which not less than one (1) copy of said Code has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. The Green Building Standards code is adopted and incorporated by reference as though fully set forth at length herein as provided for in section 419 of the Charter of the city. The California Green Building Standards code, as thus amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the city Green Building Standards code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2810, § 51, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 43, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 15, 12-6-16 )  
ARTICLE XVII. - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-2901. - Applicability and purpose. 
This Article applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the City. Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Article are not subject to the requirements of this Article unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the electric vehicle charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2953 , § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 8-2902. - Electric vehicle charging station requirements. 
(a)  "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means all of the following: 
(1)  Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station; 
(2)  Is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code; 
(3)  Delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle; 
(4)  Conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, and all state and City health and safety standards. 
(b)  An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. NS-2953 , § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 8-2903. - Duties of the building department. 
(a)  A checklist and required permitting documentation of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review and all documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station shall be published on the City's publicly accessible Internet Web site. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. Web site applications may be allowed at such time in the future that the technology is made available by the City. 
(c)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(d)  The Building Department shall adopt a checklist and required permitting documentation of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(e)  The checklist and required permitting documentation of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(Ord. No. NS-2953 , § 2, 9-4-18)  
Sec. 8-2904. - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The Building Department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of electric vehicle charging stations applications within thirty (30) days of the adoption of this Article. 
(b)  An application for electric vehicle charging stations that meets the requirements of the checklist and required permitting documentation of all requirements shall be deemed complete, and the Building Department shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit at an expedited rate. 
(c)  Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Department's review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
(d)  If an application for electric vehicle charging station is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be provided to the applicant for resubmission. 
(e)  At the time of the adoption of this Article, the City does not have the technical capability to accept electronic signatures, therefore, acceptance of an electronic signature is not required. 
(f)  Inspections shall be required and performed by the Building Department for electric vehicle charging stations. 
(g)  The inspection shall be done in an efficient inspection process, in a timely manner, and should include consolidated inspections; inspection measures taken should be consistent with safety requirements to ensure that the electric vehicle charging stations are properly installed. 
(h)  If an electric vehicle charging station fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized, but need not conform to the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2953 , § 2, 9-4-18)  
Chapter 9 - CIVIL SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Applicability of rules and regulations. 
The civil service rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall govern and control the relationship existing between city employees and the city upon any matter covered or regulated herein. Exceptions to these rules and regulations may be negotiated with the appropriate recognized employee group(s), or allowed at the discretion of the city manager when these changes do not impact any recognized employee group, in keeping with charter provisions. 
(Code 1952, § 2200; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Charter reference— Rules effective after adoption in an ordinance, § 1000.  
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
The following terms, whenever used in these rules and regulations, shall be construed as follows: 
Assembled examination: A test conducted at a specified time and place at which applicants are required to appear for competitive examination under the supervision of an examiner. 
Board: The personnel board appointed in accordance with sections 911 and 912 of the charter. 
Charter: The Charter of the city, ratified by the voters of the City November 4, 1952, adopted by California Concurrent Resolution No. 10, in Assembly January 8, 1953, and in Senate January 8, 1953, as amended. 
Class or classification: A group of positions in the competitive service which are substantially so similar as to require the same kind and amount of training and experience for proper performance and to merit equal pay. 
Council: The city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
Executive director of human resources: That person designated by the city manager to have charge of personnel administration. 
Eligible: A person who legally may be appointed to a vacant position in the competitive service as provided in the rules. 
Eligible list: A list of persons eligible for appointment in the competitive service to positions in the class indicated by the title of the class. 
Memorandum of understanding: An agreement between the city and represented employees under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act. 
Oath of office: That oath required by the charter, prior to entering upon the duties of a position. 
Part-time appointment: An employee appointed to a position which averages more than twenty (20) hours and less than forty (40) hours per week within the civil service system as outlined in these rules and regulations. 
Part-time employee: An employee appointed to a position within the civil service system which averages more than twenty (20) hours and less than forty (40) hours per week. 
Position: A group of current duties, tasks and responsibilities assigned or delegated by competent authority, requiring the full or part-time services of one (1) person. 
Regular appointment: An appointment to a regular full-time or part-time civil service position after completion of the prescribed probationary period. 
Regular employee/status: A full-time or part-time employee who has successfully completed his or her probationary period and has received a regular appointment. An employee who has attained regular status retains that status during any probationary promotional periods. 
Unassembled examination: An appraisal of training, experience, work history, or use of other means for evaluating relative qualifications without the necessity for the personal appearance of applicants at a specified time. 
(Code 1952, § 2201; Ord. No. NE-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1886, § 6, 1-19-87; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 1, 5-6-96; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-2.5. - Appointing authorities. 
(a)  For purposes of section 707 of the charter, the following officers of the city are designated as the heads of a department, office or agency, having the power to appoint and remove such deputies, assistants, subordinates, and employees as are provided by the city council for their department, office, or agency, and shall be deemed to be a "department head," "appointing officer," and "appointing authority" with respect to such deputies, assistants, subordinates and employees for purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  City attorney; 
(2)  Clerk of the council; 
(3)  Police chief; 
(4)  Fire chief; 
(5)  Executive director of finance and management services; 
(6)  Executive director of public works; 
(7)  Executive director of recreation and community services; 
(8)  Executive director of human resources; 
(9)  Executive director of planning and building safety; 
(10)  Executive director of community development; 
(11)  Library director. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the "appointing officer" and "appointing authority" for purposes of this chapter for all appointed officers of the city except officers appointed by the city council pursuant to the charter and for those employees of the city who are not subject to appointment and dismissal by any officer designated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The officers listed in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute the heads of departments of the city for purposes of clause (7) of subsection (a) of section 1002 of the charter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1886, § 7, 1-19-87; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-3, which pertained to residence requirements and derived from Code 1952, § 2202 and Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957.  
Sec. 9-3.1. - Policy against close relatives working together. 
The city council finds and determines that close relatives working together as city officers or employees is likely to result in problems of employee morale, inappropriate supervision, conflict of interest and public criticism. It is the policy of the city to avoid such problems in the government of the city caused by close relatives working together. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a person shall be deemed a "close relative" of a city officer or employee if that person is related to such officer or employee by blood, adoption or marriage, exclusive of any such relationship which is collateral consanguinity more remote than the fourth degree. 
(Ord. No. NS-2034, § 1, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-4. - Executive director of human resources. 
There is created the position of executive director of human resources. The executive director of human resources shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city manager. The duties of the executive director of human resources may be combined with those of any other office or position which is filled by appointment by the city manager. The executive director of human resources shall: 
(1)  Serve as secretary to the personnel board, if so appointed by the city manager. 
(2)  Administer all the provisions of the civil service rules and regulations except those specifically reserved to the council, the personnel board, or the city manager. 
(3)  Be custodian of the official records concerning the employment status of all employees. 
(4)  Confirm that authorized budgeted positions exist, before probationary or temporary appointments are made. 
(5)  Keep such records as required by these rules and regulations. 
(6)  Ascertain that employee pay items conform to memorandum of understanding provisions and to federal, state and municipal laws. 
(Code 1952, § 2203; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-5. - Disqualification of applicants. 
The executive director of personnel services may reject any application, refuse to examine an applicant, disqualify an applicant, remove an applicant from an eligible list, or refuse to certify any person on an eligible list if: 
(a)  The applicant is found to lack any of the requirements prescribed for the class or position; 
(b)  The applicant is so disabled as to be unable to perform all of the essential functions, with reasonable accommodations, of the position for which the applicant is a candidate; 
(c)  The applicant is addicted to the use of narcotics or the habitual use of intoxicating liquors to excess; 
(d)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(e)  The applicant has previously been dismissed from any public or private employment for any cause other than abolition of position or reduction in force; 
(f)  The applicant has used, or attempted to use, political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in connection with the application, examination, certification or appointment; 
(g)  The applicant has directly or indirectly obtained information regarding the examination to which the applicant was not entitled; 
(h)  The applicant has failed to submit the application correctly or within the prescribed time; 
(i)  The applicant has taken part in the compilation, administration or correction of the examination; 
(j)  The applicant has practiced, or attempted to practice, any deception or fraud in the application or in securing the eligibility or appointment; 
(k)  On evidence that the applicant cannot be located by postal authorities; 
(l)  On receipt of a written statement declining an appointment or stating that the applicant wishes his or her name removed from the eligible list; 
(m)  An offer of an appointment from the eligible list has been extended but not accepted; 
(n)  The applicant declines to reply to letters of inquiry or letters of appointment or fails to respond to a notification of certification in a timely manner; 
(o)  The applicant does not report for duty, after appointment by the appointing officer; 
(p)  The applicant has been appointed to the position for which he/she has applied; 
(q)  The applicant has not been selected for appointment after being certified from the eligible list the maximum allowed times; 
(r)  After examination by a designated physician, the applicant does not meet the medical standards prescribed for the class including the standards as set forth in the city's policy on a drug-free workplace and cannot reasonably be accommodated; 
(s)  The applicant is a close relative of the city manager or the city manager's assistants, if any. 
The personnel board may, upon written request of applicant, review any action taken pursuant to the provisions of this section. The applicant shall have ten (10) calendar days following notification of such action to file his or her written request for review in the offices of the secretary to the personnel board. Such review shall normally occur at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the personnel board, unless the board determines that the matter requires earlier consideration. The decision of the personnel board in the review of such matters shall represent final appeal action. 
(Code 1952, § 2207; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 2, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-5.1. - Criminal conduct; ineligibility for employment. 
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, no person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment in the excepted or competitive service of the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is determined that mitigating circumstances exist, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of conviction, or the fact that the position applied for or occupied by such person is unrelated to such conviction. 
The city manager, assistant city manager, executive director of executive services, chief of police, city attorney, and each appointing authority of the city are hereby authorized to have access to the "State Summary Criminal History Information" as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1307, § 1, 8-2-76; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-6. - Rejection. 
Whenever an applicant is rejected, or the applicant's name is removed from an eligible list per the provisions of sections 9-5 and 9-5.1, the applicant will be notified by letter, stating the reason(s) therefor. 
(Code 1952, § 2208; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 3, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-7. - Considering appeals from decisions and ratings of qualification appraisal boards. 
The executive director of personnel services shall consider appeals from decisions and ratings of qualification appraisal boards in the same manner and within the same periods of time as established for appeals of results of written examinations. Appeals of decisions and ratings of the qualification appraisal boards shall be considered solely for alleged irregularity or fraud in the conduct of the interview. 
(Code 1952, § 2219; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 4, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-8. - Medical examinations. 
Before the initial placement with the city, individuals receiving job offers will be required to successfully pass a physical examination before a licensed physician. The standards for the physical examination including the drug screening shall be established prior to publication of the written announcement of the examination. The licensed physician mentioned in this section shall be one selected by the executive director of human resources. The examination fee shall be paid by the city. 
A candidate for a promotional appointment to a classification which requires higher or more stringent medical standards than the classification from which the candidate seeks promotion shall be required to pass a medical examination prior to appointment. 
(Code 1952, § 2220; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 5, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-9. - Hearings—Before personnel board. 
Hearings before the personnel board shall be called by the chair of the personnel board or, in the chair's absence, by the vice-chair. The chair shall make arrangements through the executive director of human resources for suitable clerical assistance and for assignment of space in which to hold the hearings. 
(Code 1952, § 2245; Ord. No. NS-277, § 1, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-10. - Same—Order of proof. 
The order of proof in any hearing of review shall be as follows: 
(a)  The appointing authority shall present evidence in support of the charges; 
(b)  The employee shall then produce such evidence as such employee may wish to offer in his or her defense; 
(c)  The parties in interest may then offer, respectively, rebuttal and surrebuttal evidence; 
(d)  All evidence must be relevant and material to the issues, and the board's decision concerning the relevance or materiality of evidence shall be final; 
(e)  Following the presentation of evidence, each side shall be permitted to argue the case to the personnel board. The order of argument shall be as follows: The appointing authority shall be permitted to present its opening argument; the employee, or employee's counsel, shall be permitted to argue; if the employee presents an argument, the appointing authority shall be permitted to present a closing argument; 
(f)  When arguments are completed, the chair shall declare the hearing closed; 
(g)  The personnel board shall then retire to its chambers to consider and review the evidence presented to it; 
(h)  Following its review of the evidence, the board members shall return to the hearing room and shall vote publicly "yes" or "no" upon the question of whether each charge has been sustained. The chair shall announce the result of the vote. If any charge is sustained, the board shall consider what disciplinary action, if any, it concludes to be warranted. Such consideration of appropriate disciplinary action may, at the board's discretion, be conducted at the public meeting or in the chambers of the board. In either event, any proposed disciplinary action shall be determined by roll call vote. The chair may announce the recommended disciplinary action at the public meeting or submit such recommendation within the ten (10) days; 
(i)  The board shall adjourn to prepare its written findings, conclusions and recommendations; 
(j)  The written findings, conclusions and recommendations shall be signed by the chairman and authenticated by the secretary of the personnel board before distribution. 
(Code 1952, § 2246; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, amended § 2246 of the 1952 Code, § 9-10 herein, by adding the provisions concerning the board's decision as to relevance in (d), and by expanding the provisions concerning disciplinary action in (h).  
Sec. 9-11. - Employee performance appraisals. 
The city manager shall establish and make effective a system of employee performance appraisal. Such evaluations shall be prepared by the employee's immediate supervisor and shall be reviewed by the division and/or department head. Performance appraisals shall be reviewed with the employee concerned and the employee shall sign the appraisal form to acknowledge said review. Performance appraisals will be submitted according to the following schedule for full-time civil service employees and after equivalent hours of service for part-time civil service employees: 
(a)  At the end of each four (4) months' service during probationary periods; 
(b)  Annually after completion of probation; 
(c)  Prior to a merit increase eligibility date; 
(d)  As called for, at the discretion of the appointing authority and/or as mandated by the applicable memorandum of understanding. 
Employee performance appraisals, including those prepared as directed in this section will be delivered to the executive director of human resources for filing with the records of the employee. Performance appraisals will be considered in making merit salary advances and may be considered a factor in promotional examination, demotions, and dismissals. 
(Code 1952, § 2247; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 2, 5-6-96; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2247 of the 1952 Code, § 9-11 herein. Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, amended § 9-11 by revising the number and type of reports required.  
Sec. 9-12. - Employee records. 
Department heads shall furnish the executive director of human resources with written reports of any disciplinary action involving loss of pay, and of any especially noteworthy communication or oral commendation or condemnation received or written by the department head relative to the performance of any employee. 
(Code 1952, § 2248; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-14. - Attendance—Hours of work. 
Eight (8) hours shall constitute a normal day and forty (40) hours of work shall constitute a minimum workweek for full-time employees, except for employees for whom special provisions have been approved by the council. Employees shall be in attendance at their work during prescribed hours and shall not absent themselves during prescribed hours without approval of the department head. 
(Code 1952, § 2250; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-787, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 3, 5-6-96) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2250 of the 1952 Code, § 9-14 herein.  
Sec. 9-15. - Same—Records. 
All departments shall keep attendance records prescribed by the city manager and shall transmit them to the executive director of human resources on the dates he or she shall specify. 
(Code 1952, § 2251; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-16. - Outside employment. 
Employees in the competitive service shall not engage in any employment or sales or service outside of their regular city employment, except with the written approval of the department head and consent of the city manager. Such permission may be granted for intermittent or casual employment in sales, services or in connection with educational programs, if the request contains a statement as to the nature and frequency of the employment. The said application shall be denied by the department head or city manager if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that such outside employment will be inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict, or interferes in any way with the proper performance of the duties as a city employee. Permission to engage in outside employment will be granted for a period not to exceed six (6) months and extensions may be granted by the department head for additional six-month periods. The personnel board may, upon request of the employee, review any action taken pursuant to the provisions of this section and report its findings to the city council and the city manager. 
(Code 1952, § 2275; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-17. - Excepted service inclusion. 
The vacation and sick leave provisions of these rules and regulations shall apply to all regular full-time city employees of the excepted service who are eligible to become members of the state employees' retirement system 
(Code 1952, § 2276; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-18, which pertained to accidents or disease sustained in connection with city employment and derived from Code 1952, § 2277 and Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957.  
Sec. 9-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-19, which pertained to death of any city employee and derived from Code 1952, § 2278 and Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957.  
Sec. 9-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2150, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1991, repealed § 9-20 in its entirety. Former § 9-20 pertained to persons excluded from retirement plans under charter § 1400 and derived from Ord. No. NS-1460, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 1978.  
Secs. 9-21—9-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXAMINATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Examination leave, § 9-134. 
 
Sec. 9-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-31, which pertained to scheduling of vacancies and derived from Code 1952, § 2204; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957; and Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1969.  
Sec. 9-32. - Announcement. 
Whenever an examination is to be given, the executive director of human resources shall give sufficient public notice to ensure an adequate number of applications are received from qualified individuals. Notices for open competitive examinations shall be posted on a bulletin board at the city hall, readily available to the public, in the office of the executive director of personnel services and in the departments where exist classifications for which examinations are being held, and in such other places as may attract qualified candidates. The notices will contain sufficient information relative to the examination to indicate to interested candidates the duties and prerequisites of the position, together with dates, salaries and pertinent benefits. Promotional examinations will be published by means of notices posted in the departments containing qualified candidates and in the office of the executive director of human resources. 
(Code 1952, § 2205; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 6, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-33. - Applications. 
Applications to take examinations shall be submitted in the manner and/or on forms approved by the executive director of personnel services. They must be received in the office of the executive director of personnel services prior to the hour and date established in the examination announcement or, in the case of continuous recruitment, prior to the time the recruitment is deemed closed. 
(Code 1957, § 2206; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 7, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-34. - Scope. 
All examinations shall be competitive and impartial and shall be suitable to test fairly the relative capacities of the persons examined to discharge the essential functions of the positions to which they seek appointment. 
(Code 1952, § 2209; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 8, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-35. - Types. 
Examinations shall be assembled or unassembled and, further, they may be written or oral, or in the form of a practical demonstration of skills or any combination of these. Any investigation of education, experience, character or identity, and any test of knowledge, skill, ability, physical or mental fitness which, in the judgment of the city manager, fairly tests the relative capacities of the applicants to perform the essential functions of the position to which they seek appointment may be employed. 
(Code 1952, § 2210; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 9, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-35.1. - Promotions. 
Vacancies in positions of the higher classifications in the civil service of the city shall, as far as practicable, be filled by promotion of employees occupying positions of lower classifications having duties and responsibilities which can reasonably be considered as affording training and experience for the performance of the duties of the higher classification; provided that the city manager may hold examinations for positions of such higher classifications on the basis of open competitive examinations or both open and promotional competitive examinations in the manner provided in the civil service rules and regulations. Eligibility for promotional examinations shall be subject to civil service rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1659, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 10, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-36. - Promotional. 
Promotions shall be based on competitive examination. The examinations shall be open, promotional, or both open and promotional. In each case of an examination for a higher classification, the city manager shall determine which positions in a lower classification are appropriate for advancement to the higher classification. If the number of employees considered eligible for promotion is less than three (3), the city manager may determine that an open or a combination of open and promotional examinations be held to create an eligible list. In the event that a combined open and promotional examination is to be held as provided herein, employees holding regular full-time or part-time civil service status in any one (1) of the classifications considered appropriate for advancement, and actually in the employment of the city at the time of the examination, will be placed at the top of the eligible list if they have an overall examination grade of eighty (80) percent or more, prior to inclusion of preferential credits. 
(Code 1952, § 2211; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 2, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 11, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 4, 5-6-96)  
Sec. 9-37. - Promotional seniority credit. 
Seniority credit shall be given on promotional examinations where all applicants are regular employees of the city and on combined open and promotional examinations as provided in section 9-36. This credit shall be given those employees who attain a passing grade and shall be one-half of one (0.5) percent for each complete year of service to the city but not to exceed five (5) percent of the maximum possible grade. 
Full-time or equivalent part-time hours of service in the promotional ladder within the same occupational field shall apply in the computation of this credit. Such service completed prior to a break in continuous city service shall not apply unless the break in service was concluded by reappointment, as provided in section 9-114. 
(Code 1952, § 2215; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 5, 5-6-96)  
Sec. 9-37.1. - Veterans' credit. 
In all examinations for entrance into the civil service of the city, veterans who attain a passing grade shall be allowed an additional preferential credit of five (5) percent, and disabled veterans obtaining a passing grade shall be allowed a preferential credit of ten (10) percent of the maximum possible grade for such examination. The term "veteran" means a person who has served on active duty in the armed forces of the United States in time of war or armed intervention (and prior to the cessation of hostilities, as declared by the President or the Congress of the United States) for a period of at least ninety (90) days and has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty. 
(Ord. No. NS-1659, § 3, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-38. - Conducting. 
The executive director of human resources shall determine the manner and methods and by whom examinations are to be administered. No person shall be permitted to take an examination unless an application has been submitted in accordance with the terms of the public notice for the particular position. 
(Code 1952, § 2212; Ord. No. NS-277, § 1, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-39. - Qualification appraisal. 
In examinations where the executive director of human resources considers it appropriate, education, experience and personal qualifications of the candidates shall be evaluated on the basis of interviews conducted by a board composed of persons known to be interested in the improvement of public administration and in the selection of efficient personnel according to merit system principles. In classifications requiring technical knowledge, at least one (1) of the members of the board shall be familiar with the technical aspects of the work in the classification for which the applicant will be examined. The board mentioned in this section shall consist of at least two (2) persons. 
Each member of the board will submit a report in writing on forms supplied by the executive director of human resources, and these reports will be made available to the appointing authority for those candidates who have been certified as eligible for appointment. The boards described in this section will be known as qualification appraisal boards. 
(Code 1952, § 2217; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 12, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-40. - Rating. 
The minimum grade or standard determining eligibility shall be based upon all factors in the examination, including educational requirements, experience, and other qualifying elements as shown on the application of the candidate or other verified information. Each section of the examination shall be graded independently. Weights of sections shall aggregate to one hundred (100). Veterans' preference and seniority shall not be considered sections. When applicable, veterans' preference and seniority points shall be added to the general average, and the resulting sum shall be used in determining the order or band in which the name of the candidate shall appear on the eligible list. Failure in one (1) section may be grounds for declaring the applicant as having failed in the entire examination and as disqualifying for subsequent parts of an examination as shall be determined by the executive director of human resources. All applicants in the same examination shall be accorded uniform and equal treatment in all phases of the examination procedure. 
(Code 1952, § 2214; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 13, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-41. - Passing score. 
Seventy (70) percent shall be used to represent the minimum score which competitors shall be required to attain, but such seventy (70) percent may be an adjusted score, when adjudged necessary by the executive director of personnel services, based upon consideration of the test, the quality of the competition and the needs of the city. Any such adjusted score shall be established before the identification of the competitor's examination papers. 
(Code 1952, § 2216; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-42. - Error appeal. 
During the five (5) working days commencing with the first working day after a written test has been completed, a candidate may file with the executive director of human resources an appeal against any item of the test or any part of the test, citing the items or the parts against which the appeal is directed and the reasons for such an appeal. An eligible list resulting from such test shall not thereafter be established until all the disputed items have been reviewed by the executive director of human resources and corrected if found to be wrong, or the appeal denied. Decisions of the executive director of human resources shall be subject to review by the city manager upon written request by the candidate filed with the executive director of human resources within five (5) working days of the decision. 
(Code 1952, § 2217; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 14, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-43. - Grading appeal. 
During the five (5) working days beginning with the day after notice of placement on the eligible list has been mailed, a candidate may file with the executive director of human resources a request to review the score assigned to each component of the examination. If the candidate believes an error has been made in any computation of his or her scores, including computation of score assigned to each examination component, determination of weighted scores, or in the summing of weighted scores, he or she may make application, in writing, to the executive director of human resources for an adjustment of his or her score. However, in such application the candidate must state specifically and particularly wherein he or she believes error has been made. Any error that may appear shall be corrected, and any change in the standing of candidates as a result thereof shall be made by the executive director of human resources within five (5) working days after the appeal period. All conclusions in connection with appeals shall be approved or disapproved by the city manager and shall be subject to review by the personnel board upon written request by the candidate filed with the board within five (5) working days after the candidate has been notified of the decision of the city manager. 
(Code 1952, § 2218; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 15, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-44. - Records. 
All examination materials submitted by competitors are confidential records which may be open for inspection only for the purposes and under the conditions set forth in these rules and regulations. Applications and examination records shall be kept during the life of the eligible list. Examination materials and applications of certified candidates shall be open for inspection by the appointing authority to which the candidates have been certified, during such time as said materials are on file. 
(Code 1952, § 2221; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 16, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-45. - Eligible lists—Preparation; approval, etc. 
Upon completion of any examination, the city manager shall cause to be prepared and shall approve eligible lists with the persons who passed such examination being listed as follows: 
(a)  For promotional only exams, candidates who passed such examination shall be listed on the promotional eligible list in relative order of the score received, from highest to lowest. 
(b)  For open exams, candidates who passed such examination shall be placed on the open eligible list in three (3) groups or bands, as follows: 
Band A: Candidates shall be placed in this band if their adjusted scores are equal to or higher than ninety (90.00) percent. 
Band B: Candidates shall be placed in this band if their adjusted scores are equal to or higher than eighty (80.00) percent but less than ninety (90.00) percent. 
Band C: Candidates shall be placed in this band if their adjusted scores are equal to or higher than seventy (70.00) percent but less than eighty (80.00) percent. 
Within each band, names of candidates shall be listed in alphabetical order. 
(c)  For combination open and promotional exams, promotional candidates who passed such examination shall be placed on the promotional eligible list if they achieve the minimum required score, as provided in section 9-36. 
(Ord. No. NS-1659, § 4, 11-15-82; Ord. No. 2034, § 17, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-46. - Same—Duration. 
Such eligible lists shall remain in effect for the time period listed below, unless within such period the executive director of human resources shall not be able to certify for appointment the number of persons required under the provisions of this chapter. 
(a)  Eligible lists for classifications designated as "local police/fire safety" members of the public employees' retirement system shall be in effect for two (2) years. 
(b)  Eligible lists for all classifications which are not included in subsection (a) above shall be in effect for six (6) months, but may be extended in six-month increments with the approval of the city manager to allow for a maximum life of list of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. NS-2034, § 18, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Secs. 9-47—9-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FILLING VACANCIES 
 
Sec. 9-60. - Eligible lists—promotional; removal of name of separated employee. 
The name of an employee who leaves the employment of the city, except through layoff, shall be removed from any promotional eligible list. 
(Code 1952, § 2222; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-61. - Same—Request for removal or reinstatement of name. 
An eligible, at any time, may request in writing that his or her name be withdrawn temporarily from the eligible list and placed on inactive status. Upon approval of the executive director of human resources such request shall be granted, and likewise, upon written request of the eligible, his or her name may be reinstated to active status during the life of the list. 
(Code 1952, § 2223; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-62. - Same—Consolidation. 
Two (2) eligible lists of the same type (open or promotional) for the same classification may be consolidated by the executive director of human resources by placing eligibles from an old list onto a new list in accordance with the procedures outlined in section 9-45. The names on the resulting (consolidated) list shall be certified in accordance with the procedures outlined in section 9-66. 
(Code 1952, § 2223.1; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 19, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-63. - Method of filling. 
Vacancies in the competitive service shall be filled from an eligible list if available, or by a temporary appointment for not longer than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days as specified in the charter. 
(Code 1952, § 2224; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 20, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-64. - Appointment—Eligible lists defined. 
Reemployment: A list which contains the names of individuals who were laid off from a classification as provided for in these rules and regulations. The list shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of an employee's layoff; or as otherwise specified in a current memorandum of understanding. 
Reappointment: A list which contains the names of individuals who had passed probation, separated in good standing from the civil service classification to which they have requested and have received approval to be reappointed, and have met all other criteria for placement described in section 9-114. Appointments from this list are at the discretion of the appointing authority. (See section 9-114, Reappointment) 
Transfer: A list which contains the names of individuals who request to transfer from the department in which they are working at the time of the request to the same classification in another department, as provided in section 9-111. 
Promotional: A list which contains the names of regular employees who have passed a promotional examination and who meet eligibility criteria in these rules and regulations. 
Open: A list which contains the names of individuals who are certified as being qualified for appointment to a civil service classification by passing an open, competitive examination. 
(Code 1952, § 2225; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 21, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-65, which pertained to request for certification and derived from Code 1952, § 2226 and Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957.  
Sec. 9-66. - Certification—Procedure. 
Upon receipt of the request from an appointing authority, the executive director of human resources shall certify, to the appointing authority, names in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If a reemployment list exists for the classification, one (1) name for each vacancy. 
(2)  If no reemployment list exists, names shall be certified as follows: 
(a)  By transfer list, then by reappointment list. If the combined total of candidates eligible for certification from these two (2) lists is less than five (5), candidates may be certified from a promotional list, if any, or an open list as shown below. 
(b)  For promotional-only appointments, the names of the candidates with the three (3) highest scores on the promotional eligible list. Except in the case of ties, the number of names to be certified from an active promotional list shall be two (2) more than the number of appointments to be made. 
In the event of ties, if there are three (3) or more candidates at the highest score, only those candidates shall be certified. If there are less than three (3) candidates at the highest score but three (3) or more candidates within the highest two (2) scores, then those candidates with the two (2) highest scores will be certified. 
If there are no ties at the first and second scores, then all candidates within the top three (3) scores will be certified. 
(c)  For open appointments, the number of names to be certified from the open eligible list may be four (4) more names than the number of appointments to be made. When the number of candidates certified in the highest band is less than five (5), the appointing authority may request the certification of the next lower band. If more than five (5) people are in the group from which an appointing authority is entitled to select, the appointing authority may review the applications of the candidates in that group and select a lesser number of candidates for certification whose qualifications best fit the needs of the position. 
(Code 1952, § 2227; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 22, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-67. - Appointments. 
The appointing authority may appoint, of the candidates certified, whichever one in his or her opinion is best qualified for the position. 
No candidate may be certified more than four (4) times from any eligible list resulting from any one (1) examination except candidates on open eligible lists, who may be certified more than four (4) times, at the discretion of the executive director of human resources, in keeping with the charter. 
If no eligible list for the classification exists, or if an existing list for the classification contains less than three (3) promotional candidates or five (5) nonpromotional candidates who are eligible and available for appointment, the executive director of human resources shall so notify the appointing authority who may select from the existing candidates or, after requesting a new recruitment, may make a temporary appointment to the vacancy. 
After making the selection, the appointing authority shall inform the executive director of human resources of the candidate appointed, the date that person will assume the duties of the position and the applicable rate of pay. After verification that the candidate has passed the required medical examination per section 9-8, and after verification of the execution of the oath of office, the executive director of human resources shall confirm the appointment. After confirmation of the appointment, the appointing authority shall enter the name of the employee on the employment rolls. 
(Code 1952, § 2228; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 5, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 23, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-67.1. - Exclusion of close relatives. 
If, in the opinion of an appointing authority, the appointment of a candidate to a position of employment under the jurisdiction of such appointing authority would result in a violation of the policy set forth in section 9-3.1, the appointing authority shall so notify the executive director of human resources, who shall exclude such candidate from the list of names certified to such appointing authority for such position. Any close relative of an appointing authority shall likewise be excluded from any list certified to such appointing authority. In the event a candidate is excluded pursuant to this section, the executive director of human resources shall certify to the appointing authority a list containing the names of all candidates who would have appeared on such list if the excluded candidate had never been a candidate for the subject position of employment. A candidate who is excluded pursuant to this section shall not be considered as having been certified from an eligible list for purposes of sections 9-5 or 9-67. 
(Ord. No. NS-2034, § 24, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-68. - Failure to appoint certified applicant. 
If, upon certification, an eligible declines appointment or neglects to report to the appointing authority for interview, the appointing authority shall notify the executive director of human resources. The executive director of human resources shall remove any eligible from the list for neglect to report within five (5) working days after notice has been sent by mail to the address on file, unless said eligible provides an explanation satisfactory to the executive director of human resources. 
In the case of a promotional-only appointment, after an eligible declines appointment and/or is removed from the eligible list, the executive director of human resources shall upon the request of appointing authority certify the next candidate on the list. In the case of an open appointment, after an eligible declines appointment and/or is removed from the list, if the number of eligible candidates is less than five (5), the executive director of human resources shall upon request of the appointing authority certify the next lower band. 
(Code 1952, § 2229; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. 994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 25, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-69. - Filling by temporary appointment. 
Temporary appointments may not be for a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the first day of such temporary appointment, nor may temporary appointments be made to any position a cumulative total of more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days in one (1) calendar year following the first day on which the position is filled by a temporary appointment. Such temporary appointment will be terminated when an employment list is prepared for the position. Temporary appointments shall be processed by the executive director of human resources for record keeping purposes and to conform with personnel policies and regulations. 
(Code 1952, § 2230; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 6, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-70. - Emergency appointments. 
Appointing officers filling positions in any class or grade created for a special or temporary purpose which will exist less than ninety (90) calendar days will obtain authority for their action from the city manager prior to such appointment. These appointments will be recorded in the personnel department. 
(Code 1952, § 2231; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-71. - Part-time positions in the excepted service. 
Part-time positions of twenty (20) regular hours per week employment, as outlined in the charter, will be processed by the executive director of human resources for record keeping purposes and to conform with personnel policies and regulations. 
(Code 1952, § 2232; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 6, 5-6-96; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Secs. 9-72—9-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROBATION 
 
Sec. 9-90. - Object of probationary period. 
The probationary period preceding regular appointment to a position in the civil service is an intrinsic part of the examination process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the effective adjustment of a new employee to a position, and for eliminating any probationary employee whose performance or personal qualifications do not meet the required standards of work. When an employee has been retained continuously in probationary status for the required period, the employee shall achieve permanent status. 
(Code 1952, § 2233; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 7, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-91. - Duration of probationary work test period. 
The probationary work test period shall be twelve (12) consecutive months from the date of appointment from a reappointment, promotional, or open eligible list. Absences and/or other periods of time when an employee is unable to perform the full range of duties of his or her position totaling fifteen (15) days or more during a probationary period may extend the probationary period the total length of time of such absences, at the discretion of the appointing authority. During such probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without right of a hearing before the personnel board. An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which the employee has been promoted shall be reinstated to the position from which the employee was promoted, unless the employee is dismissed from the service of the city in addition to rejection, in which event the employee shall have the right of a hearing before the personnel board as to such order of dismissal in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The appointing authority at his or her discretion may extend the duration of the probationary work test period for up to six (6) months with the specific reasons stated in writing to the employee. 
(Code 1952, § 2234; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1516, § 1, 12-3-79; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 8, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2034, § 26, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-92. - Probationary period performance appraisals. 
Performance appraisals will be prepared by the appointing authority every four (4) months during the probationary period and filed with the executive director of human resources. These reports will bear the statement that the employee is to be retained or rejected. The final report will be filed five (5) working days prior to the end of the probationary period. 
(Code 1952, § 2235; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-93. - Probationary employee rejection. 
A rejection during the probationary period will be effective as of the date of rejection by the appointing authority. Within ten (10) days of the rejection, the appointing authority will file a statement with the executive director of human resources, stating the reason for rejection and giving the effective date, which shall not be later than the last day of the probationary period. In case of separation because of rejection during the probationary period, the probationer concerned will be notified immediately in writing, and a copy of such notice will be filed with the statement furnished the executive director of human resources. 
(Code 1952, § 2236; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-94. - Promotional probationary reports. 
Employees serving under probation as a result of promotion will be the subject of the same appointment, performance, rejection and other reports as required in the case of other probationary appointees during their probationary period. 
(Code 1952, § 2237; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-95. - Part-time reference. 
Whenever reference is made to a required number of days, months, or years for full-time civil service employees in this article, an equivalent number of hours will be substituted to satisfy an equivalent requirement for part-time civil service employees as defined in section 9-2. 
(Ord. No. NS-2285, § 7, 5-6-96)  
Secs. 9-96—9-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEMOTION, TRANSFER, RESIGNATION, REDUCTION-IN-FORCE, LAYOFF, ETC. 
 
Sec. 9-110. - Demotion. 
Employees having regular status may be demoted for disciplinary reasons or at their own request. Demotions, in either case, shall be within the department in which the employee is serving at the time of demotion and if such vacancy does not exist, demotion cannot be used as a disciplinary measure. In the event an employee requests demotion it must be for a vacancy for which there is no re-employment list. Requests for voluntary demotion must be signed by the employee, approved by the appointing authority, and subject to approval of the city manager before being effective. The city manager, prior to approval of a request for demotion, may conduct such an investigation as he or she deems proper to insure that the request was not submitted under compulsion and that the person demoted possesses the minimum qualifications for the new position if he or she has not previously qualified for the lower position by examinations. 
(Code 1952, § 2238; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-111. - Transfer. 
An employee may be transferred by the city manager at any time from one (1) position to another in the same class. Transfers shall not be used to effect a promotion, demotion, or reduction, each of which may be accomplished only as provided elsewhere in these rules. No transfer shall be effected between positions in different departments except with the written consent of both appointing powers. 
(Code 1952, § 2239; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2239 of the 1952 Code, § 9-111 herein.  
Sec. 9-112. - Resignation—Submitting. 
Any employee voluntarily leaving the employment of the city shall at least two (2) weeks prior to separation, submit a written resignation to his or her department head with the effective date and reason for resignation. Failure to furnish the written resignation within the time stated in this section may be cause for denying the employee reappointment privileges. Resignations shall be forwarded, by the appointing authority, to the executive director of human resources. 
(Code 1952, § 2240; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, amended § 2240 of the 1952 Code, § 9-112 herein, by substituting "may" for "shall" in the provisions pertaining to failure to furnish written resignation.  
Sec. 9-113. - Same—Withdrawal. 
The city manager may permit the withdrawal of a resignation only upon written request filed within ten (10) working days prior to its effective date, and provided such request for withdrawal bears the favorable recommendation of the appointing officer. 
(Code 1952, § 2240.1; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2240.1 of the 1952 Code, § 9-113 herein.  
Sec. 9-114. - Reappointment. 
Upon request, within one (1) year of the separation of a regular employee who resigned in good standing, the city manager may place his or her name on a reappointment list, to be certified as provided in these rules. This list shall expire on the anniversary of the employee's separation date. An eligible, if appointed from a reappointment list shall serve a regular probationary period and shall be considered a new employee for seniority, vacation, and sick leave purposes, provided, however, that the eligible may be reappointed at his or her former salary step. 
(Code 1952, § 2241; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-115. - Reversion to competitive service. 
When an employee is entitled to reversion to his or her former position in the competitive service from the excepted service, the executive director of human resources will notify the appointing officer in the department from which the employee transferred to the excepted service. The latter, in restoring the person to the former position, as prescribed in the charter, will provide the required vacant position, if it does not exist, by means of lay-off or demotion, as outlined in other sections of these rules and regulations. 
(Code 1952, § 2242; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-116. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-116, which pertained to reinstatement after military service and derived from Code 1952, § 2243 and Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957.  
Sec. 9-117. - Reduction-in-force. 
When it becomes necessary because of lack of work, lack of funds, or other sufficient reason, to reduce the staff of any city office, activity or department, the reduction shall be accomplished by laying off the employee or employees with the least amount of service, including temporary appointees, that have been appointed in the class, until the necessary reduction has been made. Vacancies in the lowest class, resulting from such lay-off, shall be filled by the employee or employees last appointed to the next higher class, and those vacant positions filled by the employee or employees in the next succeeding higher class and so on until all vacant positions have been filled. Re-employment shall be in reverse order of any lay-off or demotion made under the terms of this section and prior to any other appointments. 
(Code 1952, § 2244; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 8, 5-6-96)  
Sec. 9-118. - Suspensions; demotions; dismissals. 
(a)  Right to exercise the disciplinary and dismissal powers hereinafter provided is vested respectively in the officers of the city who have the power of appointment as to any position in the personnel system. 
(b)  Except as specified in subparagraph (d), any employee serving a probationary period in a position in the civil service shall be subject to suspension without pay for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, demotion or dismissal, and the employee so disciplined or discharged shall not have a right of appeal, except that an employee who held regular status in some other position or employment included within the civil service immediately prior to his appointment to probationary status shall not be discharged without written notice of charges, an opportunity to answer, a written decision as hereinafter provided and right of appeal to the personnel board. 
(c)  Except as specified in subparagraph (d), any employee, other than one serving a probationary period, holding a position in the civil service shall be subject to suspension without pay for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or to demotion, or to dismissal subject to a right to appeal to the personnel board in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article. However, such appeal shall not stay the imposition of suspension, demotion or dismissal following the written decision of the appointing authority. 
(d)  Each or any of said actions relating to suspension, demotion, or dismissal may be taken by the officer having power of appointment to the position for reasonable and sufficient cause; provided, however, that no employee who is exempt from the requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act shall be subject to suspension without pay for any period of less than one (1) week. 
(e)  Each such employee shall have ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written decision of the appointing authority in which to file a notice requesting a hearing before the personnel board. Such request for a hearing shall be filed with the executive director of human resources. If a hearing is requested, the personnel board shall thereupon set a date for hearing the matter at its earliest convenience. Hearing procedures shall be informal, and the rules of evidence generally applicable to administrative proceedings shall apply. 
Such employee shall have an opportunity at such hearing to be heard in person, or by counsel, and the right to subpoena witnesses. Except as otherwise provided by law, all hearings held under the provisions of this section shall be open to the public. 
(f)  The personnel board shall make written findings which shall state as to each charge whether or not such charge is sustained. The personnel board shall also set forth in writing its conclusions and recommendations based upon such findings, and within ten (10) days after concluding the hearing, it shall certify its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to the officer from whose action the appeal was taken, and to the city manager and the city council. 
(g)  If, with respect to a suspension, demotion, or dismissal, the personnel board shall conclude that the employee charged was not guilty of the act or omission resulting in such suspension, demotion, or dismissal, a recommendation by it of reinstatement without loss of pay shall be binding upon the appointing authority, who forthwith shall order such reinstatement. In the event that the personnel board shall conclude that the employee was guilty of the act or omission resulting in such suspension, demotion, or dismissal but that the penalty was not warranted under the circumstances, the personnel board may review the severity and appropriateness of the punishment. A recommendation by it of a greater or lesser punishment or of reinstatement with or without loss of pay shall be binding upon the appointing authority, who forthwith shall order the same. 
If, with respect to a suspension, demotion or dismissal, the personnel board concludes that the employee was guilty of the act or omission resulting in such suspension, demotion or dismissal, and that such punishment was warranted, such decision shall be final. 
(h)  Vacancies created under this section may be filled by the appointing authority by temporary appointment pending the completion of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(i)  A reduction in pay shall be treated as a demotion under this section, unless the reduction in pay is part of a plan of reclassification of positions or of a plan to reduce salaries and wages in connection with a general economy or curtailment program, or is the result of a finding by the appointing authority that the employee's performance does not justify the continuance of a level of pay that is dependent upon meritorious service. A failure to grant an increase in pay at a time when an increase would otherwise have been granted as a part of a plan to increase salaries and wages throughout the city service shall not be treated as a demotion under this section. 
(j)  The personnel board may adopt procedural rules to govern the conduct of its hearings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1659, § 9, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2208E, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. NS-2208, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2285, § 9, 5-6-96; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. NS-2208E, adopted November 15, 1993, made the changes codified in § 9-118 by § 1 of Ord. No. NS-2208E (concerning the Fair Labor Standards Act) retroactive to April 15, 1986.  
Sec. 9-118.1. - Procedural requirements prior to suspension, demotion or dismissal. 
No employee holding a position in the civil service who has served a probationary period for the position held by such employee shall be subject to suspension, demotion or dismissal, unless prior thereto such employee has received: 
(1)  Notice of the proposed action and of the grounds for such action; 
(2)  A written copy of the charges, which charges shall be separately stated, and grounds for such charges; 
(3)  A reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10) days, unless the appointing authority authorizes a longer time, to answer the charges; 
(4)  A written decision on the answer at the earliest practicable date. 
Examination of witnesses, trial, or hearing is not required, but may be provided in the discretion of the appointing authority. Copies of the charges, the notice of the action, the answer, the reasons for and the order of removal or suspension without pay, and also the reasons for the actions taken shall be made a part of the records of the city, and, on request, shall be furnished to the individual affected and to the personnel board. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 1, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 10, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.2. - Notice of proposed adverse action. 
Except as provided in section 9-118.4, infra, an employee against whom disciplinary action is pending is entitled to reasonable advance written notice stating any and all reasons, specifically and in detail, for the proposed action. The material on which the notice is based and which is relied upon to support the reasons in that notice, including, but not limited to, statements of witnesses, documents, and investigative reports or extracts therefrom, shall be assembled and made available to the employee for his or her review and copying. The notice shall inform the employee when and where he or she may review such material. Material which cannot be disclosed to the employee may not be used to support the reasons in the notice. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 2, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 11, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.3. - Employee's answer. 
Except as provided in section 9-118.4, infra, an employee is entitled to a reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10) days unless the appointing authority authorizes a longer time, to answer a notice of proposed disciplinary action. The time to be allowed depends on the facts and circumstances of the case, and shall be sufficient to afford the employee ample opportunity to review the material relied on by the appointing authority to support the reasons in the notice and to prepare an answer. If the employee answers, the appointing authority shall consider the answer in reaching a decision. The employee is entitled to answer personally, in writing, or both personally and in writing. The right to answer personally includes the right to answer orally in person by being given a reasonable opportunity to make any representations which the employee believes might sway the final decision in his or her case. When the employee requests an opportunity to answer personally, the agency shall make a representative or representatives available to hear the answer. The representative or representatives designated to hear and answer shall be persons who have authority either to make a final decision on the proposed adverse action or to recommend what final decision should be made. As used herein, the noun "answer" shall be deemed to include such statements, affidavits, declarations, or other evidentiary matter as the employee may wish to submit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 3, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.4. - Exceptions to the notice period and opportunity to answer. 
Advance written notice and opportunity to answer are not necessary in the case of suspension, dismissal or demotion of an employee for any reason other than those grounds for disciplinary action that are specified in section 9-118. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 4, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-1659, § 12, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.5. - The duty status during notice period. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, an employee against whom disciplinary action is proposed is entitled to be retained in an active duty status during the notice period. When circumstances are such that the retention of the employee in an active duty status in his position may result in damage to city property or may be detrimental to the interests of the city or injurious to the employee, other workers or the general public, the appointing authority may temporarily assign the employee to duties in which these conditions do not exist or place him or her on administrative leave. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 5, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.6. - Notice of adverse decision. 
Each employee against whom disciplinary action is pending is entitled to notice of the appointing authority's decision at the earliest practicable date. The appointing authority shall deliver the notice of decision to the employee at or before the time when the action will be effective. The notice shall be in writing, be dated, and inform the employee of the following: 
(1)  Which of the reasons in the notice of proposed adverse action have been sustained and which have not been sustained. 
(2)  The right to appeal to the personnel board. 
(3)  The time limit for appealing to and requesting a hearing from the personnel board. 
(Ord. No. NS-1319, § 6, 11-15-76; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-118.7. - Reasonable and sufficient cause. 
For purposes of section 1000 of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana, the term "reasonable and sufficient cause" for suspension, demotion or dismissal shall include, but not be limited by, each of the following causes: 
(a)  Fraud in securing appointment. 
(b)  Incompetency. 
(c)  Inefficiency. 
(d)  Inexcusable neglect of duty. 
(e)  Insubordination. 
(f)  Dishonesty. 
(g)  Drunkenness on duty. 
(h)  Intemperance. 
(i)  Addiction to the use of, or abuse of, controlled substances. 
(j)  Unauthorized absence from duty. 
(k)  Conviction of a felony or conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. A plea of guilty, or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere, to a charge of a felony or any offense involving moral turpitude is deemed to be a conviction within the meaning of this subsection. 
(l)  Immorality. 
(m)  Discourteous treatment of the public or other employees. 
(n)  Improper political activity. 
(o)  Willful disobedience. 
(p)  Misuse of city property. 
(q)  Violation of any city departmental or agency rule. 
(r)  Violation of section 9-16 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code relating to outside employment. 
(s)  Other failure of good behavior, either during or outside of duty hours, which is of such a nature that it causes discredit to the appointing authority or the city. 
(t)  Unlawful discrimination, including harassment, on the basis of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical handicap, marital status, sex or age, against the public or other employee(s) while acting in the capacity of a city employee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2034, § 27, 1-2-90; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-119. - Layoffs. 
All layoffs within the competitive service occasioned by the abolishment of a position, the combination of duties of two (2) or more positions, or the reduction in number of employees in a given class shall be governed by seniority in service and performance. Reemployment shall be in the reverse order of layoffs. 
(Ord. No. NS-1659, § 13, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-120. - Medical examination and proceedings thereon; demotion, transfer or dismissal. 
(a)  The appointing authority may at any time require an employee to submit to a medical examination by a physician or physicians designated by the appointing authority to evaluate the fitness or capacity of the employee to perform the work of his or her current position. Prior to requiring such medical examination, the appointing authority shall, in writing, state the reasons for seeking an evaluation. The employee may be placed on administrative leave with pay until medical clearance is obtained. 
(b)  Fees for the examination and for the services of medical specialists or technicians, if necessary, shall be paid by the city. The employee may submit medical or other evidence to the examining physician or to the appointing authority. The examining physician shall make a written report of the examination to the appointing authority. The appointing authority shall provide a copy to the employee or to the physician designated by the employee. 
(c)  When the appointing authority, after considering the conclusions of the medical examination and other pertinent information, concludes that the employee is unable to perform the work of his or her present position, but is able to perform the work of another position, the appointing authority may demote or transfer the employee to another position within the same classification or offer the employee a voluntary demotion, provided there is a vacant position in a lower level classification within the classification series. Any voluntary demotion will be according to section 9-110. The employee demoted or transferred pursuant to this section shall receive the maximum of the salary range of the class to which he or she is demoted or transferred, provided that the salary is not greater than the salary he or she received at the time of his or her demotion or transfer. 
(d)  When the appointing authority, after considering the conclusions of the medical examination provided for by this section or medical reports from the employee's physician and other pertinent information, concludes that the employee is unable to perform the work of his or her present position, or any other vacant position within the classification series in the agency, and the employee is not eligible or waives the right to retire for disability, the appointing power may take action to suspend or dismiss the employee. 
(e)  The appointing authority may demote, transfer, suspend or dismiss an employee under this section without requiring the employee to submit to a medical examination, when the appointing authority relies upon a written statement submitted to the appointing authority by the employee as to the employee's condition or upon medical reports submitted to the appointing authority by the employee. 
(f)  Upon the petition of the employee who was dismissed, demoted or transferred in accordance with this section, the employee shall be placed on the reappointment list for his or her previously held position in accordance with section 9-114 if it is determined by the director that the employee is no longer incapacitated for duty in such position. The employee shall provide satisfactory proof to the appointing authority of fitness for duty prior to being placed on a reappointment list. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any right to appeal to the personnel board as provided in section 9-118. 
(Ord. No. NS-2190, § 1, 4-5-93; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Secs. 9-121—9-128. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LEAVES, HOLIDAYS AND ABSENCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-129. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to full-time regular employees not covered by a memorandum of understanding and/or a resolution of the city council. However, in the case where a memorandum of understanding and/or a resolution is silent on a specific issue the code provision shall prevail. Expired memorandums of understanding shall not be considered as "silent" on specific issues. 
(Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-130. - Regular vacation period. 
Regular vacation with pay is granted to each full-time permanent or probationary employee at the rate of fifteen (15) working days for each completed year of service to be taken in the calendar year following the year in which it is earned, except as provided elsewhere in these rules. An employee who has completed less than one (1) year's service during the calendar year shall receive a proportionate fraction in accordance with the amount of service to his or her credit during the year; provided, however, no employee shall be entitled to or receive payment for any vacation until he or she has completed six (6) months of continuous service. Absence on sick leave for a period in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days shall not be considered as service for vacation accrual purposes. 
Sworn members of the police department and uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the normal five-day work week schedule are granted regular vacation on the same basis as other full-time employees, as set forth in the preceding paragraph. 
Uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the twenty-four-hour shift schedule are granted regular vacation on the same basis as other full-time employees, except that their standard work unit is a working day of twelve (12) hours. Therefore, each sworn fire department employee in this category is granted regular vacation at an annual rate of fifteen (15) twelve-hour working days. In those cases when an employee is transferred between twenty-four-hour shift and normal five-day work week schedules: the employee's earned vacation, which is accrued in hours, shall be converted to agree with the number of working hours per day in the currently assigned schedule. 
(Code 1952, § 2252; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-577, 4-16-62; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69 ; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, amended § 2252 of the 1952 Code, § 9-130 herein, by adding the provisions pertaining to absence on sick leave. Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, amended § 9-130 by including probationary employees in the application of the provisions and revising the provisions relative to the vacation period for fire department members.  
Sec. 9-131. - Computing regular vacation. 
In computing regular vacation, each municipal holiday that occurs during the vacation, and that falls on a day which the employee would have worked had he or she not been on vacation, shall be deducted from the computation so that one (1) additional day of regular vacation shall be allowed to the employee unless departmental practice provides some other manner of compensating for municipal holidays. Should an employee be confined to a hospital for sickness or injury while on authorized vacation, each full day of such confinement, when confirmed by a physician's statement and upon department head approval, may be deducted from the computation of vacation expended and charged against the employee's accumulated sick leave. 
No employee may accumulate more than the equivalent of one (1) regular vacation period from the previous year, and vacation not taken beyond that amount is forfeited. A regular vacation period is defined as the maximum of vacation earned in a calendar year as provided in section 9-130 of this Code. No employee shall have a right to accumulate or split his or her vacation, but the same may be allowed or required by the department head. The time at which an employee shall take his or her vacation shall be determined by his or her department head, with due regard for the wishes of the employee and particular regard for the needs of the service. It is the policy of the city to grant employees vacations in order to provide them a break in their regular work schedule. In the administration of the provisions of this section the department head shall be guided by this stated purpose and he or she must approve in writing any accumulation of regular vacation. 
(Pers. Rules, § 2253, Ord. No. NS-577, § 1, 4-16-62 ; NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, amended § 9-131 by adding the provisions relative to hospital confinement while on authorized vacation.  
Sec. 9-132. - Longevity vacation. 
Each regular employee is granted additional working days of vacation leave with pay for each completed year of full-time, continuous city service as set forth in the following table. This additional vacation shall be designated longevity vacation. 
		Hourly Equivalent 
Completed 
Years 	Additional 
Days 	Regular 
Employees 	24-Hour 
Shift 
Employees 
6 	½ 	4 	6 
7 	1 	8 	12 
8 	1½ 	12 	18 
9 	2 	16 	24 
10 	2½ 	20 	30 
11 	3 	24 	36 
12 	3½ 	28 	42 
13 	4 	32 	48 
14 	4½ 	36 	54 
15 	5 	40 	60 
16 	6 	48 	72 
17 	7 	56 	84 
18 	8 	64 	96 
19 	9 	72 	108 
20 	10 	80 	120 
 
No employee becomes eligible for longevity vacation until completion of the sixth year of continuous service, and each employee continues to earn the maximum of ten (10) working days of longevity vacation for each completed year of service in excess of twenty (20) years. For uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the twenty-four (24) hour shift schedule, the working day granted is a twelve (12) hour day. 
A period of earlier service does not apply toward longevity vacation accumulation when an employee has had a break in continuous service, unless the break in service is concluded by reappointment, as provided in section 9-114, or by reemployment within two (2) years at a higher level classification in the former occupational field. Leave of absence without pay, as provided in sections 9-141 or 9-164, does not constitute a break in continuous service as used in this section; however, the leave of absence period shall not be applied toward the accumulation of longevity vacation. Absence on military leave followed by reinstatement does not constitute a break in service, and the period of absence on such military leave shall be applied toward the accumulation of longevity vacation. 
(Code 1952, § 2254; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69 ; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71 ; Ord. No. NS-1111, § 2, 3-20-72; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Editor's note— Sec. 9-132 is derived from and has been amended from time to time by the ordinances indicated in the history note following the section. Editorial analysis is omitted due to the nature and extent of amendment.  
Sec. 9-133. - Limitation on vacation. 
No employee is granted and no employee shall be allowed to take any vacation leave with pay in excess of fifty (50) working days in any one (1) year by any combination of the vacations in these rules and regulations granted. Further, no employee may accumulate more than the equivalent of one (1) longevity vacation period, and the equivalent of one (1) regular vacation period, from a previous year, and vacation not taken beyond that amount is forfeited. Therefore, the maximum vacation that an employee with less than ten (10) years' service could accumulate is thirty (30) working days, and only an employee with more than twenty (20) years' service could accumulate and take the authorized maximum of fifty (50) working days in any one (1) year. 
(Code 1952, § 2255 ; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-577, 4-16-62; Ord. No. NS-904, § 1, 12-4-67 ; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69 ; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-134. - Examination leave. 
Employees participating in examinations for positions in the competitive service of the city will be granted leave with pay for the time required, without loss of any accrued vacation. 
(Code 1952, § 2274; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-135. - Holidays—Regular employees. 
Legal holidays observed by city employees shall be January 1, the third Monday in February in memory of George Washington's birthday, the last Monday in May in commemoration of Memorial Day, July 4, the first Monday in September, November 11, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day, the last working day occurring immediately prior to December 25, and December 25 and every day proclaimed by the mayor as a holiday for city employees. Any holiday which falls on Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. Any holiday which falls on a Saturday will be observed on the Friday preceding the holiday. 
(Code 1952, § 2267; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-577, 4-16-62; Ord. No. NS-787, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-873, § 1, 3-20-67; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-1044, § 1, 10-19-70; Ord. No. NS-1137, § 1, 10-2-72; Ord. No. NS-1459.1, § 1, 10-16-78; Ord. No. NS-1459, 11-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-136. - Same—Shift personnel. 
Full-time employees whose regularly scheduled days off are other than Saturday and Sunday shall be entitled to holiday benefits equivalent to those provided in section 9-135. Except as otherwise provided in this division, and with the specific exceptions explained below, employees who do not take holidays as they occur shall be entitled to nine (9) working days off during the year in lieu of holidays. Such substitute holidays shall be scheduled by the department head, normally during the same month that the holiday is observed by other city employees. An employee entitled to time off in lieu of holidays shall receive that time off in proportion to his or her service at full pay in such capacity during the year. 
The following exceptions apply: 
(1)  Sworn members of the police department shall be entitled to eight (8) working days off during the year in lieu of holidays until July 1, 1973, on which date they shall be entitled to nine (9) working days off during the year in lieu of holidays. 
(2)  For uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the twenty-four (24) hour shift schedule, the working day granted is a twelve (12) hour day and these employees shall be entitled to eight (8) working days off during the year in lieu of holidays. 
(Code 1952, § 2268; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-577, 4-16-62; Ord. No. NS-787, § 1, 3-15-65; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-1003, § 1, 2-16-70; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1137, § 1, 10-2-72; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-137, which pertained to Good Friday and derived from Code 1952, § 2267.1; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, adopted Sept. 3, 1957; and Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69.  
Sec. 9-138. - Bereavement leave. 
An employee shall be entitled to three (3) days' leave without loss of pay in case of death of a member of the employee's immediate family. Such leave is designated as bereavement leave. "Immediate family" as used in this section is limited to: 
(1)  Any relative by blood or marriage who is a member of the employee's household; 
(2)  Any parent, spouse, child, brother or sister of the employee, regardless of residence; 
(3)  Any grandparent or parent-in-law of the employee whose death requires the presence of the employee. 
(Code 1952, § 2266.1; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2266.1 of the 1952 Code, § 9-138 herein.  
Sec. 9-139. - Absence—Unauthorized. 
Absence from duty without leave for a consecutive number of working hours equal to the number of working hours in the employee's normal work week, shall be deemed a resignation from the service; provided, if upon return the person so absenting himself or herself makes an explanation satisfactory to his or her department head of the cause of the absence, the department head may restore him or her to the position, with the city manager's approval. 
Prior to invoking this section for employees who have achieved regular status, the affected employee shall be provided written notice by United States Mail, return receipt requested, of the department head's intention to invoke this section and stating the facts supporting the intention. Such notice shall also state that the employee has a right to respond either personally, in writing, or both, to the department head within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice if the employee desires to challenge the accuracy of the facts stated in the notice. 
In the event the employee responds and the department head determines to proceed under this section, the department head shall request that the clerk of the council appoint a hearing officer to determine the accuracy of the facts. The hearing officer's factual determination shall be final and binding on the department head and employee. 
(Code 1952, § 2256; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Prior to amendment by Ord. No. NS-1904, § 2, § 9-139 provided that absence from duty without leave for 5 consecutive working days would be deemed a resignation.  
Sec. 9-140. - Same—Authorized—Maximums. 
Absence without pay not to exceed five (5) consecutive working days, or two and one-half (2½) consecutively scheduled working shifts for uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the twenty-four (24) hour shift schedule, may be authorized by an employee's department head. Absence without pay not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days may be authorized by the department head with the approval of the city manager. Such absences may be authorized only if in the judgment of the department head they serve the best interest of the city. 
(Pers. Rules, § 2256.1; Ord. No. NS-326, § 1, 6-16-58; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, amended § 9-140 by adding provisions relative to absences without pay for 2½ consecutively scheduled working shifts for uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the 24 hour shift schedule.  
Sec. 9-141. - Same—Same—Granting. 
Upon receipt of a written request from an employee having regular status and action by the appropriate department head recommending approval of the request, the city manager may grant a leave of absence not to exceed six (6) months for illness of the employee, or of a member of the employee's immediate family residing in the employee's household, requires that the employee move from the vicinity of the city as a remedial health measure and a designated physician indicates that such removal from the city is necessary and will not be required for longer than six (6) months. 
(Code 1952, § 2269; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2269 of the 1952 Code, § 9-141 herein.  
Sec. 9-142. - Same—Same—Return from. 
An employee returning to duty with the city shall inform the department head and executive director of human resources of his or her intention at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration of the six (6) months period or shorter period if the full six (6) months is not taken. Upon receipt of such notice, the department head concerned will take steps necessary to restore the employee to the former or comparable position. 
(Code 1952, § 2270; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-143. - Military leave—Proof of orders; reinstatement. 
An employee shall be granted military leave if he or she furnishes the executive director of human resources satisfactory proof of his or her orders to report for duty. Upon return and upon showing of proof of actual service pursuant to such orders, he or she will be reinstated as provided by law. 
(Code 1952, § 2271; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-144. - Same—Temporary. 
Members of the reserve forces of the United States, or the National Guard, granted temporary leave when ordered to duty, in accordance with the Military and Veterans Code, will be granted leave with pay for not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days in each calendar year after one (1) year's service with the city, upon presenting satisfactory proof of orders to and from such temporary active duties. 
(Code 1952, § 2272; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2272 of the 1952 Code, § 9-144 herein.  
Sec. 9-145. - Jury and witness leave. 
When an employee is called to serve as a juror or witness in any court action, he or she shall be allowed leave for the time actually required for such service, without loss of pay or loss of accumulated vacation time. Each employee called for such service shall present to his or her department head for examination the subpoena calling him/her to such service and shall pay into the city treasury the fees collected for such service, with the exception of reimbursement for transportation expenses, if any. 
(Code 1952, § 2273; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, reenacted § 2273 of the 1952 Code, § 9-145 herein.  
Sec. 9-146. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 1994, set out provisions repealing § 9-146, which pertained to special shift personnel regular vacation/holidays and derived from Ord. No. NS-1094, § 1, 11-15-71.  
Secs. 9-147—9-159. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SICK LEAVE 
 
Sec. 9-160. - Definition. 
Sick leave is construed to mean absence because of an illness that will prevent the employee from performing the duties of his or her position or exposure to a contagious disease requiring retention in quarantine. Sick leave granted for purposes other than illness of the employee concerned shall be included in the sick leave authorized in section 9-163. 
(Code 1952, § 2263; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-161. - Authorized only when necessary. 
Sick leave shall not be considered as a right which an employee may use at his discretion, but shall be allowed only in case of necessity and actual sickness or disability. 
(Code 1952, § 2257; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-162. - Accrual. 
An employee shall be entitled to one (1) day of sick leave for each full calendar month of service during which he or she is employed by the city with pay; provided, however, any absence on sick leave for a period in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days shall not be considered as service for sick leave accrual purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 2259; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-163. - Limit. 
The maximum total accumulation of sick leave with pay shall be two hundred (200) working days. Sick leave usage of less than a full day shall be charged in minimum increments of one-quarter (¼) day. For the eight (8) hour working day the minimum charge shall be two (2) hours, with fractional usage rounded upward to the next higher multiple of two (2). 
Uniformed members of the fire department assigned to the twenty-four (24) hour shift schedule, whose standard work unit is a twelve (12) hour day, shall be charged sick leave at the rate of one (1) day for each twelve (12) hour absence. For these employees, the minimum sick leave increment of one-quarter (¼) day is three (3) hours, with fractional usage rounded upward to the next higher multiple of three (3). In those cases when an employee is transferred between twenty-four (24) hour shift and normal five (5) day work week schedules, the employee's earned sick leave, which is accrued in hours, shall be converted to agree with the number of working hours per day in the currently assigned schedule. 
(Pers. Rules, § 2260; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-794, § 1, 4-5-65; Ord. No. NS-1003, § 2, 2-16-70 ; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1137, § 1, 10-2-72; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1137, § 1, amended § 9-163 to read as herein set out. Sec. 2 of said ordinance provided that said amendment "… shall become effective on December 1, 1972 and shall not apply prior to said date". For the provisions effective through November 1972, see the legislation cited in the history note passed prior to October 2, 1972.  
Sec. 9-164. - Extended. 
The city manager may grant leave up to six (6) months without pay to an employee who has exhausted all of his or her accrued sick leave if the city physician or a licensed physician designated by the city manager indicates that the employee will be sufficiently recovered to return to his or her employment within a six (6) month period. Prior to the expiration of the additional time, the employee may return to his or her position provided that he or she has a certificate from one of the above mentioned physicians stating that the employee is able to perform all the duties of his or her position without qualification. In addition to the above, the city manager may grant a further extension not to exceed a total of one (1) year without pay. 
(Code 1952, § 2261; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-165. - Extension by use of vacation. 
After an employee's sick leave has been exhausted he/she may be granted permission to take any earned vacation he/she may have accrued. 
(Code 1952, § 2264; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-166. - Notice. 
The employee taking sick leave shall notify his/her department head either prior to or within four (4) hours after the time set for beginning his/her duties, or as otherwise established by departmental regulations. When the absence is more than three (3) consecutive working days, the employee shall present to his/her department head a physician's certificate stating the cause of illness and that, in his/her opinion, the employee could not report to work because of such illness or injury and that the employee is sufficiently recovered to safely return to work. Such certificate shall be transmitted to the executive director of human resources with the report of the return of the employee to work. 
(Code 1952, § 2262; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94; Ord. No. NS-2946 , § 3, 6-5-18)  
Sec. 9-167. - Denial. 
No employee shall be entitled to sick leave with pay while absent from duty because of sickness or injury purposely self-inflicted or caused by willful misconduct; or, sickness or disability sustained while on leave of absence without pay; or sickness or disability sustained while engaged in employment other than employment by the city, for monetary gain or other compensation, or by reason of engaging in business or activity for monetary gain or other compensation. 
(Code 1952, § 2265; Ord. No. NS-277, § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-1094, § 2, 11-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-168. - Industrial injury leave. 
(a)  This section applies to any full-time, regular employee who is compelled to be absent from duty as a result of any injury or disease which comes under the State of California Workers' Compensation Insurance and Safety Act (referred to hereinafter as the "Act"), and is deemed compensable; except that this section shall not apply to any such employee who is entitled to leave of absence without loss of salary under California Labor Code § 4850. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, industrial injury compensation will be paid at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the employee's normal gross salary for all full work days lost, for a period or periods equal in total to not more than six (6) months and occurring during a twelve-month period commencing with the initial date of absence due to the injury or disease. The twelve-month period may be extended to eighteen (18) months by the employee's appointing authority if the appointing authority determines that the city can accommodate the employee's return to work in a limited hour capacity of twenty (20) hours or more per week, if the employee obtains a release for such limited work from a physician designated by the city, and if the employee does return to work on such basis. In such event, absences for less than a full work day shall be eligible for industrial injury compensation pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  Sick leave shall be applied to the absence of the employee as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(3) of this section, deduction shall be made from the employee's accumulated sick leave for the first three (3) days that the employee is absent due to an injury or disease compensable under the Act unless the period of such absence equals or exceeds fourteen (14) days. In the event the period of such absence does equal or exceed fourteen (14) days, sick leave shall be reaccredited to accrued sick leave, and all days absence due to such injury or disease which had been accounted as sick leave shall be converted to industrial injury leave. 
(2)  If the employee has no accumulated leave, it shall be advanced and deduction shall be made from any subsequently earned until the total amount advanced has been recovered. If the employee should leave the employment of the city prior to recovery of the sick leave advanced, adjustment shall be made of any final paycheck, if practicable. 
(3)  In the event that the injury or disease results in immediate hospitalization, no sick leave will be applicable and industrial injury leave will commence immediately. 
(d)  Any period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from his or her position by reason of an injury or disease for which the employee is entitled to receive compensation shall not be considered a break in his or her continuous service for the purpose of his or her right to salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation, or seniority. 
(Code 1952, § 2266; Ord. No. NS-277 § 2, 9-3-57; Ord. No. NS-994, § 1, 12-1-69; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
Sec. 9-169. - Payment for unused sick leave. 
Upon retirement, an employee who meets the following conditions is eligible for payment for a portion of the unused sick leave which he or she has accumulated: (1) the employee has been credited for retirement purposes with a minimum of ten (10) years of cumulative service with the City of Santa Ana; and (2) retirement under the city's contract with the Public Employees' Retirement System of the State of California shall be a service retirement, as distinguished from a disability retirement. Such employee shall be entitled to payment for one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total sick leave benefit credited to his or her account upon his or her effective date of retirement and at the rate of pay, effective on that date. The maximum limit for this payment shall not be affected by changes in the maximum limit of sick leave accumulation as set forth in section 9-163 herein, and shall remain fixed at one-third ( 1/3 ) of one hundred sixty (160) (or 53.33 days). 
Payment may be received in either a lump sum amount; or by request of the employee, payment may be deferred and distributed in equal proportions on an annual basis for a period of up to five (5) years. A lump sum payment shall be made to the beneficiaries of any eligible employee whose death occurs while an active employee of the city in the amount of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total sick leave benefit credited to the employee's account at the time of his or her death and at the rate of pay effective on that date. 
(Ord. No. NS-1111 § 1, 3-20-72; Ord. No. NS-1137, § 1, 10-2-72; Ord. No. NS-2232, § 1, 9-19-94)  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2416, § 2, adopted Jan. 3, 2000 repealed in its entirety the provisions of article VII of this chapter which encompassed §§ 9-170—9-183, §§ 9-185—9-189, § 9-194 and pertained to overtime work. For a detailed history of the provisions of former §§ 9-170—9-183, §§ 9-185—9-189, and § 9-194, please refer to the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 9-170—9-194. - Reserved.  
Chapter 10 - CRIMES AND MISCELLANEOUS LAW ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Duty of city attorney to prosecute, § 703(d). 
Cross reference— Prohibited conduct in parks and recreation centers, § 31-2 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city attorney to prosecute, 72193, Gov. Code; provisions relative to the municipal court, § 74000 et seq.; authority to make and enforce police regulations, § 11, Art. 11, Const. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Abandoned wells; to be capped. 
An abandoned oil or water well is any such well not actually and continuously used and any well, whether being used or not, the mouth or entrance of which is left open. 
A person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls any water well or oil well and abandons such well, and a person who owns, possesses or controls any premises on which an abandoned water well or oil well exists, shall cap or otherwise securely cover the mouth or entrance to the well. The capping or covering shall be so constructed and installed as will prevent any human being from falling into the well or from suffering any bodily injury, through accident or inadvertence, by reason of the existence of the well. 
(Code 1952, §§ 38001.1, 3801) 
State Law reference— For law governing abandoned shafts, see § 24400, Health and S. Code, wherein fencing is required.  
Sec. 10-2. - Motion picture permit—Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to take or cause to be taken any commercial motion picture or electronic video tape in or upon any property owned or controlled by the City of Santa Ana unless and until a permit to take such commercial motion picture or electronic video tape has been obtained pursuant to section 10-3. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to persons taking motion pictures or electronic video tapes for their own personal entertainment and not for commercial purposes, nor shall it apply to persons engaged in taking motion pictures or electronic video tapes for news-gathering or reporting purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1547, § 1, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 10-3. - Same—Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit for taking motion pictures or electronic video taping shall apply to the city manager for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the proposed activity on a form to be provided by the city manager. The application shall be verified and may contain any or all of the following information as required by the city manager: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking the permit; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of any organization and the responsible officer of such organization on whose behalf any such permit is sought; 
(3)  The location of the proposed filming or video taping; 
(4)  The date and times of the proposed filming or video taping; 
(5)  A list of motor vehicles and their license numbers proposed to be parked during any such filming or taping; 
(6)  The services of city employees desired or required on the proposed location before, during and after filming or taping; 
(7)  A description of the scene to be filmed or taped; 
(8)  The name of the person to be in charge of the filming or taping activity; and 
(9)  Such other information as the city manager shall deem reasonably necessary in determining whether the permit should be issued. 
(b)  Each application for a permit required by section 10-2 shall be accompanied by proof that a nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the city council has been deposited with the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1547, § 2, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 10-4. - Same—Insurance and indemnity. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any permit required by section 10-2, the city manager shall require that the applicant shall have obtained a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or policies in a form as approved by the city attorney, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the State of California, with coverage that includes the permitted activities and the location in which the filming or taping activities shall occur and any other area used by the applicant. The City of Santa Ana, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy or policies. The policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence combined single limit for both bodily injury and property damage. Said policy or policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation or change of coverage of insured or additional insured shall be effective until after ten (10) days notice thereof has been given in writing to the clerk of the council of the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  Each person, as defined in this Code, to whom a permit is issued hereunder shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Santa Ana, its officers, agents and employees, from and against all damages to property or injuries to or death of any person or persons, including officers, agents and employees of the City of Santa Ana, and shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the City of Santa Ana, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims, demands, suits, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature, including, but not by way of limitation, workers' compensation claims, of or by anyone whomsoever, in any way resulting from any act or omission of such person or such persons, officers, agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. NS-1547, § 3, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 10-5. - Same—Issuing or denying permit; appeal. 
(a)  The city manager shall issue a permit required by section 10-2 upon a finding that: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all applicable laws; and 
(2)  The conduct of the applicant will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic or the scheduled maintenance of buildings or grounds at the location; and 
(3)  The conduct of the applicant will not interfere with fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas in the vicinity of the filming or taping; and 
(4)  There is no other previously planned use or the location; and 
(5)  The applicant has deposited an amount of money as determined by the director of finance to defray costs to be incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, personnel, material and equipment costs. After deduction of actual costs incurred by the city, any balance shall be refunded to the applicant. If the actual cost to the city is greater than the deposit, the applicant shall promptly pay the excess to the city upon receipt of a billing thereof. 
(b)  The city manager shall deny the application for a permit required by section 10-2 upon a finding that: 
(1)  Facts are contrary to the findings required to be made for issuance of such permit; or 
(2)  The information contained in the application is false in any material detail. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by any action of the city manager pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal as provided by Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1547, § 4, 1-5-81)  
Sec. 10-6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-7. - Parades—Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Parade" means any parade, march, procession, ceremony, exhibition, or pageant of any kind, consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations and controls. 
(b)  "Person" means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
(c)  "City manager" means the city manager of the City of Santa Ana or designee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 1, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2761, § 2, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 10-8. - Same—Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a parade without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 2, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-9. - Same—Application for permit. 
(a)  Each application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be accompanied by proof that a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council has been deposited with the police department for the purpose of paying the cost of processing said application. 
(b)  Any person desiring to conduct a parade shall apply to the city manager for a permit no earlier than one hundred eighty (180) days or later than thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the proposed parade. The city manager may, for good cause shown, consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade which is filed less than thirty (30) days prior to the date such parade is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be on a form provided by the city manager, shall be verified, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct a parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the responsible officer of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the parade chairman, or the person otherwise responsible for its conduct (such person shall be present during the entire parade); 
(4)  The date on which the parade is to be held; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, if any, including the starting point and termination point, including a map and written narrative of the route; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles taking part in the parade, including the type of animals and description of vehicles; 
(7)  The hours at which the parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  Whether such parade will occupy all or only one-half (½) of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of assembly and disassembly of such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin assembly in the assembly area; 
(11)  The maximum length or the components of the parade; and 
(12)  Such additional information as the city manager shall deem reasonably necessary in determining whether or not the permit shall issue under the standards set forth below. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 3, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2761, § 3, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 10-10. - Costs and indemnity. 
Prior to issuance of any permit pursuant to section 10-12, the city manager shall require that the applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made, by filing such application do represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the parade or its participants. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 4, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-1535, § 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-11. - Notification. 
Upon receipt of the application, the city manager shall transmit a copy of such application to the following: Chief of police, director of public works, fire chief, traffic engineer, and the Orange County Transit District. Each of the foregoing may review and provide a written report to the city manager within ten (10) days after the filing of such application. Immediately upon granting of a permit, the city manager shall transmit a copy thereof to each of the above departments. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 5, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-12. - Issuance of permit. 
The city manager shall issue a permit for a parade upon a finding that: 
(a)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area of its route; 
(b)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city so as to prevent the normal police protection of the city; 
(c)  The concentration of persons, a animals and vehicles in the parade will not unreasonably interfere with proper fire and police protection, or ambulance service to areas in the vicinity of the parade, its assembly area or other areas of the city; 
(d)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(e)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(f)  The parade is not proposed for a time and location for which another parade permit has been previously issued; 
(g)  The proposed area for the parade or for the set-up or dispersal of the parade could physically accommodate the number of participants expected to participate in the parade, as reflected in the application completed and submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 6, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-13. - Denial of permit. 
The city manager shall deny an application for a parade permit and notify the applicant of such denial where: 
(a)  The city manager makes any findings contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit; 
(b)  The information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
The city manager shall within fifteen (15) days after the filing of such application act thereon. If the city manager finds that such permit should not be issued, he shall mail within such time a notice of his action denying the permit, stating in general terms the reasons for his denial of the permit. Failure to act within the specified time period shall be deemed a denial. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 7, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-14. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by such action of the city manager shall have the right to appeal as provided in chapter 3 of this Code. Any judicial relief sought upon a final decision shall be in accordance with section 41-191.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 8, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-15. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit issued shall specify the following information: 
(a)  The assembly area and time therefore; 
(b)  The starting time of the parade; 
(c)  The minimum and maximum speeds to be maintained by vehicles in the parade, if any; 
(d)  The maximum length of components of the parade in miles or fraction thereof; 
(e)  The maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
(f)  The specific portions of streets that may be occupied by the parade; 
(g)  The disassembly area and time therefore; 
(h)  Such other requirements as are found by the city manager to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 9, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-16. - Conduct of permittee. 
(a)  Each permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms, conditions and provisions of the permit and with all applicable laws of the state and the city. Each permittee shall ensure that the person in charge of the parade will at all times carry such permit on his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(b)  Signs. Any signs with supports, shall have supports, which are made of wood, blunt at each end, not exceed forty (40) inches in length, be one-fourth-inch (¼") or less in thickness and two (2) inches or less in width. 
(c)  No person shall carry, possess or wear any gas mask or similar device designed to filter all air breathed and that would protect the respiratory tract and face against irritating, noxious or poisonous gases. 
(d)  Use of amplification devices shall be prohibited unless specifically allowed via conditions on the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 10, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-17. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of these sections shall not apply to funeral processions or to governmental agencies acting within the scope of their authorized functions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 11, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-18. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager may revoke a parade permit issued pursuant to this ordinance [sections 10-7 through 10-21] if the manager finds that any term, condition, restriction or limitation of such permit has been violated, or if the manager finds that as a result of changed circumstances any one (1) or more of the standards specified in section 10-12 has not been satisfied. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by registered mail. Appeal from any such revocation may be taken as hereinbefore specified in section 10-14. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 12, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-19. - Interference. 
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade conducted under permit from the city manager in violation of any terms of said permit, nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. NS-1426, § 13, 6-5-78; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-20. - City's costs to be paid by person or organization responsible for parade. 
A permittee under the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for all traffic control costs incurred in connection with diverting traffic due to the closure of streets. These costs shall be established by the city council by resolution from time to time. No fee shall be charged based upon the need for security or increased police protection due to the nature of the parade. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-21. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a parade permit by the permittee or any participant in a parade is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 3, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22. - Special events—Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Special event means the temporary use of public property for the purpose of conducting certain outdoor, short-term events and includes, but is not limited to, promotional or fund-raising activities, athletic or sporting events, art shows, sidewalk sales, live musical events, community celebrations and observances, or neighborhood activities such as block parties, which are conducted in whole or in part on city-owned or controlled public property. The term "special event" does not include events conducted at Eddie West Stadium, to the extent governed by article 6 of chapter 2 of this Code, or to events conducted at city parks, recreation or community facilities to the extent governed by article 6 of chapter 2 of this Code, or to events conducted at city parks, recreation or community facilities to the extent governed by chapter 31 of this Code, or to events as governed by section 41-195.5 of this Code. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Santa Ana or designee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2761, § 4, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 10-22.1. - Same—Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the activity of a special event without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.2. - Same—Application for permit. 
(a)  Each application for a permit to conduct a special event shall be accompanied by proof that a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council has been deposited with the police department for the purpose of paying the cost of processing said application. 
(b)  Any person desiring to conduct a special event shall apply to the city manager for a permit no earlier than one hundred eighty (180) or later than thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the proposed special event. The city manager may, for good cause shown, and upon payment of an accelerated processing fee, consider any application for a permit to conduct a special event which is filed less than thirty (30) days prior to the date such special event is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be on a form provided by the city manager, shall be verified, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct a special event; 
(2)  If the special event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the responsible officer of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the special event, or the person otherwise responsible for its conduct (such person shall be present during the special event); 
(4)  The date on which the special event is to be held; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, if any, including the starting point and termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles taking part in the special event, including the type of animals and description of vehicles, and any amplified sound systems to be used; 
(7)  The approximate hours at which the special event will start and terminate; 
(8)  Whether alcohol is to be served or sold; 
(9)  The location by streets of assembly and disassembly of such special event; 
(10)  A petition signed by at least eighty (80) percent of all the residents and businesses within the enclosed street closure boundaries wherein pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress is impacted by the special event. The police chief or designee shall establish guidelines to govern the petition process; 
(11)  A site plan showing what public property will be used and where any items will be placed on public property; 
(12)  An agreement that the city shall be compensated for any damage to public property, and that the site shall be cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the special event, or compensate the city for any and all associated clean-up costs; and 
(13)  Such additional information as the city manager shall deem reasonably necessary in determining whether or not the permit shall issue under the standards set forth below. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2761, § 5, 1-7-08)  
Sec. 10-22.3. - Indemnity and insurance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit pursuant to section 10-22.5, the city manager shall require: 
(a)  That the applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose behalf the application is made, by filing such application do represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the conduct of the special event or its participants. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of any permit required by section 10-22.1, the city manager shall require that the applicant shall have obtained a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or policies in a form as approved by the city attorney, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state, with coverage that includes the permitted activities and the location in which the filming or taping activities shall occur and any other area used by the applicant. The city, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy or policies. The policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence combined single limit for both bodily injury and property damage. Said policy or policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation or change of coverage of insured or additional insured shall be effective until after ten (10) days notice thereof has been given in writing to the clerk of the council of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.4. - Notification. 
Upon receipt of the application, the city manager shall transmit a copy of such application to the following: Chief of police, director of public works, fire chief, traffic engineer, and the Orange County Transit District. Each of the foregoing may review and provide a written report to the city manager within ten (10) days after the filing of such application. Immediately upon granting of a permit, the city manager shall transmit a copy thereof to each of the above departments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.5. - Issuance of permit. 
The city manager shall issue a permit for a special event upon a finding that: 
(a)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the area; 
(b)  The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city so as to prevent the normal police protection of the city; 
(c)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles in the special event will not unreasonably interfere with proper fire and police protection, or ambulance service to areas in the vicinity of the special event, its assembly area or other areas of the city; 
(d)  The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(e)  The special event is not proposed for a time and location for which another special event permit has been previously issued; 
(f)  The proposed area for the special event or for the set-up or dispersal of the special event could physically accommodate the number of participants expected to participate in the special event, as reflected in the application completed and submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.6. - Permit—Granting conditions 
As a condition to granting such permit, the city manager may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning: 
(a)  The time and place of such special event; 
(b)  The area and manner of conducting such special event; 
(c)  The maximum number of persons participating therein; 
(d)  The type of live amplified music; 
(e)  The regulation of traffic, if required; 
(f)  The number and type of signs, banners, and barricades to be provided by applicant, if any, together with a plan of their disposition attached to the application; 
(g)  Whether alcohol shall be allowed; 
(h)  Whether security guards shall be required (the minimum number is to be determined by the chief of police or his authorized representative during the application process. Under special circumstances city police officers may be required in addition to security guards. The applicant will bear the cost of the police officers) 
(i)  And such other requirements as they may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.7. - Denial of permit. 
The city manager shall deny an application for a special event permit and notify the applicant of such denial where: 
(a)  The city manager makes any findings contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit; 
(b)  The information contained in the application is found to be false in any material detail. 
The city manager shall within fifteen (15) days after the filing of such application act thereon. If the city manager finds that such permit should not be issued, he shall mail within such time a notice of his action denying the permit, stating in general terms the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.8. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by such action of the city manager shall have the right to appeal as provided in chapter 3 of this Code. Any judicial relief sought upon a final decision shall be in accordance with section 41-191.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.9. - Contents of permit. 
Each special event permit issued shall specify the following information: 
(a)  The name of the person or organization to whom issued; 
(b)  The address and telephone number of the person or organization named on the permit; 
(c)  The type of activity for which the permit has been issued; 
(d)  The date, hour and location of the special event; 
(e)  Any conditions imposed on the holding of such special event. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.10. - Conduct of permittee. 
(a)  Each permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms, conditions and provisions of the permit and with all applicable laws of the state and the city. Each permittee shall ensure that the person in charge of the special event will at all times carry such permit on his person during the special event. 
(b)  Signs. Any signs with supports, shall have supports, which are made of wood, blunt at each end, not exceed forty (40) inches in length, be one-fourth-inch (¼") or less in thickness and two (2) inches or less in width. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.11. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager may revoke a special event permit issued pursuant to this ordinance [sections 10-22 through 10-22.14] if the manager finds that any term, condition, restriction or limitation of such permit has been violated, or if the manager finds that as a result of changed circumstances any one (1) or more of the standards specified in sections 10-22.5 and 10-22.6 have not been satisfied. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by registered mail. Appeal from any such revocation may be taken as hereinbefore specified in section 10-22.8. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.12. - Interference. 
No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute or carry on any specific event without a permit first had and obtained from the city manager. No person shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a special event for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 10-22.13. - City's costs to be paid by person or organization responsible for special event and sponsorship exemption. 
(a)  A permittee under the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for all city department service charges incurred in connection with or due to the permittee's activities under the permit. These costs shall be established by the city council by resolution from time to time. 
(b)  A permittee that is co-sponsoring an event with the city or is selected to receive assistance for a special event pursuant to a special event policy adopted by resolution of the city council, may be wholly or partially exempt from subsection (a) above, as provided for by the adopted policy. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2879, § 1, 8-4-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2879, § 1, adopted August 4, 2015, amended § 10-22.13 to read as set out herein. Previously § 10-22.13 was titled "City's costs to be paid by person or organization responsible for special event."  
Sec. 10-22.14. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a special event permit by the permittee or any participant in a special event is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2528, § 4, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 10-23—10-25. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-26. - Defacing public property. 
No person shall advertise upon, paint, color or deface in any manner any public highway, street, pavement or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1952, § 4272)  
Sec. 10-27. - Advertising on public property prohibited. 
No person except a public officer or employee in performance of a public duty shall paint, paste, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone, lamppost, pole, hydrant, bridge, wall or tree upon any public street or other public place, except as may be required or permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2080, § 6, 9-17-90)  
Secs. 10-28—10-32. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-33. - Drinking alcoholic beverages in public. 
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage on any street, park, in any automobile, in any public place or in any other public place within the city, except in establishments or business places properly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 4251; Ord. No. NS-703, § 2, 12-16-63) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, § 23000 et seq., Bus. and P. Code.  
Sec. 10-34. - Human waste. 
No person shall urinate or evacuate his bowels on private property in an area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, except in a public restroom. 
(Ord. No. NS-1384, 1-3-78)  
Sec. 10-35. - Public nudity. 
No person shall wilfully appear, bathe, sunbathe, dress or undress in any public place, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view, in such a manner that the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus, anal regions, natal cleft, perineum or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or beyond the edge of the areola thereof of any female person is/are exposed to public view or is/are not covered by an opaque covering. 
This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Children under the age of ten (10) years; and 
(2)  Live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall or other similar establishment located on public or private land. 
(Ord. No. NS-2018, § 1, 8-7-89)  
Secs. 10-36—10-39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 10-40, prohibiting the filing of false statements regarding city officers or employees, derived from Ord. No. NS-1223, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1974, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1510, § 1, enacted Dec. 3, 1979.  
Sec. 10-41. - Falsely informing police of need for assistance. 
No person shall give or send to the police department or any policeman any false information in the line of a policeman's duty by means of the telephone or otherwise by which the police department or any policeman is deceived to believe that any policeman is wanted for any police duty in the city. 
(Code 1952, § 3807) 
State Law reference— False bomb report, § 148.3, Pen. Code.  
Sec. 10-42. - Fingerprint fees. 
Every person requesting that his fingerprints be processed by the City of Santa Ana shall accompany such request with payment of the appropriate fee as established from time to time by resolution adopted by the city council. This fee shall not be required of the following persons: 
(1)  Applicants for employment with the City of Santa Ana. 
(2)  Applicants who are amnesia victims and are attempting to establish their identity. 
(3)  Applicants who are complying with any of the following statutes: California Penal Code Sections 290, 1026, 1203.1, 1203.45, 1370, 11113 and California Health and Safety Code Section 11850. 
(Ord. No. NS-1101, § 1, 12-20-71; Ord. No. NS-1233, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 10-43—10-45. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1801, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 1985, repealed § 10-46 which pertained to fortunetelling and which derived from Code 1952, § 4220, and Ord. No. NS-977, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 1969.  
Secs. 10-47—10-53. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-54. - Gambling-Conducting within a house. 
No person shall conduct within the city any house, room, apartment or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place where any game is played, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for merchandise, property or anything of value; provided, however, nothing in this section shall apply to the games played for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of money, defined or mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 4210) 
Cross reference— Prohibited in pool halls, § 29-6; prohibited in parks and recreation centers, § 31-2.7. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, § 330 et seq., Pen. Code.  
Sec. 10-55. - Same—Permitting premises to be used therefor. 
No person shall knowingly permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge or control in the city to be used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place for playing, dealing or carrying on any game with cards, dice or other device for merchandise, property or anything of value; provided, however, nothing in this section shall apply to the games played for money, checks, chips, credits or any other representative of money, defined and prohibited in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 4211)  
Sec. 10-56. - Same—Playing or betting. 
No person shall play or bet at or against any game which is played, dealt or carried on with cards, dice or other device for merchandise, property or anything of value; provided, however, nothing in this section shall apply to the games played for money, checks, chips, credits or any other representative of money, defined and prohibited in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 4212)  
Sec. 10-57. - Same—Dice, pool peas or pool games. 
No person shall deal, play, or carry on, open, or cause to be opened, or conduct, or permit, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of dice having six (6) faces or less, or any game played with small round balls usually having one (1) flat face and commonly referred to as "pool peas", or any games using pool balls for the purpose of engaging in billiards, snooker, pool, or any similar game when the aforementioned games are played for money, checks, credit, or other representatives of value, and no person shall bet at or against any of the aforementioned and prohibited games. 
(Code 1952, § 4213; Ord. No. NS-862, § 1, 11-21-66)  
Sec. 10-58. - Definition of "bingo." 
"Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 1, 9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-59. - Bingo license required. 
No person or organization shall organize, conduct or operate a bingo game without having first procured and maintained a license issued by the City of Santa Ana pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1389.1, § 1, 10-17-77; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 1, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-59.1. - Organizations eligible for city license to conduct bingo games. 
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701 a, 23701 b, 23701 d, 23701 e, 23701 f, 23701 g, and 23701 l, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the City of Santa Ana under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, as amended, and the provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code relating to bingo. 
(Ord. No. NS-1351, § 1,_4-4-77; Ord. No. NS-1389, § 2, 10-17-77; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 2, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 1, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-60. - Application for license. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the City of Santa Ana shall file an application in writing with the finance department on a form to be provided by the finance department. The issuing authority shall be the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 3, 9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-60.1. - Qualifications. 
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under section 10-59.1 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 4, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 3, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-60.1.1. - License fee; monthly report. 
(a)  Each application for a bingo license shall be accompanied by a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), one-half (½) of which shall be refunded to the applicant if the license is denied. 
(b)  Each licensee shall pay a monthly fee of one (1) percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) derived from bingo games to the city's director of finance, as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  On or before the fifteenth day of each month, the licensee shall report in writing to the city's director of finance, in a form prescribed by the director, an accounting of all bingo receipts and expenditures for the immediately preceding calendar month. The statement required hereunder shall be signed and certified to be correct by the president or treasurer of the licensee, and shall be accompanied by the payment required by subsection (b) of this section. Fees not paid when due shall bear interest from the date due until paid at the maximum rate an individual is permitted by law to charge. 
(Ord. No. NS-1677, § 2, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-60.2. - Contents of application. 
An application for bingo license shall contain the following: 
(a)  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under section 10-59.1(a) and has met the requirement of section 10-59.1(b). 
(b)  The name, address and date of birth of officers and directors of the corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust. 
(c)  The particular property within the City of Santa Ana including the street number, donated to or owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place. 
(d)  Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games. 
(e)  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the Santa Ana Municipal Code, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any such provisions. 
(f)  Except as to mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations (unless the same are qualified under any of the applicable Revenue and Taxation Code sections), the applicant shall also submit with its application, a certificate of determination of exemption pursuant to the Revenue and Taxation Code section which is applicable to the applicant organization, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento showing exemption under said applicable section. 
(g)  Said application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty for perjury. 
(h)  No person shall make any fraudulent statement on the application with respect to the information required herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 5, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 49, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 3, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-60.3. - Investigation of applicant; grounds for denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the finance director shall refer the application to the city manager for investigation. 
(b)  The city manager shall deny the issuance of a bingo license if the city manager finds any or all of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application; or 
(2)  The applicant fails to qualify as an applicant organization; or 
(3)  The property fails to qualify as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, zoning, occupancy, parking, and other applicable restrictions; or 
(4)  Any officer or director of the applicant has, within five (5) years prior to the application filing date, been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or any crime involving theft, embezzlement, dishonesty or fraud. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 6, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 4, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-60.4. - Contents of license. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the City of Santa Ana, the city manager shall issue a license to said applicant which shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance and which shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued. 
(b)  The address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted. 
(c)  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted. 
(d)  The date of the expiration of such license. 
(e)  The days and hours during which licensee conducts or operates a bingo game. 
(f)  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 7, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1326, § 1, 10-26-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 5, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-60.5. - Summary suspension of license pending opportunity for hearing; misdemeanor to continue after suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, the city manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
(b)  Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection (a) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The order issued under subsection (a) shall also notify the licensee that he shall have five (5) days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city manager within said five-day period, shall result in a revocation of the license. 
(d)  Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been suspended under subsection (a), for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the city manager, or his delegate, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation. 
(e)  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 8, 9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-60.6. - Revocation of license; alternative procedure. 
(a)  Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation, and no summary suspension is ordered under section 10-60.5, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the city manager, or his delegate, at the time fixed by the city manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five (5) days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to said licensee at the address given in the application. Notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the revocation. 
(b)  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo games in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 9,9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-60.7. - Appeal of revocation to city council. 
(a)  Any holder of a license aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police or designee to revoke said license may appeal to as provided in chapter 3 of the Code. 
(b)  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the City of Santa Ana for a period of one (1) year from the date of said revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under the section of the Revenue and Taxation Code applicable to the eligible organization, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 10, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 6, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 11, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-61. - Maximum amount of prize. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 11,9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-61.1. - Profits to be kept in separate fund or account. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account, and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except (1) such proceeds may be used for prizes, and (2) a portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. Each licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this Code. 
The City of Santa Ana, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records, including records of any bank accounts, at any reasonable time, and licensee shall cooperate fully with the City of Santa Ana by making such records available and/or allowing inspection of same, including, but not limited to, execution of any consent documents required by law. Said records shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Number of participants present at each session of bingo. 
(b)  Number of bingo cards sold in each price category, including any special cards. 
(c)  Amount of prizes awarded in each individual game. 
(d)  Total amount of receipts gained from admission fees and sale of cards. 
(e)  Total amount of prizes awarded at each session. 
All records relating to the operation of a bingo game shall be kept on file and accessible to said officers of the city for a period of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 12, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 7, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 5, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-61.2. - Financial interest in licensee only. 
No person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 13, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 8, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-61.3. - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This section shall not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting the game. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 14, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 6, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-61.4. - Conduct of game. 
(a)  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place during which the bingo game is being played. 
(c)  There shall be one (1) corresponding ball or object in the receptacle for each number and letter on all bingo cards utilized in the game. 
(d)  The equipment used in the playing of bingo and the method of play shall be such that each card has an equal opportunity to be a winner. The objects or balls to be drawn shall be essentially the same as to size, shape, weight, balance, and all other characteristics that may influence their selection. All objects or balls shall be present in the receptacle from which they will be drawn before each game is begun. A method of displaying the numbers called shall be utilized and shall be plainly visible to all players. 
(e)  The bingo caller and the receptacle from which the objects or balls are drawn shall be in the same room as the players. No more than one (1) room shall be used for any bingo game. All numbers announced shall be plainly and clearly audible to all the players present. 
(f)  All objects or balls to be drawn during a bingo game shall be prominently displayed for viewing by the players for fifteen (15) minutes and audited prior to the start of a bingo session and during all intermissions. Any player is entitled to a verification of all the numbers drawn at the time a winner is determined. Such verification shall be made in the immediate presence of the member of the licensee organization who is in charge of the game. If such member is also the caller, the verification shall be in the immediate presence of three (3) witnesses. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 15, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 9, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-61.5. - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire chief and director of planning and development services in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, occupancy capacity as limited by required parking for the particular property. Notwithstanding the occupancy capacity at any location, a licensee shall not permit more than five hundred (500) persons to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 16, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 10, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 7, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-61.6. - Bingo games conducted only on licensee's property. 
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property donated to or owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this Code shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization upon application under this Code, when it again has property donated to it or owns or leases property used by it for an office, or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property donated to or owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by the organization; provided, however, that such property shall not be used for the conduct of bingo games by more than one (1) licensee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 17, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 11, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 8, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-61.7. - Minors not to participate. 
No person shall allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to participate in any bingo game, nor shall any person under the age of eighteen (18) years participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 18, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 12,2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-61.8. - Intoxicated persons not to participate. 
(a)  No person shall allow any person who is obviously intoxicated to participate in a bingo game. 
(b)  No person shall allow any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while participating in a bingo game. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 19, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 13, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 10-61.9. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  No licensee shall conduct bingo games, and no bingo games shall be conducted between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day. 
(b)  No licensee shall conduct more than one (1) bingo game at a time, and no bingo games shall be conducted at any location for a period of time greater than six (6) hours per day. 
(c)  No licensee shall conduct bingo games more often than one (1) day a week, unless the attendance at the bingo games conducted by such licensee is limited by the terms of the license to one hundred (100) persons or less. No licensee whose license so limits attendance at the bingo games conducted by, such licensee to one hundred (100) persons or less shall conduct bingo games more often than two (2) days a week. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager, upon written application for good cause shown, may authorize any licensee to conduct bingo games for not more than up to twelve (12) additional days per year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 20, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 14, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 9, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-61.10. - Manager and staff member identification. 
(a)  Each bingo manager as defined in section 10-61.11 of this Code shall wear on his or her outside clothing, in plain view, an identification badge measuring not less than two and one-half (2½) inches by three and one-half (3½) inches in size, specifying the full name and title of such person and the name of the licensee organization, stating that such person is a member of the licensee organization, and containing a photograph of such person. 
(b)  Any person participating in the operation, conduct or staffing of any bingo operation or game where the monthly gross exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and the licensee organization is subject to a monthly fee pursuant to section 10-60.1.1(b) of the Code, shall wear on his or her outside clothing, in plain view, an identification badge measuring not less than two and one-half (2½) inches by three and one-half (3½) inches in size, specifying the full name and title of such person and the name of the licensee organization, stating that such person is a member of the licensee organization, and containing a photograph of such person. 
(Ord. No. NS-1677, § 10, 5-2-83; Ord. No. NS-1766, § 1, 3-18-85)  
Sec. 10-61.11. - Bingo manager. 
Each applicant for a bingo license shall file with the application, a statement specifying the name and address of a person or persons who shall manage, supervise and be responsible for the conduct of all bingo games by said applicant. Said person or persons shall be known as the bingo manager, shall sign the statement accepting such responsibility, and one, such bingo manager shall be present on the premises at all times during which bingo games are conducted. With respect to bingo licenses issued prior to the effective date of adoption of this section, such licensees shall file the above statement within ten (10) days following the effective date of adoption of this section. In the event any other person is designated as the bingo manager by any licensee, such licensee shall immediately file a new statement containing all of the data specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1677, § 11, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-62. - Receipt or payment of profit by a person; misdemeanor under state law. 
(a)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by Section 19 of Article IV of the State Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California. Security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games, as provided in this Code. 
(b)  A violation of subdivision (a) of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city as provided in Penal Code Section 326.5(c). 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 22, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1396, § 16, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1677, § 12, 5-2-83)  
Sec. 10-63. - City may enjoin violation. 
The City of Santa Ana may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of the provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code relating to bingo games. 
(Ord. No. NS-1314, § 23, 9-20-76)  
Sec. 10-64. - Golf range hours. 
No person shall operate any miniature golf course or golf driving course in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. following. 
(Code 1952, § 6390.3)  
Secs. 10-65-10-69. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. NS-1892, enacted April 6, 1987, provided for the repeal of § 10-70. Previously § 10-70 prohibited certain uses of barbed-wire and thorn-bearing hedges, and derived from § 4273 of the 1952 Code.  
Sec. 10-71. - Same—Notice to trim hedge. 
No owner, lessee or agent of any property on which there is a hedge along any street line or public sidewalk in the city, for ten (10) days after service of a written notice so to do by the director of public works, shall fail or neglect to trim said hedge and keep the same trimmed so that it shall not grow to such a height as to injuriously shade or otherwise injuriously affect any street or sidewalk and so that the outer edge of said hedge shall not extend over the inner edge of said sidewalk. 
(Code 1952, § 4273.1)  
Secs. 10-72—10-78. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-79. - Influencing dismissal of prosecution of one promising to appear. 
No person shall request, attempt to influence, or solicit any police officer to withdraw, drop, dismiss, cancel or 
discontinue any prosecution for violation of any statute of the state or any ordinance of the city against any person who has signed a promise in writing to appear in court upon a written notice to so appear, issued by a police officer of the city. This section shall not be deemed to apply to any person who has made such promise to appear, who may be discussing such prosecution with the officer issuing such notice or to any member of the State Bar, representing such person so promising, as an attorney at law. 
(Code 1952, § 3806)  
Secs. 10-80—10-88. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-89. - Mobile home occupancy outside of established ground. 
No person shall occupy any mobile home camp car or trailer outside of a mobile home park, trailer park or camp ground authorized and established in accordance with law. The word "occupied" and "occupy," as herein used, means sleeping in, cooking in or eating in any such camp car or trailer. 
(Code 1952, § 5124)  
Secs. 10-90—10-95. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-96. - Loitering, obstructing passage; signs. 
(a)  Public property. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public street, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk, walkway area or mall so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person block, obstruct or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
(b)  Private property open to the public. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with this section, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person block, obstruct or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
(c)  Signs posted as provided in this section shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Each sign shall not be less than twenty-two (22) inches by thirty (30) inches; 
(2)  Colors of such signs shall be optional; 
(3)  All signs shall be clearly visible to persons in restricted locations; 
(4)  Signs shall have the word " WARNING " not less than two (2) inches in height, and all other lettering shall be at least five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inches in height; 
(5)  Signs shall be posted every one hundred (100) feet; and 
(6)  The following wording shall appear on each sign: 
" WARNING " 
"Unreasonable obstruction of pedestrian traffic in this area by persons loitering, standing, sitting, or lying is prohibited and punishable as a misdemeanor." 
"SAMC Section 10-96" 
(Ord. No. NS-1603, § 1, 10-26-81)  
Sec. 10-97. - Same; by attracting crowds. 
No person, for the purpose of advertising any store or sale of merchandise, shall invite, advertise for, or cause to collect or gather by any means whatsoever, any persons to be present at or conduct, manage or superintend any proceedings, drawings, raffle, gift, enterprise, free lottery or entertainment for the interest, benefit or advantage of or to satisfy the curiosity of others, and especially any person who stands, sits or loiters in or upon any public highway at or near the place where such proceedings, drawings, raffle, gift, enterprise, free lottery or entertainment is being conducted, so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same or so as in any manner to annoy or molest or interfere with persons passing along the same. 
(Code 1952, § 3804)  
Sec. 10-98. - Obstructing entrance to halls, etc. 
No person shall loiter or stand or sit in or at the entrance of any hall, theater or place of public assemblage so as in any manner to obstruct such entrance. 
(Code 1952, § 3803) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions and authority of city to regulate, see § 647c, Pen. Code.  
Sec. 10-99. - Loitering for purposes of engaging in drug-related activities. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place or on private property readily accessible to the public for the purpose of engaging in any conduct prohibited by chapters 6 and 6.5 of division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2257, § 1, 7-17-95)  
Sec. 10-100. - Prohibition of obstructive matter in the public right-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, store, abandon, affix, attach or otherwise cause the location of any obstructive matter on any street, sidewalk, alley or parkway within any part of the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Except as excluded under paragraph (c) of this section, any object, material or substance which hinders or prevents the free passage of the public on that part of the public right-of-way where it is located shall constitute obstructive matter for purposes of this section. 
(c)  The following shall not constitute obstructive matter for purposes of this section: 
(1)  Legally parked vehicles; 
(2)  Trash and refuse placed for collection by the municipal collection service; 
(3)  Objects placed for a period not exceeding one (1) hour for purposes of loading or unloading, provided such activity is not part of a regular course of conduct; 
(4)  Temporary drainage of water, provided that public passage and access to abutting property remains open and no hazard to health or safety is created; 
(5)  Minor encroachment of buildings and such appurtenances to buildings as are not readily capable of removal; 
(6)  Any legally located bus passenger bench or shelter or material located in accordance with any municipal permit or authorization or with any requirement or regulation of any state or federal agency or with any requirement of law. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to in any way limit any other rights or remedies to which the city may be entitled to abate any obstruction or encroachment in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. NS-1331, § 1, 11-23-76)  
Secs. 10-101—10-109. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-110. - Picketing of private residences. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before of about the residence or dwelling of any individual, where such picketing is focused on that particular residence or dwelling. 
(b)  In enacting this section, the city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The protection of the well-being, tranquility and privacy of the home is a significant government interest. 
(2)  Picketers who focus upon a particular residence or dwelling generally do not seek to disseminate a message to the general public but to intrude upon the targeted resident and to do so in an especially offensive way. 
(3)  Such picketers inherently and offensively intrude on residential privacy. 
(4)  The purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the home through assurance that members of the community enjoy in their homes and dwellings a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy. 
(Ord. No. NS-2024, § 1, 8-7-89)  
Secs. 10-111—10-120. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-121. - Renting of rooms for immoral purposes. 
(a)  No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any building or place where transients are accommodated shall register, rent or assign any room, space or place for joint occupancy by persons of the opposite sex, unless such persons shall be registered as husband and wife or as parent and minor child or adult and related minor child with the exact relationship shown. 
(b)  No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house, trailer or other place where transients are accommodated for sleeping or lodging purposes shall rent or let any room or trailer more than once to the same person between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next day. 
(c)  No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house, trailer or other place where transients are accommodated for sleeping or lodging purposes shall rent or assign any room, space or place to any person without first requiring such person to sign a register kept for such purpose, and if more than one (1) person is to occupy any room or space, the name of each shall be shown on said register. 
(d)  No proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any hotel, motel, lodging house, rooming house, trailer or other place where transients are accommodated for sleeping or lodging purposes shall knowingly rent, let or assign any room, space or place to any person for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Code 1952, § 4232; Ord. No. NS-456, § 1, 7-5-60) 
State Law reference— For offense of keeping disorderly house, see § 316, Pen. Code.  
Secs. 10-122—10-131. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-132. - Slingshots. 
No person shall shoot or discharge an instrument known as a slingshot within the city. 
(Code 1952, § 4275.1)  
Secs. 10-133—10-139. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-140. - Storing building material; junk, etc. 
No person shall store, place or maintain in the city, except on property zoned for industrial purposes, any new or used lumber, building material, brick, terra cotta tile, concrete pipe, building blocks, lime, cement, plaster of paris or other building material, scrap iron, junk, or used scaffolding, concrete form lumber or material, concrete mixing or construction equipment, dismantled automobiles or auto-wrecking or used parts. The violation of this section shall constitute the creating of a nuisance. This section shall not be applicable when said personal property shall be entirely confined in a building, enclosed with a roof and on all sides, and a license for the conduct of the business of dealing in such property shall have been granted for such location. 
(Code 1952, § 4276.4)  
Secs. 10-141—10-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2414, § 3, adopted Dec. 20, 1999 repealed in their entirety the provisions of §§ 10-141—10-143 which pertained to damaging trees, dumping harmful substances on trees and building materials near trees and shrubs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1465, §§ 2—4, adopted Dec. 4, 1978. Ord. No. NS-2414, adopted similar legislation regarding trees and added such to this Code as §§ 33-191—33-193.  
Secs. 10-144—10-147. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-148. - Throwing stones or other projectiles. 
No person shall throw stones or other substances in a manner likely to produce injury to persons or damage to property. 
(Code 1952, § 4275)  
Sec. 10-149. - Weapons; discharge of firearms. 
(a)  No person, except in self defense, shall discharge, or cause or allow the discharge of any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, or any other firearm, or any airgun, gas gun, or any other weapon which emits a projectile as a result of pressure at the breech, unless said person has first obtained permission in writing from the chief of police, and then only in compliance with all the conditions contained in said permission. This section does not apply to any peace officer in the discharge of his duty. 
(b)  A weapon of any nature used in violation of section 10-149(a) is, upon a conviction of the defendant, a nuisance. 
(c)  Upon conviction of defendant any weapon described in subdivision (a) or (b) shall be surrendered to the chief of police of the City of Santa Ana. The chief of police to whom the weapons are surrendered, except upon the certificate of a judge of a court of record, or of the city attorney of Santa Ana that the retention thereof is necessary or proper to the ends of justice, may annually, between the first and tenth days of July, in each year, offer the weapons, which the officers in charge of them consider to have value with respect to sporting, recreational or collection purposes, for sale at public auction to persons licensed under federal law to engage in business involving any weapon purchased. If any weapon has been stolen and is thereafter recovered from the thief or his transferee, or is used in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) without the prior knowledge of its lawful owner that it would be so used, it shall not be so offered for sale but shall be restored to the lawful owner, as soon as its use as evidence has been served, upon identification of the weapon and proof of ownership. 
(d)  If, under this section, a weapon is not of the type that can be sold to the public, generally, or is not sold pursuant to subdivision (c), the weapon shall, between the first and tenth days of July, next succeeding, be destroyed so that it can no longer be used as such weapon. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any firearm in the possession of the department of fish and game or which was used in the violation of any provision of law, or regulation thereunder, in the Fish and Game Code. 
(f)  No stolen weapon shall be sold or destroyed pursuant to subdivision (c) or (d) unless reasonable notice is given to its lawful owner, if his identity and address can be reasonably ascertained. 
(Ord. No. NS-1011, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. NS-1584, § 1, 5-18-81)  
Sec. 10-150. - Exhibition of harmful matter to minors; blinder racks. 
(a)  Any newspaper or similar publication which displays material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Section 313 of the Penal Code of the State of California, in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, shall have the placement of devices commonly known as blinder racks in front of the material so that the lower two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the material is not exposed to view. 
(b)  Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels or assists in an offer of sale of any newspaper or similar publication in violation of this section. 
(c)  Any newspaper or similar publication offered for sale in violation of this section constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1175, § 1, 7-2-73; Ord. No. NS-2061, § 1, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 10-151. - Service station signs. 
No person owning or operating fuel pumps for the purpose of selling gasoline or diesel fuel to the general public, whether at a service station or in conjunction with any other use, shall sell gasoline or diesel fuel unless signs are posted on the premises, indicating the price (inclusive of tax) of each grade of gasoline or diesel fuel sold, in such conspicuous places as are visible to substantially all vehicular traffic on the adjacent street or streets. No person shall sell gasoline or diesel fuel except in accordance with the prices posted on such signs. 
(Ord. No. NS-1524, § 1, 5-5-80)  
Sec. 10-152. - Unlawful acts toward police animals. 
(a)  No person shall willfully or maliciously tease, harass, agitate, provoke, beat, strike, kick, disable, injure, kill, administer or disperse any desensitizing drug, chemical or substance, or in any way interfere or meddle with, any police animal. 
(b)  As used in this section, "police animal" means any dog, horse or any other animal utilized by the police department or any officer or employee thereof, in the performance of any function or duty of said department, officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1625, § 1, 4-5-82; Ord. No. NS-2943, § 2, 4-17-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2943, § 2, adopted April 17, 2018 , amended § 10-152 to read as set out herein. Previously § 10-152 was titled "Police canines."  
Sec. 10-153. - Loud and raucous noise from sound-making or amplifying devices prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the emission or transmission of any loud or raucous noise from any sound-making or sound-amplifying device in his/her possession or under his/her control: 
(1)  Upon any private property; or 
(2)  Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or thoroughfare; or 
(3)  In or upon any public park or other public place or property except upon any school district property. 
(b)  The words "loud and raucous noise," as used herein, shall mean any sound or any recording thereof when amplified or increased by any electrical, mechanical or other device to such volume, intensity or carrying power, such that it can be heard fifty (50) feet from the location where the electrical, mechanical or other device is amplifying the sound. 
(c)  The word "person" as used herein means any of the following: 
(1)  The owner(s) of record of the real property and/or location where the party, gathering or event takes place. 
(2)  The person(s) in charge or purportedly in charge of the real property and/or location where the event takes place. 
(3)  The person(s) authorizing the use of the real property and/or location for the event except when a permit has been issued by the city. 
(4)  The person(s) who organized the event. 
(5)  The person(s) who is operating the electrical, mechanical or other device amplifying the sound in the manner described in subparagraph (b) above. 
(6)  If the person in charge of the premises from which the loud or raucous noise originates is a minor, who resides with one (1) or more parents or legal guardian(s), then the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall be deemed "person" within the meaning of this section. 
(d)  The word "subsequent" means any and all occasions within a calendar year (January 1—December 31), when one (1) or more police officers are dispatched to the scene of a party, gathering, or similar event from which loud and raucous noise originates at the same location. 
(e)  The word "location" means the physical address, APN, parcel of land, and/or structures thereon regardless of the number of units on the property. 
(f)  Any officer may issue an administrative citation to a person pursuant to this chapter and SAMC 1-21. Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person charged with any violation of the Code. 
(2)  The date(s) on which the person violated the Code. 
(3)  The section(s) of the Code so violated. 
(4)  The location where the violation occurred. 
(5)  A notice that each violation of the Code also constitutes a nuisance and that nuisance abatement costs may be enforced as an assessment or lien against the real property and/or location where the Code violation occurred. 
(6)  A statement indicating that any person receiving a notice of violation may file an appeal pursuant to Chapter 1 (Section 21.8) within fifteen (15) days from the issuance of the citation. 
The absence of any of the above information in the notice of violation form shall not invalidate the city's process or issuance of the notice of violation. 
(g)  The city shall have the authority to impose an administrative fine for violations of this section following the issuance of an administrative citation as authorized in subdivision (f) above. The city is authorized to collect the amount of the fine specified below in addition to any other amount to which the city may be entitled under the law. The fines shall be in the following amounts and shall be due to the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the issuance of the citation as follows: 
(1)  1st response ..... No fine 
(2)  2 nd subsequent response ..... $100.00 
(3)  3 rd subsequent response ..... 250.00 
(4)  4 th subsequent response ..... 500.00 
(5)  5 th subsequent response ..... 750.00 
(6)  6 th subsequent response or thereafter ..... 1,000.00 
(h)  Collection of unpaid fines. At its discretion, the city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies to collect unpaid fines imposed pursuant to this chapter. Pursuit of one (1) remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedy. It is intended that persons, maintaining, and/or permitting the violation, and not the taxpayers, bear the financial burden of the city's enforcement activity. 
(i)  Cumulative remedies. The remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative, and shall not restrict the city's ability to pursue any other remedy to which it is entitled under law or equity. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the imposition of any criminal penalty, nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to conflict with any penalty or provision under state law, or prohibit any conduct authorized by the state or federal constitutions. 
(Ord. No. NS-2184, § 1, 2-1-93; Ord. No. NS-2964 , § 2, 4-2-2019)  
Secs. 10-154—10-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Conditions under which permitted in pool halls, § 29-8. 
 
Sec. 10-175. - Military service. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any minor in the military service of the United States. 
(Code 1952, § 4246)  
Sec. 10-176. - Possession of firearms or ammunition by a minor. 
(a)  No minor shall possess any firearm or ammunition in a public place. 
(b)  No person shall sell, exchange, give or loan, or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given or loaned, any firearm or ammunition to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "firearm" means any weapon which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the term ammunition means any unexpended cartridge or shell, consisting of a case which holds a charge of powder and a bullet or shot, or any device containing any explosive designed and intended for use in any firearm, or any device containing any explosive. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the possession of any firearm by a minor at a bona fide firing range or in an automobile vehicle while enroute to or from hunting any game animal that may be legally hunted under the provisions of the Fish and Game Code, provided said minor has the written permission of his parent or guardian to have such firearm or is accompanied by his parent or guardian while he has such firearm in his possession. 
(Ord. No. NS-1485, § 1, 6-4-79)  
Secs. 10-177—10-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2791, §§ 3, 5, adopted August 17, 2009, redesignated the former sections 10-177 and 10-178 as sections 10-222—10-223.1. Formerly, sections 10-177 and 10-178 pertained to the sale and possession of pressurized paint cans, and public access to aerosol containers and large marker pens offered for sale in retail stores, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1542, § 1, adopted September 15, 1980; Ord. No. NS-1544, § 1, adopted October 6, 1980; Ord. No. NS-2189, § 1, adopted April 5, 1993, and Ord. No. NS-2720, § 5, adopted August 7, 2006. For similar provisions, the user's attention is directed to chapter 10, article IV.  
Sec. 10-181. - Night time curfew—Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The city, under the police power delegated to it by the Constitution of the State of California, has the authority to enact legislation when the potential exists for jeopardy to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. 
(2)  The city council is concerned with the level of juvenile violence, juvenile gang activity, and juvenile crime in the city. 
(3)  The crimes committed by juveniles include serious offenses such as murders, drive-by shootings, drug related crimes and other gang related activity. 
(4)  The ability to make reasoned judgments, resist peer pressure and understand the consequences of improper conduct increases with age, knowledge and experience, all of which are likely to increase as a person grows older, therefore the justification of the application of the curfew to minors, but not adults. 
(5)  Juveniles are particularly susceptible, by their lack of maturity and experience, to participation in unlawful and gang related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. 
(6)  Recent local statistics regarding juvenile crime and victimization indicate that enforcement of a curfew for juveniles decreases the percentage of juvenile victimization and increases the number of arrests for violent crimes during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. NS-2360, § 1, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 10-182. - Same—Definitions. 
As used in sections 10-181 through 10-187 of this Code, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Curfew hours means the period from 10:00 p.m. any evening of the week, until 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
Direct means without stop or delay. 
Emergency means any unforeseen event or combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate attention. The term includes, but is not limited to, automobile accidents, fire, natural disaster, or any situation requiring immediate attention to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment(s) means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, and includes but is not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person or minor; or a public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Operator means any individual, or firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. 
Parent means the person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters and shops. 
Remain means to linger, sojourn, wait or stay; or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, park ranger, or the owner, operator, or person in control of the premises. 
Responsible adult means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protected loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. NS-2360, § 2, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 10-183. - Same—Restrictions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to be present and/or remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b), above, that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  Involved in an emergency; 
(4)  Engaged in employment activity, or going to or returning from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(6)  On a sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; 
(8)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(9)  Engaged in reasonable and direct travel to and from those activities described in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(8), above; 
(10)  Emancipated pursuant to law; or 
(11)  In the military service of the United States. 
(Ord. No. NS-2360, § 3, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 10-184. - Same—Separate violation; classification of offense. 
Each violation of the provisions set forth pursuant to night time curfew shall constitute a separate offense and may be classified as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2360, § 4, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 10-185. - Same—Duty of police. 
Before taking any enforcement action pursuant to night time curfew, a police officer or park ranger shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred, and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense is present or applicable under subsections 10-182(c)(1) through (11). 
(Ord. No. NS-2360, § 5, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 10-186. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-187. - Night time curfew—Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, when a person subject to this article is charged with a violation thereof, and a peace officer issues notice to appear in any court to that minor, the charge shall be deemed to be an infraction. 
(b)  Any person convicted of willfully violating this article is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), or equivalent community service as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. NS_2360, § 7, 7-20-98)  
Secs. 10-188—10-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2873, § 2, adopted December 2, 2014, repealed art. III, §§ 10-196—10-209, in its entirety. Former art. III pertained to bicycles and was derived from Ord. No. NS-1276, § 1, adopted September 15, 1975 and Ord. No. NS-2022, §§ 1—13, adopted August 21, 1989. 
 
Secs. 10-196—10-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-221. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
(a)  Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, adhesive sticker or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, labeled, pasted, applied or affixed, on any surface of public or private real or personal property, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, windows, signs, structures, places or other surfaces regardless of the nature of the material of which the surface is composed. 
(b)  Graffiti implement means any implement capable of marking, scarring, damaging, or defacing any surface to create graffiti, including, but not limited to, aerosol paint containers, felt tip markers, paint sticks or graffiti sticks, etching tools, adhesive stickers, spray actuators, marking pens, drill bits, grinding stones or any other similar implement. 
(c)  Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, that is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
(d)  Felt tip marker means any broad-tipped marker pen with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) of one (1) inch or any other similar implement containing an ink that is not water soluble. 
(e)  Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and that, upon application, leaves a visible mark on the surface at least one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) of an inch in width or is not water soluble. 
(f)  Adhesive stickers means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other material with an adhesive, paste, or gummed backing, which when applied or affixed to any surface either creates a permanent contact or is not easily removable without the use of solvents. 
(g)  Property means personal or real property. 
(h)  Etching tool means any sharp or pointed instrument, that is capable of etching or marking glass, plastic, wood, metal, or concrete surfaces, including, but not limited to, picks, scribes, awls, chisels, markers, and etchers, or any masonry or glass drill bit, carbide drill bit, glass cutter, grinding stone, etching cream or acid etching solution. 
(i)  Expense of abatement, abatement expenses, costs of the abatement, and/or abatement and related administrative costs include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorneys fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair or replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city and/or any other public agency as authorized pursuant to Government Code Section 38772(d)(1). 
(j)  Graffiti violations of law are those violations referred to in Government Code Section 38772(d)(3) and any violation of this article. 
(k)  Spray actuator (also known as a spray tip, nozzle, or button) means an object or device that is capable of being attached to an aerosol or other paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 4, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-222. - Sale and possession. 
(a)  Sale of graffiti implements to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum/paste/self-adhesive label or sticker, etching cream, spray actuator, or paint stick to anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the minor, and no person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall purchase any pressurized can containing paint or dye. 
(b)  Possession in designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement, with the intent to use or apply graffiti, while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility or zoo or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city, or while in or within fifty (50) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm channel, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the city. This section shall not apply to authorized employees of the city or an individual or authorized employee of an individual, agency or company under contract with the city. 
(c)  Possession by minors at or near school facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any graffiti implement while on school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon private property without written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the possession of broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating is a class at the school that formally requires the possession of broad-tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of the section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a broad-tipped marker. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 5, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-223. - Public access; signage. 
(a)  Paints and markers. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol containers, paint sticks, glass etching solution, or broad-tipped markers shall store these items in an area continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business. In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, glass etching solution, or broad-tipped markers in an area as provided above, the establishment shall store the containers, sticks, and markers in an area not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
(b)  Etching tools. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling masonry or glass drill bits, carbide drill bit, glass cutters, grinding stones, awls, chisels or carbide scribes, shall store or cause such items to be stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to, the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such items. 
(c)  Customer signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall post a sign in clear public view at or near display of such products stating: "Pursuant to Penal Code Section 594.1, place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such products stating: "Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid or device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to 6 months and/or a fine up to $1000." 
(d)  Additional signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating: "Selling spray paint, paint sticks, or broad-tipped markers to persons less than eighteen (18) years of age is against the law and punishable by a fine of $1000." 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 5, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-223.1. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface on any public or private-owned property or, without permission of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  Directing, aiding and abetting. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti, or for any person to aid or abet or agree to aid or abet another person to plan to apply or apply graffiti. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 5, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-224. - Penalties and other remedies. 
Any person violating this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-224.1. - Parental liability. 
(a)  In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall liable with the minor for payment of all fines. 
(b)  Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result in the imposition of an abatement assessment against the parents' or legal guardian's property that includes the fine and administrative costs. 
(c)  Upon and application and finding of indigence, the court may decline to order fines against the minor, parents or guardian. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-224.2. - Restitution. 
In addition to any punishment specified in the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be ordered with the minor to make restitution. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-224.3. - Forfeiture. 
All personal property, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, scooters, bicycles or skateboards, used or intended to be used in violating this ordinance shall be forfeitable to the city. In forfeiting such personal property, the city shall follow procedures outlined in this Code concerning forfeitures of personal property. In any forfeiture proceeding initiated under this section, the court shall not order forfeiture unless it finds that the forfeiture is commensurate with the severity of the violation to the extent required by the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-224.4. - Community service. 
In lieu of, as part of, or in addition to the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult shall be required to perform community service as described by the court based on the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  The minor or adult shall perform not less than forty (40) hours of community service for the first offense, not less than eighty (80) for the second, and not less than one hundred twenty (120) for a third or subsequent offense. 
(b)  At least one (1) parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the assigned community service. 
(c)  The period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police. 
(d)  Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
(e)  Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under state law as a result of committing an offense in the city shall be required, at the city's option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than forty (40) hours nor more than eighty (80) hours. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-225. - Trust fund. 
The city council hereby creates the city anti-graffiti trust fund. Penalties assessed against violators of this ordinance shall be placed in the fund, along with assessments and judgments collected pursuant to this article, as well as any monetary donations received from individuals or from the business community wishing to contribute to the fund. The council shall direct the expenditures of monies in the fund. Such expenditures shall be restricted to the payment of the cost of graffiti removal, the payment of rewards pursuant to section 10-226 of this article and such other public purposes as may be approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 6, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-226. - Reward provisions. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the Government Code, the city may offer a reward for information leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person who places graffiti on any public or private property in such amounts approved by the city council. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in a manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. 
(b)  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city in a manner specified by city council. 
(c)  The person convicted of committing the graffiti offense shall be liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section and, if that person is an unemancipated minor, the custodial parent of said minor shall be liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section. In the event of damage to public or private property, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated minor must reimburse the city for any reward paid. 
(d)  No law enforcement officer, municipal officer, official or employee of the city shall be eligible for a reward made pursuant to this section. 
(e)  No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 7, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-227. - Graffiti as a nuisance; city abatement. 
(a)  The existence of graffiti within the city limits constitutes a public and private nuisance and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this article. 
(b)  Removal by the perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the executive director of public works or other designated city official. Failure of any person to remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by a minor, the parents or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor shall also be responsible for such removal. 
(c)  Removal by city. Whenever the city becomes aware of or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property capable of being viewed from any public right-of-way or from a public or quasi-public place, the city is authorized to use public funds to remove the graffiti, by painting, repairing, water blasting, or other graffiti removal technique, to that degree reasonably necessary to restore the defaced area and to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community. 
(d)  Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time specified by this ordinance, or if the city has requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city and consistent with the terms of this section, the city shall commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions specified in section 10-228 below. 
(e)  Recovery of costs. The city reserves the right to recover city costs and expenses from any person who has willfully damaged property in a manner described in subsection (a) above, pursuant to the provisions of this Article, Penal Code Section 594, Civil Code Sections 731 and 1714.1 and Government Code Sections 38771, et seq. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 7, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-228. - Abatement by property owner. 
(a)  Property owner responsibility. Any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of private property or for repair or maintenance of private property in the city must abate graffiti as set forth below. 
(b)  Failure to remove. If the property owner has not removed the graffiti within ten (10) days after its appearance or has refused consent to the city to enter the property and abate the nuisance, the city may, pursuant to this section, remove graffiti at the owner's an expense as a public nuisance and to assess the property for such abatement costs in accordance the procedures set forth in chapter 17, sections 17-1 through 17-43 of this Code. 
(c)  Exceptions to the removal requirement. The removal requirements identified in this section shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party can demonstrate that the property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the graffiti; or the property owner or responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program. In such case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of ten (10) days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 8, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-229. - Minor and parental financial responsibility for graffiti violations of law. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2, and 38773.6, the city council hereby makes the expense of abatement of graffiti violations of law committed by minor a personal obligation of both the minor causing the graffiti nuisance and the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor (who shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor), and an assessment against the property of the minor or an assessment against the property of the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor. 
(b)  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38772(c), the county probation officer shall report the names and addresses of parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor responsible for a violation of this chapter to the clerk of the council. 
(c)  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, upon a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period, the city may find that the minor causing the graffiti nuisance and the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor is responsible for the graffiti and request the court to impose treble damages. 
(d)  Parental liability. Pursuant Civil Code Section 1714.1, any parent or legal guardian of a minor shall be personally liable for any and all costs to the city or any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by conduct of said minor, and for all attorney's fees, court costs, and civil penalties incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 9, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-230. - Defendant liability for cost of graffiti abatement. 
(a)  Defendant's liability for cost of graffiti abatement. When the disposition of a criminal case or a proceeding pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 determines that the defendant in that case is responsible for creating, causing or committing the graffiti which was abated by the city, that same defendant shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city. These costs shall include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in the identification and apprehension of the defendant responsible for the graffiti or other inscribed material on publicly or privately owned permanent real or personal property within the city, as prescribed within Government Code Sections 38772-38773.6, and 53069.3. 
(b)  Adult defendant presumption. The determination of responsibility shall be presumed by any confession, admission, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere to any violation of Penal Code Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
(c)  Juvenile offender presumption. In the case of a minor defendant, responsibility shall be determined upon a conviction by final judgment or by the minor being made a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 by reason of the commission of any act prohibited under Penal Code Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
(d)  Adult civil actions. The city may bring a civil action in the superior court to obtain a money judgment against a defendant for any amount not ordered or collected by the criminal court, including, but not limited to, all attorney's fees, court costs, and civil penalties incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement. 
(e)  Juvenile civil actions. The city may bring a civil action in the superior court to obtain a money judgment against a juvenile offender and/or his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) having custody and control of the juvenile offender for any amount not ordered or collected by the juvenile court, including, but not limited to, all attorney's fees, court costs, and civil penalties incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 9, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-231. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-232. - Assessment, procedures. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6 the city may recover its costs to abate any graffiti through assessment procedures set forth in sections 17-40 through 17-43 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 9, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 10-233. - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies provided for the enforcement of this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies provided by law. The remedies provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. NS-2791, § 9, 8-17-09)  
Secs. 10-234—10-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT SERVICES FUND 
 
Sec. 10-250. - Establishment. 
The director of finance shall maintain as a separate fund a special enforcement services fund, consisting of such amounts derived from the general fund revenues of the city as the city council shall from time to time determine. Withdrawals from such fund shall be by police department personnel pursuant to the regulations set forth in this article and shall be made for the purpose of investigating such narcotics law violations, property thefts, or other crimes as have been approved by the chief of police for investigation by the special investigations section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1293, § 1, 2-17-76; Ord. No. NS-1626, § 1, 4-5-82)  
Sec. 10-251. - Disbursements—Designated payees. 
The director of finance shall not disburse any amounts from the special enforcement services fund except by check issued and payable to a police officer designated by the chief of police as the special investigations section commander or the special investigations section sergeant. The chief of police shall designate such officers by written memorandum to the director of finance prior to any disbursement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1293, § 1, 2-17-76)  
Sec. 10-252. - Same—Written requests. 
The director of finance shall not disburse any amounts from the special enforcement services fund except upon a written request signed by the chief of police, or in his absence, by the investigation division commander, presented to the director of finance by the designated special investigations section commander or special investigations section sergeant, and stating the amount of money requested, the police department case number, and the name of the person to whom the check should be made payable. 
(Ord. No. NS-1293, § 1, 2-17-76)  
Sec. 10-253. - Operational regulations. 
Cash and currency held by police department personnel upon the cashing of any check drawn upon the special enforcement services fund shall be held subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The special investigations section commander shall be responsible for maintaining custody of the money until it is returned to the director of finance; 
(b)  When not in actual use, the money shall be kept in a safe located in the office of the special investigation section commander; 
(c)  Money being used by an officer during an investigation shall not leave the possession of the officer at any time; 
(d)  During an investigation, the officer in possession of the money shall be kept under visual surveillance by other officers at all times; 
(e)  Money shall be returned to the director of finance within four (4) days of the date of disbursement, exclusive of weekends and holidays. 
The chief of police shall establish detailed operational guidelines consistent with the above requirements prior to withdrawal of any amounts from the special enforcement services fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1293, § 1, 2-17-76)  
Secs. 10-254—10-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 10-270. - Purpose. 
The City of Santa Ana hereby finds and determines that the regulation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to promote the health, welfare and safety of the people in that some of the public are using alarm systems which either mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their users, causing an increase in false alarm reports thereby constituting a hazard to the safety of peace officers and the public in general. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-271. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Alarm system is any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on any premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both; and when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a signal to indicate that an emergency situation exists, and to which police are expected to respond. 
(b)  Alarm business shall mean any person, firm, or corporation conducting or engaging in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, removing, installing or monitoring an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. 
(c)  Alarm agent shall mean any person who is self-employed or employed either directly or indirectly by an alarm business whose duties include any of the following: Selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. 
(d)  Audible alarm is a device designed for the detection of the unauthorized entry on or attempted entry into a premise or structure or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, and which, when actuated, generates an audible sound on the premises. 
(e)  Alarm user shall mean any person using an alarm system at his place of business or residence. 
(f)  Direct dial telephone device (automatic dialing device ) is any device which is interconnected to a voice grade telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmits by pre-recorded voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
(g)  False alarm shall mean the activation of an alarm system necessitating response by the police department where an emergency situation for which the alarm system was designed or used does not exist. 
(h)  Person shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity. 
(i)  Residential means premises used as dwelling units which includes apartments and lodging houses. 
(j)  Business means any nonresidential use. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-272. - Alarm business registration. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or firm to own, manage, conduct or carry on an alarm business within the City of Santa Ana without first having registered with the police department; provided, however, such registration shall not be required for any business which only sells or leases said alarm systems from a fixed location unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing such information as may be required by the police department, including but not limited to the full name of the business, the number of the license issued by the state director of consumer affairs for the alarm business, and the name and business address of the manager of operations for the area which includes the city or Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-273. - Alarm agent registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owners of an alarm business, to act as an alarm agent within the City of Santa Ana without first having registered his or her name and filed with the chief of police a copy of the alarm agent registration card issued to him by the state director of consumer affairs pursuant to the provisions of Section 7514(g) of the California Business and Professions Code; provided, however, nothing herein shall require a person to so register in order to install, service, repair, alter, replace, or move an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by that person; and further provided, nothing herein shall require a person to so register who is merely a salesperson for any business not required to obtain an alarm business license under the provisions of section 10-272 if such salesperson does not engage in any other activities related to alarm systems apart from selling. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 1, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 10-274. - Notification of change. 
Any alarm business or alarm agent registered with the police department shall report within five (5) working days to the chief of police any change of address, ownership, name of business or location of business. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-275. - Alarm agents; registration in possession. 
Every person acting as an alarm agent within the City of Santa Ana shall carry on his or person at all times while so engaged a valid State of California alarm agent's registration card and shall display such card to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. NS-1583, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-276. - Alarm user's license. 
No person shall install, or cause to be installed, used, maintain, or possess an alarm system on any business or residential premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the City of Santa Ana without first having obtained an alarm user's license from the chief of police in accordance with this section. The application for an alarm user's license shall be filed with the chief of police. The chief of police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the license application. The application shall include the address of the business or residential premises where the system is to be located and the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the person who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night. Every application for an alarm user's license shall be accompanied by payment of a fee for such amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 2, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 10-277. - Correction of information. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information as may be required in section 10-276, alarm user's license, the license holder or his designate shall give written notice of such change to the chief of police within five (5) working days. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 3, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 10-278. - Alarm system standards. 
All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment installed on any premises shall meet or exceed those standards which may hereafter be established by resolution of the city council of the City of Santa Ana. The city reserves the right to inspect all alarm systems subject to all applicable laws including Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50, et seq. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-279. - Alarm system regulations. 
(a)  Automatic deactivation; audible alarms. Audible residential alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off mechanism capable of terminating the audible annunciator after activation within a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes. Audible commercial alarm systems shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off mechanism capable of terminating the audible annunciator after activation within the maximum of thirty (30) minutes. Those audible alarms installed prior to the effective date of this section not capable of turning off the annunciator shall have until one (1) year from and after this section becomes effective to comply. 
(b)  Maintenance notification. The alarm user shall contact the police department's communication supervisor prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration or installation of an alarm system which might produce a false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. 
(c)  Power supply. Alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four (4) hours of operation. 
(d)  Repairs. When any false alarm caused by a malfunction of an alarm system has occurred, the alarm user shall cause the alarm system to be repaired to eliminate the malfunction. The alarm system annunciator shall be disconnected while repairs are made. 
(e)  Direct dial telephone devices. On or after the effective date of this article, no person shall install any alarm system which directly dials any telephone number of the Santa Ana Police Department except as may hereafter be designated by the chief of police. Any existing alarm system of this type will have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article to comply by reprogramming to another source. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-280. - False alarm penalty assessment. 
(a)  When any emergency alarms, messages, signals or notices are received by the police department showing that an alarm user has failed to meet any of the requirements of this article, the chief of police is authorized to demand that the user of that alarm system disconnect the system until it is made to comply with said requirements. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, any person having an alarm system which results in a police response in which the alarm proves to be a false alarm shall pay a penalty assessment fee to the city in such amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council. The penalty assessment for false alarms from alarms designed to be activated while the business is open and/or occupied and requiring activation by an employee, or a residential alarm designed to be activated by the tenant from within the residence, which indicate the commission of a crime defined by California Penal Code Section 211 (Robbery) may be higher than the penalty assessment for other false alarms. 
(c)  Except for robbery and/or panic false alarms for commercial establishments, which shall be assessed a penalty on the first activation, penalty assessments shall only be made for false alarms which number more than one (1) in a 12-month period. This 12-month period is determined by the date of the most recent false alarm. 
(1)  On the sixth false alarm occurring within a 12-month period, a written warning will be issued with an invoice stating that two (2) or more false alarms within the 12-month period will result in automatic non-response status. 
(2)  On the eighth false alarm occurring within a 12-month period, the location will automatically be placed on non-response status until all fees are paid and written proof of correction (alarm company work order) and a written request by the user requesting reinstatement is received by the city. 
(d)  Commencing with the date of a new alarm installation and for six (6) months thereafter, there shall be no charge for the first through third false alarms. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, § 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-1697, § 1, 10-10-83; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 4, 5-17-93; Ord. No. NS-2800, § 2, 12-21-09)  
Sec. 10-281. - Right to discontinue response. 
The chief of police reserves the right to discontinue response by police officers to any location of a silent or audible alarm when (1) the alarm user has been given written notice and assessed six (6) penalty assessments within a one-year period, or (2) the alarm user has failed to pay any such penalty assessment. Reinstatement may occur when the alarm user has taken steps to eliminate or correct the problem(s) and has documented the corrective action in writing to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-282. - Suspension/revocation of licenses. 
If at any time it shall come to the attention of the chief of police that the holder of an alarm user's license under this chapter has violated any provisions of this article, or rules or regulations made pursuant to this article, including, but not limited to, false alarms which exceed the numbers permitted pursuant to section 10-280, or has failed or refused to pay the false alarm penalty assessment fee as provided in said section, the chief of police may suspend or revoke the license. If an alarm user's license is to be suspended or revoked, as provided hereunder, the chief of police shall notify the holder of the license in writing of his intention to revoke such license seventy-two (72) hours before the effective hour of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 5, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 10-283. - Appeals. 
Any alarm user aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to assess any penalty or to suspend or revoke such license may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. NS-2196, § 6, 5-17-93)  
Sec. 10-284. - Confidentiality. 
Information furnished and secured pursuant to this article shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81)  
Sec. 10-285. - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article, excluding the provisions of section 10-280, penalty assessments, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with the California Penal Code regarding infractions. 
Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such persons. 
(Ord. No. NS-1585, 1, 6-1-81)  
Secs. 10-286—10-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - POLICE SERVICES AT LARGE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-300. - Purpose. 
The city finds and determines that: the control of large parties, gatherings or events on private property is necessary when such continued activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. Police officers have been required to make as many as three (3) return calls to a location of a party, gathering or event in order to disperse uncooperative participants, and the return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources often leaving other areas of the city without minimal levels of police protection; all of which creates a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 10-301. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Large party, gathering, or event is a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity. 
(b)  Police services include the salaries of the police officers for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or in remaining at the party, gathering or event, at a rate established by resolution of the city council; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers; and, the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property. 
(c)  Person responsible for the event is the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place; the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services. 
(d)  Special security assignment means the assignment of police officers and services during a second call to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 10-302. - Second response. 
When a large party, gathering or event occurs on private property and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person(s) responsible for the event will be held liable for the cost of providing police services for the special security assignment during a second response by the police after the first warning, to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
The return call, or second call, may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators of the state penal code or other local regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 10-303. - Police services fee. 
The police services fee shall include the cost of personnel and equipment but shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a single incident. 
The city does not hereby waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) through other legal remedies or procedures. 
The amount of such fee charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons receiving said service and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 10-304. - Billing. 
The chief of police shall notify the director of finance in writing following such performance of police services, of the name and address of the responsible person, the date and time of the incident and the services performed and the costs thereof and such other information as may be required. The director of finance shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Sec. 10-305. - Appeals. 
Any individual aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to assess any penalty under the provisions of this article may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1958, § 1, 5-16-88)  
Secs. 10-306—10-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-400. - Purpose. 
The public streets and areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this article is to maintain public streets and areas within the city in a clean and accessible condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-2160, § 1, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 10-401. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this article. 
(a)  Camp means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia. 
(b)  Camp facilities include, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters. 
(c)  Camp paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
(d)  Park means the same as defined in section 31-1 of this Code. 
(e)  Store means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
(f)  Street means the same as defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2160, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. NS-2194, § 1, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 10-402. - Unlawful camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided: 
(a)  Any street; 
(b)  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. No. NS-2160, § 1, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 10-403. - Storage of personal property in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council: 
(a)  Any park; 
(b)  Any street; 
(c)  Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. 
(Ord. No. NS-2160, § 1, 8-3-92)  
Secs. 10-404—10-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LICENSING OF FIREARMS SALES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 21. 
 
Sec. 10-500. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purposes of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To implement Article 4 (commencing with section 12070) of Title 2 of Part 4 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(2)  To provide procedures for the grant or denial of licenses for the sale, lease, or transfer of firearms and the suspension or revocation of the same. 
(3)  To regulate the sale, lease or transfer of firearms as necessary and appropriate for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  This article applies to all sales, leases and transfers of firearms for which a license is required by Section 12070 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-501. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Santa Ana and any employee within the Santa Ana Police Department who is designated by the chief of police to act as his representative in the implementation of this article. 
Penal Code means the Penal Code of the State of California, as it may from time to time be amended. 
License and licensee mean the license required by Section 12070 of the Penal Code of the State of California and the person holding such a license, unless the context shows that a different type of license is meant. 
Other terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-502. - Chief of police as licensing authority. 
The chief of police is the duly authorized licensing authority for licenses granted pursuant to Sections 12070 and 12071 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-503. - Fixed place of business required. 
Each licensee must have a fixed place of business and possess all permits, licenses, certificates, variances or other instruments of approval or evidences that any conditions exist for the sale of firearms as required by any other section of this Code or by any statute or code provisions of the state. Except as may otherwise be provided by the Penal Code, all sales of firearms may only be made at said fixed location. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-504. - Branch establishments; multiple places of business; separate licenses required. 
A separate firearm seller's license fee must be paid and a separate firearm seller's license obtained for each branch establishment of the business transacted and carried on within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-505. - Overlapping business. 
If in addition to the business of selling firearms any person shall engage in, conduct, manage, or carry on at the same time and on the same premises any other business requiring any permit, license, certificate, variance or other instrument of approval or evidence that any conditions exist as required by any other section of this Code or by statute or code provisions of the state, such person shall comply with all of the provisions affecting each business. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-506. - Licensee responsible for the conduct of the business. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee to see that no firearms are sold or offered for sale in violation of this article or the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-507. - Retention and maintenance of sales information and sales records; inspection. 
(a)  All firearm and ammunition sales information and sales records shall be retained for a period of three (3) years and shall be maintained and stored within the licensed location during normal business hours. All such records shall be maintained in an orderly manner, consistent with federal, state and local laws and shall be located so that all records are immediately and readily accessible for inspection in a specific space allocated for record retention. 
(b)  All sales information and records relating to sales of firearms and/or ammunition shall be made available to any police officer or other duly authorized representative of the chief of police upon request. Stock in trade shall likewise be made available for inspection as appropriate to allow for comparison of such stock with business records. No licensee shall attempt to dissuade or impair said officers' or duly authorized representative's inspection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-508. - Evidence of doing business as a seller of firearms. 
When any person shall by the use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, newspapers, or trade publications, advertise, holdout, or represent that he or she is a seller of firearms, or when any person holds an active license, certificate, or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he or she is a seller of firearms within the city and such person fails to deny in a sworn statement given to the chief of police that he or she is not a seller of firearms within the city, after being requested to do so by the chief of police, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is a seller of firearms within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-509. - Rules and regulations. 
The chief of police shall adopt and enforce, by rules and regulations, security requirements for the protection from theft of firearms and ammunition sold and maintained by the licensee. Such rules may require that licensee provide burglar alarm systems, separate storage areas for ammunition and other measures designed to prevent the theft of such merchandise from the premises of licensee. The chief of police shall also have the power to adopt other rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-510. - Term and renewal of licenses. 
Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, unless sooner revoked, suspended or canceled, shall be effective for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance; and may be thereafter renewed annually. Applications for renewal shall be treated as applications for an initial license and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this article. Applications for renewal shall be filed with the chief of police not later than thirty (30) days before the expiration of the current license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-511. - Application for license. 
(a)  An application for a license shall be filed with the chief of police on forms furnished by the chief of police. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, driver's license number, social security number, fictitious business name or names under which the applicant is registered to operate, business and residence address of the applicant, if a natural person, or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, federal employer identification number, address of its principal officers, together with their respective residence addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the fictitious name or names under which the partnership is registered to operate, the names of the partners, driver's license numbers, social security numbers, of the persons comprising such association or company, and the business and residence of each partner or person; 
(2)  The business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application; including, if applicable, the applicant's business license and police permit history; 
(3)  All criminal convictions or proceedings in which a plea of guilty or nolo contendere was entered; 
(4)  Such other identification and information as the chief of police deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The application submitted shall be accompanied by copies of the following licenses, permits, and certificates: 
(1)  A valid federal firearms license issued in the name of applicant. 
(2)  A valid seller's permit issued by the State Board of Equalization in the name of applicant issued for the city. 
(3)  A valid certificate of eligibility issued by the California Department of Justice. 
(4)  A valid city business license issued for the retail sale of firearms. 
(5)  A statement of zoning code compliance in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Any person who desires to obtain a license pursuant to this article may request a statement of zoning code compliance from the planning manager. Any such request shall be in writing and shall specify the location as to which the license will pertain and the nature of the activities to be conducted at that location by the licensee if the license is granted. The planning manager or his or her designated representative may require such additional information as may be necessary to determine whether the conduct of such activities at such location complies with the requirements of Chapter 41 of this code. If the planning manager or his or her designated representative determined either (i) that such activities at such location will comply with said Chapter 41 without the necessity of any permit, variance or other entitlement of use pursuant to that chapter, or (ii) that any such necessary permit, variance or other entitlement of use has been granted, the planning manager or his or her designated representative shall sign and deliver to the chief of police, with a copy to the person requesting it, a statement of zoning code compliance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-512. - Denial of license application. 
The chief of police, within thirty (30) days from the date a completed application is filed or longer upon a showing of good cause, shall cause an investigation of the applicant, and the application for a license may be denied within such period of time on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant is a person under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(2)  The applicant is unable to provide any of the items required by subsection (b) of section 10-511. 
(3)  The applicant, his agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has committed or aided or abetted in the commission of any act or act of omission which if committed by a permittee would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license; or 
(4)  The applicant, his agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder, associate or manager has been refused a license or had a license revoked or has been an officer, director, member, partner or manager of any corporation or partnership which has been refused a license or had a license revoked. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-513. - Notice of denial of license. 
The chief of police, within the period of time specified in section 10-512, shall notify the applicant of his intention to deny an application for a license. Service of such notice shall be made personally or by United States mail. The notice shall include the reasons for denial and be accompanied by a statement that the applicant may request a hearing in accordance with section 10-516 within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. In the absence of any such request for hearing the denial shall become final upon the expiration of the ten-day period. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-514. - Suspension or revocation of license—Generally. 
The chief of police may, in his discretion or upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may temporarily suspend for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or revoke the license of any licensee who commits any one (1) or more of the acts or omissions specified in section 10-515. The chief of police shall notify the applicant of his intention to suspend or revoke the license. Service of such notice shall be made personally or by United States mail. The notice shall include the reasons for suspension or revocation and be accompanied by a statement that the applicant may request a hearing in accordance with section 10-516 within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. In the absence of any such request for hearing the decision to suspend or revoke the license shall become final upon the expiration of the ten-day period. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-515. - Same—Grounds. 
It shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license if any licensee, or his or her agent or employee, or any person connected or associated with the licensee as partner, director, officer, stockholder, general manager, or person who is exercising managerial authority of or on behalf of the licensee does any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly makes any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in an application for a firearm license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the police department. 
(2)  Commits any act or omission which is grounds for forfeiture of a license under Section 12071 of the Penal Code. 
(3)  Violates any statute pertaining to the sale, lease or transfer of firearms. 
(4)  Fails to maintain in effect the licenses, permits, certificates and zoning code compliance required by subsection (b) of section 10-511. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-516. - Hearing by the chief of police; appeal. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a request for hearing as provided in this article, the chief of police shall notify licensee by United States mail of the time and place of such hearing. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the chief of police's receipt of request for hearing, unless the licensee waives this time period in which case the hearing may be held on a later date. Any hearing, once commenced, may be continued by the chief of police or at the request of the licensee. At the conclusion of such hearing, the chief of police may render a decision which shall become effective immediately; or in the alternative, the chief of police may elect to render a written decision which shall be furnished the licensee by United States mail not less than ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing. Such written decision shall become effective five (5) days after the date of mailing of the notice. 
(b)  The decision of the chief of police may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code, and the licensee shall have the burden of proving that the decision rendered by the chief of police was unreasonable, erroneous or a clear abuse of discretion. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-517. - New application after denial or revocation of firearm seller's license. 
When the firearm seller's license of any person is revoked for cause, no new or other application for a firearm seller's license from the same person shall be accepted within one (1) year after such revocation. When an application for a firearm seller's license is denied for cause, no new or other application for a firearm seller's license from the same person shall be accepted within one (1) year after denial unless the applicant can show a material change in his or her situation which would justify the issuance of such firearm seller's license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-518. - Contents of license. 
All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the chief of police upon the approval of the applicant's application and payment to the city of the required fee. Each license so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
(1)  The license number of the firearm seller's license. 
(2)  The date of expiration of such license. 
(3)  The persons to whom such license is issued, and where such persons are doing business under a fictitious name; both the actual and fictitious names to whom such license is issued. 
(4)  The situs address at which licensee is approved to conduct business. 
(5)  The State Board of Equalization seller's permit number issued to licensee. 
(6)  The federal firearms license number issued to licensee. 
(7)  The Department of Justice certificate of eligibility number issued to licensee. 
(8)  Any additional statement the chief of police may deem necessary or which the state may require. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-519. - Use of license by unlicensed person. 
No person holding a license required by this article shall permit any other person to use the license, the licensed premises or the licensee's name for the purpose of evading any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-520. - Duplicates. 
A duplicate license may be issued to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and, at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate license fee equal to ten (10) percent of the original fee for the firearm seller's license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-521. - Posting. 
Every licensee shall keep the license prominently posted in a conspicuous and public place upon the premises specified in the license where such business is carried on. All other federal, state, and city licenses, certificates, and permits relative to conducting the business of firearm sales shall likewise be posted together with the firearm seller's license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-522. - Prohibition of display of suspended or revoked license. 
No person shall reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter an original firearm seller's license for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section by giving a false or misleading impression that any duplication of an original license is valid and that the appropriate fee therefor has been paid; neither shall any person exhibit a suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-523. - Transferability. 
(a)  Licenses shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. 
(b)  When a business for which a license has been issued is sold or transferred to one (1) of the transferees listed in this section, the chief of police may endorse a change of ownership on such license upon written application by the transferee. Only the following transferees or successors shall be entitled to such transfer of permit. 
(1)  Duly qualified representatives of licensees regularly appointed by courts of competent jurisdiction, assignees for the benefit of creditors, and spouses or children of deceased licensees; 
(2)  The surviving partner or partners of a dissolved partnership; 
(3)  A new partnership consisting of the members of a predecessor partnership, plus their spouse or spouses of any such members; 
(4)  A new corporation organized and controlled by an individual or unincorporated licensee for the purpose of acquiring, and which has acquired the assets of the business previously owned and operated by such licensee; 
(5)  Upon dissolution of a closely held corporation, the stockholders to whom the assets are distributed. 
(c)  A transferee or successor entitled to a transfer of a license must file an application for such transfer with the chief of police within thirty (30) days after he assumes [ownership or control] of the business. The chief of police may require such evidence of the transfer of ownership or control as he deems necessary. A fee equal to twenty (20) percent of the original fee for the license shall accompany the application. 
(d)  The chief of police shall transfer the license to an applicant entitled to such transfer unless he finds that the transfer will adversely affect the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the public or that the transferee does not possess the qualifications required of original applicants. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-524. - Change of location. 
Where no conflict exists with the city's zoning regulations, as evidenced by a new statement of zoning code compliance pursuant to subsection 10-511(c), a change of location may be endorsed on a firearm seller's license by the chief of police upon written application by a licensee, accompanied by a change of location fee equal to twenty (20) percent of the original fee for the firearm seller's license shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-525. - No refund upon termination of business. 
The license fee paid under the terms of this article is not refundable upon termination of a business or for any unused portion or term of a license period. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-526. - Right of entry. 
The chief of police or any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter the premises of any business engaging in firearms sales, leases or transfers for which a license is required during business hours, free of any charge, and at such other times as may be reasonable following due process of law, and request a display of the required license together with any other federal, state, and city licenses, certificates, and permits relative to conducting the business of firearm sales. No person having custody or control of such place of business shall fail to comply with any such request. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 10-527. - Penalty for violation. 
Every violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day any violation of any said provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. NS-2205, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Secs. 10-528—10-549. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CIVIC CENTER REGULATION 
 
Sec. 10-550. - Camping in the Civic Center. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, "camping" or "camp" is defined as the use of the public areas of the Civic Center for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings, or making any fire, or using any tents or shelter or other structure or vehicle for sleeping or doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on cooking activities. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, "Civic Center" is defined as the area in the City of Santa Ana, County of Orange, State of California, bounded by Sycamore Street on the east, Civic Center Drive West on the north, Shelton Street on the west, and Santa Ana Boulevard on the south. 
(c)  The activities listed in subsection (a) above constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that the participants, in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may be engaging. 
(d)  No person shall camp in the Civic Center. 
(e)  Short-time, casual sleeping which does not occur in the context of using the Civic Center for living accommodations will not be affected by this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2210, § 1, 12-20-93)  
Sec. 10-551. - Storage of property prohibited in civic center. 
(a)  Within the civic center, possession and/or use of the following items or engagement in the following activities are prohibited: 
(1)  Placement of any item in a manner that impedes pedestrian access to/through the public walkways or general right-of-way. 
(2)  Placement or use of an upright structure or materials to form a wall or barrier, but not including umbrellas, canopies, or other shade structures so long as they do not create enclosed spaces on civic center public property. 
(3)  Construction and landscaping materials including but not limited to, lumber, pallets, plywood, paint, drywall, nails, screws, hammers, screwdrivers, small hand tools, or cutting tools. 
(4)  Compressed gas containers, except for in-use medical purposes. 
(5)  Weapons. 
(6)  Generators, solar panels, or motorized vehicle batteries or accessories. 
(7)  Machinery, including but not limited to, power tools or construction equipment. 
(8)  Amplifiers. 
(9)  Hazardous chemicals or materials. 
(10)  Barbecues or grills. 
(11)  Propane tanks. 
(12)  Gasoline or other similar combustible or flammable liquids, gases or solid fuels. 
(13)  Shopping carts (See also section 33-215). 
(14)  Furniture, including but not limited to, recliner chairs, mattresses, sofas, coffee tables, desks, chests of drawers, and bookcases. 
(15)  Athletic equipment such as baseball bats, boxing apparatus, weights, hockey sticks, golf clubs or similar items. 
(16)  Any structure or apparatus that can be described or used as an outdoor shower. 
(17)  Any items used as temporary toilets for human waste. 
(18)  Storage of non-functioning bicycles or bicycle parts. 
(19)  Storage, dismantling and sorting of any discarded recyclable materials such as newspapers, metals, cans, or bottles. 
(20)  Area rugs or carpets. 
(21)  Running or stringing any utility cord or line into, upon, or across the civic center area. 
(22)  Conducting, advertising, announcing, or calling the public attention to the purchase, barter or sale of any article, good or service for sale or hire, unless by any regularly licensed business or concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the city. 
(23)  Possession or storage of any uncapped hypodermic needles, unless within a medically approved and sealed container. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a public agency, a non-profit entity or an individual shall not be in violation of this section if they have a permit or written permission from the city manager, or his or her designee, to possess the prohibited items or engage in the identified activities in connection with an approved contract for work, event or celebration. 
(c)  Subsection (a)(2) shall not be enforced while it is raining. 
(Ord. NS-2210, § 1, 12-20-93; Ord. No. NS-2926, § 2, 10-17-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2926, § 2, adopted October 17, 2017 , amended § 10-551 to read as set out therein. Previously § 10-551 was titled "Storage of property in the Civic Center."  
Sec. 10-552. - Limitation of animals in the civic center. 
No person shall own, keep or harbor more than three (3) animals in the civic center, except for service dogs as defined by law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2926, § 2, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 10-553. - No vehicles in pedestrian areas in the civic center. 
No person shall operate or park a motorized vehicle in the civic center, except on a vehicular road designated for that purpose in the civic center, without the written permission from the city manager, or his or her designee, provided however, that this section shall not apply to motorized personal assistive devices or law enforcement vehicles, maintenance vehicles or contractor vehicles on civic center plazas, walkways or other areas intended for pedestrians where the drivers of these vehicles are on the property to fulfill their professional responsibilities. 
( Ord. No. NS-2926, § 2, 10-17-17 )  
Sec. 10-554. - Permit required to provide organized services in the civic center. 
(a)  No person, entity, organization or business shall provide organized food, medical or social services or events in the civic center without first obtaining an event permit in accordance with policies adopted by the city manager, or his or her designee, and any applicable licenses or permits required to provide such services or access to civic center property. The purpose of this section is to ensure that all services are provided in an organized manner by those who have the proper experience and/or credentials needed to provide the service and who have submitted a set-up and clean-up plan to the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to city, county, state or federal employees conducting official business or those who are contracted by these agencies to provide services related to that official business. 
( Ord. No. NS-2926, § 2, 10-17-17 )  
Secs. 10-555—10-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 10-600. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth. 
(a)  "Abate" and "abatement" mean an action to seize, impound, forfeit or otherwise remedy a nuisance related activity or condition by such means and in such manner as is necessary to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  "Community property" means an interest in property as defined in California Family Code section 760. 
(c)  "Vehicle" means any transportation device as defined in California Vehicle Code section 670. 
(d)  "Prostitution" means engaging in lewd or sexual conduct for money or other consideration as defined in the California Penal Code. 
(e)  "Business day" means a day that the city hall is open to conduct public business. 
(f)  As used herein, "drug activity" means the purchase or possession of any illegal controlled substance as defined in the state Health and Safety Code or the state Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-601. - Nuisance vehicles. 
(a)  Any vehicle used to solicit an act of prostitution or in an attempt to solicit an act of prostitution, or used to engage in an act of prostitution, or to loiter for the purpose of soliciting an act of prostitution is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be enjoined and abated as provided herein. 
(b)  Any vehicle used to acquire or in an attempt to acquire a controlled substance, is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be enjoined and abated as provided herein. 
(c)  Any person or his or her servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is responsible for creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-602. - Seizure of vehicles. 
(a)  A peace officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon the issuance of a forfeiture order by a court having jurisdiction over the vehicle. 
(2)  Incident to an arrest for any offense related to the illegal activities described in subsections 10-601(a) or (b). 
(3)  Incident to a valid search warrant for any offense related to the illegal activities described in subsections 10-601(a) or (b). 
(4)  When there is probable cause to believe the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  A peace officer seizing a vehicle under this section shall complete a receipt in accordance with Penal Code section 1412 and deliver it to the person from whose possession the vehicle was seized. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-603. - Title to vest in the city. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all rights, title and interest in any vehicle shall vest in the city immediately upon commission of the act giving rise to the public nuisance as described herein. Unless a vehicle is released as a result of a post-seizure hearing, a vehicle seized shall be impounded for thirty (30) days regardless of ownership and subject to disposition as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-604. - Seizure, impoundment, notice, and post-seizure hearing procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all vehicles seized shall be impounded for not less than thirty (30) days. If the police chief does not order a vehicle forfeited it shall be released to the registered owner(s), legal owner(s) or to an authorized agent subject to the payment of fees and costs arising from impoundment. 
(b)  Within two (2) business days following the day of seizure of the vehicle, the police department shall send notice of seizure and impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each registered and legal owner of the vehicle at the address as shown in the records of state department of motor vehicles or records of the state in which the vehicle is registered, informing the registered and legal owner(s) that the vehicle has been seized, impounded and may be subject to forfeiture. 
(c)  If a vehicle is impounded for thirty (30) days and thereafter is not claimed by the registered owner(s), the legal owner(s) or an authorized agent, within thirty (30) days of issuance of the notice in subsection 10-604(b), the city will sell the vehicle at lien sale to recover the towing and storage charges related to impoundment, any parking fines, penalties, and administrative fees. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the registered owner(s) and or the legal owner(s) shall be responsible for all towing and storage charges related to impoundment, any parking fines, penalties, and administrative fees incurred by the registered owner. 
(e)  The city shall not be liable to the registered owner for the release of the vehicle to the legal owner, or the legal owner's agent, provided the legal owner(s) produce documents demonstrating legal ownership of the vehicle at the time of the release. 
(f)  The public agency seizing the vehicle shall provide any potential claimants discovered as a result of the investigation set out in subsection 10-604(b) with the opportunity for a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure or to seek an early release of the vehicle based on one of the criteria set forth in subsections 10-608(a)—(c). The post-seizure hearing shall be conducted within two (2) business days of the request for the hearing. The public agency may authorize its own officer or employee to conduct the hearing if the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the seizure of the vehicle. Failure of the potential claimant to request or attend a scheduled hearing within the appropriate time frame shall satisfy the post-seizure requirement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-605. - Vehicles held as evidence. 
A vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter, where appropriate may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the district attorney. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-606. - Forfeiture. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police may order the forfeiture of a vehicle seized and impounded as follows: 
(a)  An order of forfeiture shall include: 
(1)  A statement by the chief of police declaring the vehicle forfeited to the city. 
(2)  A description of the vehicle. 
(3)  The date and place of seizure. 
(4)  The unlawful act(s) alleged as the basis for forfeiture of the vehicle. 
(5)  Instructions and a form for filing a claim opposing forfeiture. 
(6)  The time limits for filing a claim opposing forfeiture. 
(7)  An estimate of the value of the vehicle. 
(b)  The order of forfeiture shall be served as follows: 
(1)  The order of forfeiture shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon all registered and legal owners of the vehicle. 
(2)  In the event that a registered or legal owner refuses to accept certified return mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished by any one of the following methods: 
(i)  By leaving a copy of the order of forfeiture at the registered or legal owner(s) dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the registered or legal owner(s) where the copy was left. 
(ii)  By leaving a copy of the order of forfeiture during usual business hours at the registered or legal owner(s) business address with the person who is apparently in charge and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the registered or legal owner(s) where the copy was left. 
(3)  If the registered or legal owner(s) lives or is located out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
(4)  If the registered or legal owner(s) cannot be located, or service cannot be affected as set forth in this subsection, service may be made by publication in a local newspaper of general circulation. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6063. 
(c)  An order of forfeiture shall be served as soon as practicable, but no later than thirty (30) days following the date the vehicle was seized. If the chief of police fails to order the forfeiture of the vehicle within the thirty (30) days, the vehicle shall be released to the registered owner(s), legal owner(s) or an authorized agent at the end of the thirty (30) day impoundment subject to the payment of fees and costs arising from impoundment. 
(d)  If no claim opposing forfeiture is timely filed pursuant to section 10-607, the chief of police shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city and dispose of the vehicle as provided by this chapter. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the chief of police under this chapter shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the purchaser of the forfeited vehicle. A copy of the declaration of forfeiture shall be mailed to the person listed in the receipt given at the time of seizure and to all registered and legal owners of the vehicle. 
(e)  If a claim opposing forfeiture is timely filed pursuant to section 10-607, then the chief of police shall request the city attorney to file a petition of forfeiture with the superior court within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the claim(s). The petition of forfeiture shall seek a court order adjudging that the vehicle was used for one or more of the nuisance purposes set forth herein, that the vehicle is a public nuisance and ordering the vehicle be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth herein. A copy of the petition of forfeiture shall be mailed to each person filing a claim opposing forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-607. - Claim opposing forfeiture. 
(a)  A person opposing an order of forfeiture for a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter must file a claim opposing forfeiture. 
(b)  If the order of forfeiture was served by personal or substitute service, the time for filing a claim opposing forfeiture is ten (10) calendar days. 
(c)  If the order of forfeiture was served by publication, the time for filing a claim opposing forfeiture is thirty (30) calendar days from the date of first publication of the order of forfeiture. 
(d)  If the last day to file a claim opposing forfeiture falls on a day that police department is closed, then the claim opposing forfeiture must be filed no later than the close of business on the next business day for the city. 
(e)  The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure section 1013 shall apply to this service of the order of forfeiture pursuant to this section. 
(f)  Each person filing a claim opposing forfeiture must state what ownership interest they have in the vehicle. 
(g)  All claims opposing forfeiture must be filed with the office of the chief, city police department. 
(h)  With respect to vehicles for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the city attorney shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-608. - Vehicles not subject to forfeiture. 
(a)  A vehicle is not subject to the 30-day impoundment or forfeiture and the city shall release a vehicle to the registered owner or legal owners or to an authorized agent under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the vehicle was a stolen vehicle. 
(2)  When the vehicle is subject to bailment and was driven by an employee of the bailee; such as a parking lot attendant or a garage mechanic. 
(b)  A vehicle is not subject to forfeiture if a community property interest existed in such vehicle prior to the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter and the community property interest owner meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The community property interest owner requests release of the vehicle from the chief of police prior to disposal of the vehicle by forfeiture. 
(2)  The community property interest owner submits proof to the chief of police that a community property interest existed prior to the date of the act giving rise to the nuisance. 
(3)  The community property interest owner submits proof to the chief of police that the vehicle is the only vehicle available to them and that the vehicle is one that may be operated with a class C driver's license. 
(4)  The community property interest holder submits proof to the chief of police that he or she, or an authorized driver other than a defendant in any criminal trial arising out of the act giving rise to the nuisance, is properly licensed and that the seized vehicle is properly registered and insured pursuant to the California Vehicle Code. 
(5)  The community property interest holder is not a criminal suspect in a police investigation of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. 
(6)  All towing and storage charges related to the seizure and impoundment and any administrative charges authorized by law are paid. 
(7)  The community property interest owner signs a stipulated vehicle release agreement, in consideration for which the vehicle will not be forfeited. This requirement applies only if the community property owner requests release of the vehicle under this section. 
(c)  A vehicle is not subject to forfeiture if the registered owner(s) or legal owner(s) of the vehicle is a rental car company and at the time of the seizure of the vehicle it was rented for a period of thirty (30) days or less. The rental car company shall pay all towing and storage charges related to the seizure and impoundment and any administrative charges authorized by law. 
(d)  Prior to release of a vehicle to a person identified in subsections (a)—(c) of this section, a hold harmless agreement shall be executed by such person. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-609. - Recovery of monetary loss. 
Nothing herein shall preclude an owner of a vehicle who suffers a monetary loss from the forfeiture of a vehicle under this section from recovering the amount of the actual monetary loss from the person who committed the act giving rise to forfeiture under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-610. - Disposal of vehicle and distribution of proceeds. 
In all cases where vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter are forfeited to the city, the vehicles shall be sold, or otherwise disposed of, the proceeds shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
(1)  To any lender, finance company or lien holder with an interest in the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of security interest in the vehicle. 
(2)  Each department of the city that incurred costs related to the seizure, impoundment, forfeiture and disposal of the vehicle shall be reimbursed. 
(3)  All remaining proceeds shall be distributed to the general fund. 
(4)  The funds distributed to a city department pursuant to this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this section, be made available to support those departments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Sec. 10-611. - Alternative settlement procedures. 
Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases, conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle which has been seized in accordance with this chapter may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the city for the return of the vehicle. Such request may be made in writing or verbally to the city attorney's office. The minimum amount of the settlement fee shall be sufficient to cover all of the city's reasonable administrative costs, including attorney's fees and personnel time for the seizure and forfeiture action. The actual amount shall be at the sole and absolute discretion of the city attorney. The executed settlement agreement shall be accompanied by the appropriate settlement fee amount in the form of a money order or cashier's check. All settlements funded shall be distributed as set forth in subsections 10-610(a)(2) and (a)(3). 
(Ord. No. NS-2679, § 3, 3-7-05)  
Secs. 10-612—10-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - AGGRESSIVE OR INTRUSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 10-700. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to protect the safety and welfare of the public and improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the City of Santa Ana by imposing reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on aggressive and intrusive solicitation while respecting the constitutional rights of free speech for all citizens. 
Aggressive or intrusive solicitation typically includes approaching or following pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Aggressive or intrusive solicitation can contribute to the loss of access to, and enjoyment of, places open to the public, and can create an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation, and disorder. 
Solicitation from people in places where they are a "captive audience" because it is difficult or impossible for them to exercise their own right to decline to listen to or avoid solicitation from others, presents a risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks or automated teller machines can be intimidating or threatening. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both person and property. Other "captive audience" locations include public transportation vehicles, their designated locations for stops, outdoor dining areas, and gasoline stations. Restricting solicitation in such places will provide a balance between the rights of solicitors and the rights of persons who wish to decline or avoid such solicitations and will help to diminish or avoid the threat of violence in such unwarranted and unavoidable confrontations. 
Solicitation in the public roadway is unsafe and hazardous for solicitors, drivers, pedestrians, and the general public due to the increased risk of drivers becoming distracted from their primary duty to watch traffic, which may result in automobile accidents, congestion, blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems. 
The practice of solicitation near driveways accessing shopping centers, retail establishments, and business establishments is unsafe and hazardous for solicitors, drivers, pedestrians, and the general public. The location of a solicitor near a driveway compromises a solicitor's safety, impedes visibility, and impairs a driver's ability to safely enter and exit. Drivers also become distracted from their duty to watch traffic, which may result in automobile accidents, congestion, blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems. 
(Ord. No. NS-2945 , § 2, 5-15-18)  
Sec. 10-701. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  "Aggressive" means any of the following types of conduct: 
(1)  Conduct intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, to fear damage to or loss of property, or otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or any other thing of value; 
(2)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without consent; 
(3)  Closely following or approaching a person, after the person has indicated they do not want to be solicited or do not want to give money or any other thing of value; or 
(4)  Making violent gestures toward a person. 
(b)  "Automated teller machine" means any electronic information processing device that accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
(c)  "Automated teller machine facility" means an area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space made available to banking customers. 
(d)  "Bank" means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank with deposits which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(e)  "Check cashing business" means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with section 12000. 
(f)  "Credit union" means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union with accounts insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
(g)  "Donation" means a gift of money or other item of value. 
(h)  "Financial institution" means any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business. 
(i)  "Intrusive" means any of the following types of conduct: 
(1)  Thrusting or forcing oneself close to another person without invitation, permission, or welcome; 
(2)  Physically contacting another person; 
(3)  Blocking a person's path of travel; or 
(4)  Behaving in a threatening manner towards another person. 
(j)  "Public place" means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground; or any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence, of any business establishment, apartment house, or hotel. 
(k)  "Public transportation vehicle" means any vehicle designed, used, or maintained for carrying 10 or more persons, including the driver; or a vehicle designed for carrying fewer than 10 persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. 
(l)  "Solicit" or "solicitation" means to ask, beg, or request for an immediate donation of money or any other thing of value or for the direct and immediate sale of goods or services. Solicitation can be accomplished by using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs, or other means. 
(Ord. No. NS-2945 , § 2, 5-15-18)  
Sec. 10-702. - Prohibited solicitation. 
(a)  No person shall solicit in an aggressive or intrusive manner in any public place. 
(b)  Financial institutions and automated teller machines. 
(1)  No person shall solicit within an automated teller machine facility without the express permission of the owner or other person lawfully in possession of the facility. 
(2)  No person shall solicit within 30 feet of any financial institution during its business hours. 
(3)  No person shall solicit within 30 feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. If the automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, the 30 feet shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. 
(4)  Subsections (1) and (3) do not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure, or space that has a primary purpose or function that is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports, and school buildings; provided that the automated teller machine is available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure, or space in which the machine is located. 
(c)  Driveways accessing shopping centers, retail establishments, and business establishments. No person shall solicit from an operator or occupant traveling in a motor vehicle while the vehicle is located within 30 feet of a driveway skirt providing vehicular access to a shopping center, retail establishment, or business establishment. 
(d)  Public transportation vehicles and stops. No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle or within 30 feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop. 
(e)  Gasoline/charging stations and fuel pumps. No person shall solicit from an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while the vehicle is stopped in a gasoline or electronic vehicle charging station or at a gasoline pump or charging and fueling station. 
(f)  Outdoor dining area. No person shall solicit from a person within the outdoor dining area of a restaurant, café, or similar establishment that serves food or drinks for immediate consumption. 
(g)  Subsections (b) through (g) do not apply to solicitations authorized or conducted by the property owner, business owner, or employees on the premises. 
(Ord. No. NS-2945 , § 2, 5-15-18)  
Sec. 10-703. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates this Article may be charged with an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the City officer. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this Article is subject to criminal sanctions, civil actions, and administrative penalties pursuant to Section 1-8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(c)  All remedies prescribed under this Article are cumulative and the election of one or more remedies does not bar the City from the pursuit of any other remedy to enforce this Article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2945 , § 2, 5-15-18)  
Chapter 11 - ENTERTAINMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2847, § 3—15, adopted August 5, 2013, amended ch. 11, §§ 11-1—11-11, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 11 was titled dancing and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 6370—6373, 6375—6378; Ord. No. NS-232, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 18, 1957; Ord. No. NS-459, § 2, adopted August 15, 1960; Ord. No. NS-859, § 1, adopted September 6, 1966; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 36, adopted December 9, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1644, §§ 1—3, adopted August 16, 1982; Ord. No. NS-1687, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 6, 1983; Ord. No. NS-2048, § 1, adopted January 2, 1990 and Ord. No. NS-2049, § 1, adopted February 5, 1990. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed as having the following meanings: 
After-hours is operation of an establishment with live entertainment between the hours of 12 midnight and 2 a.m. Live entertainment will not be allowed between 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. 
Ambient music is recorded music which is audible from a distance of no more than twenty (20) feet from any portion of the exterior of the premises and which is utilized to create ambience and is not intended to entertain. 
Amplified music is electronically enhanced music which is audible from a distance of no more than twenty (20) feet from any portion of the exterior of the premises and which is intended to entertain. 
Dance or dancing is movement of the human body accompanied by music or rhythm. 
Live entertainment includes, but is not limited to, musical performances (non-ambient, live or recorded), any act, play, revue, pantomime scene, dance act, DJ, Karaoke, strolling musician or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance. 
Private entertainment is entertainment which is limited to those persons individually invited, to which no admission charge is made, or entertainment conducted by a bona fide club, society or association, or organization incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic, literary, recreational or entertainment purposes having an established membership, and which holds meetings other than such entertainment at regular stated intervals, and when the proceeds, if any, of such entertainment are used only for the purposes of such club, society, association or organization. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 3, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-2. - Private entertainment excepted. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a private entertainment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 4, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-3. - Permit—Required; application; investigation; exception. 
(a)  Temporary live entertainment. Every person desiring to conduct temporary live entertainment, not to exceed one (1) day, shall, ten (10) days prior to such temporary one (1) day live entertainment event, file an application for a land use certificate to do so on forms provided. No applicant may obtain more than six (6) temporary one (1) day live entertainment land use certificates in any one (1) year period. Any property where temporary live entertainment is provided must comply with all zoning and occupancy requirements and regulations applicable to that property. Temporary live entertainment shall be governed under the provisions for land use certificates, and are not subject to the provisions for entertainment permits under this section. 
(b)  Entertainment permit. Every person wishing to provide live entertainment as defined in section 11-1 Definitions, shall file an application with the city manager, or designee, on forms provided at least sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of the offering of such entertainment. 
(c)  Such written application shall set forth the following facts: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant or applicants, and if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the names and residences of the officers, partners or directors thereof, and if the applicant is an association, the names and residences of the officers thereof; 
(2)  The particular place for which the permit is desired; 
(3)  The days and time of entertainment activities to be held under the permit; 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is the licensee of record, sole party, or applicants are the sole party, either directly or indirectly interested in the entertainment for which a permit is sought, and that no other person is, or will be, in any manner interested, directly or indirectly, during the continuance of the permit; 
(5)  A statement of the ownership of the realty of the premises for which the permit is sought; 
(6)  The name of at least one (1) responsible party on the premises, as well as a telephone number on the premises where such a person can be reached; 
(7)  Detailed description of all entertainment to be provided, including, but not limited to, amplified music, dancing, and any other similar live entertainment activities. 
(d)  The city manager, or designee, shall investigate the persons applying for such permit, shall consider the items and standards for granting set out in section 11-6 and, in conformance therewith, shall determine which permit category applies pursuant to section 11-7, and then grant such permit if all of the conditions of approval have been met. In the event that all of the conditions of approval have not been met, the city manager, or designee, may deny the permit applied for, and shall forthwith notify the applicant of the action along with a statement identifying the reasons for the denial. 
(e)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, or non-profit or charitable organization shall conduct any entertainment, without first making application for and obtaining a permit to do so, nor shall any person conduct the same during the time while a permit to do so is revoked. 
(f)  Any modifications or revisions to the live entertainment provided under an entertainment permit require city manager, or designee, approval. 
(g)  An entertainment permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year from date of issuance. Entertainment permits are not automatically renewed and it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to file a new application for an entertainment permit at least forty-five (45) days prior to the previous permit's expiration. 
(h)  All establishments within the city that were conducting activities requiring permitting and regulated under this section whose activities existed prior to August 5, 2013, shall have a period of one (1) year from the date of the adoption of the revisions to apply for an entertainment permit. During such time any fees for the processing of the permit shall be waived. 
(i)  Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter is issued solely to the person or entity applying for the permit and is non-transferrable to any other person or entity. 
(j)  Any permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city manager, or designee, to deny said permit may appeal as provided in chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, except that the written notice of appeal must be filed with the clerk of the council and the city manager, or designee, within ten (10) days of service of the written notice of the city manager's, or designee's, decision. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 5, 8-5-13) 
Cross reference— License fee, § 21-120d.  
Secs. 11-4, 11-5. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-6. - Same—Issuance of permit. 
The city manager, or designee, shall issue an entertainment permit to an applicant who submits a completed entertainment permit application and has fulfilled all conditions of approval found in this chapter. No permit shall be issued if the applicant or any person interested in or having any control of any part of the management of the entertainment has been convicted of a felony. Any such conviction will justify the revocation of any existing permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 8, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-7. - Same—Operational standards. 
All establishments with an entertainment permit shall comply with the following operational standards: 
(a)  Category 1. If the establishment has no amplified music, no dancing, and is not operating after-hours, as defined in this chapter, then no entertainment permit is required. 
(b)  Category 2. If the establishment has amplified music, but no dancing, and is not operating after-hours, as defined in this chapter, then an entertainment permit is required and the establishment shall comply with the following operational standards: 
(1)  The owner or manager of the entertainment venue shall maintain on the premises a written security plan approved by the police department. The category 2 security plan shall consist of a policies and procedures manual that addresses the following items: 
(A)  Procedures for handling obviously intoxicated persons. 
(B)  The method for establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to ensure adequate staffing levels to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior. 
(C)  Procedures for handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing or loitering about the building, and/or in the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented or used under agreement by the licensee(s). 
(D)  Procedures for verifying the age of patrons for purposes of alcohol sales. 
(E)  Procedures for ensuring that servers monitor patrons to ensure that their drinking limit/potential intoxication is not exceeded. This procedure should include a description of the procedure the server would use to warn, or refuse to serve, the patron. 
(F)  Procedures for calling the police regarding observed or reported criminal activity. 
(G)  Procedures for management of queuing lines. 
(H)  The location and description of any video games proposed to be on the premises. 
(2)  Any pool tables, amusement machines or video games maintained on the premises at any time must be reviewed and approved in the security plan. Any pool or billiard tables will be subject to the provisions of Santa Ana Municipal Code chapter 29 — Pool and Billiards. 
(3)  Neither the responsible party for the permitted establishment, nor any person or entity operating the premises with the permission of the responsible party, shall violate the city's adult entertainment ordinance contained in Santa Ana Municipal Code section 12-1 and 12-2. 
(4)  The premises shall not be operated as an adult entertainment business as such term is defined in Santa Ana Municipal Code section 41-1701.6. 
(5)  Persons who appear obviously intoxicated shall not be admitted into the venue. 
(6)  Employees shall not consume any alcoholic beverages during their work shift, except for product sampling for purposes of employee education about new products. Under no circumstances may contract security personnel consume alcoholic beverages during their work shift. 
(7)  Music/noise shall not be audible beyond twenty (20) feet from the exterior of the premises in any direction. 
(8)  There shall be no public telephones located on the exterior of the premises. All interior pay phones must be designed to allow outgoing calls only. 
(9)  Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises or on any adjacent area under the control of the responsible party for the permitted establishment shall be removed or painted within twenty-four (24) hours of being applied. 
(10)  It shall be the permitted establishment's obligation to ensure that California Penal Code section 602 — Trespassing is complied with at all times that the premises are in operation. 
(11)  The responsible party for the permitted establishment shall be responsible for maintaining free of litter the area adjacent to the premises under the control of the licensee. 
(12)  In no event shall the applicant allow the number of occupants to exceed the posted maximum occupancy. 
(13)  Existing venue and required parking must conform to the provisions of chapter 8, article II, division 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (building security ordinance). These code conditions will require existing project lighting may require upgrading and new lighting must meet current code standards. Lighting standards cannot be located in required landscape planters where they may become obscured by the mature canopy growth of trees. 
(14)  Cash register(s) must be visible from the street at all times and shall not be obstructed at any time by temporary or permanent signage or other mitigation agreed upon with the police department. 
(15)  Window displays must be kept to a minimum for maximum visibility and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of window coverage. 
(16)  Window displays and racks must be kept to a maximum height of three (3) feet including merchandise. 
(17)  A timed-access cash controller or drop safe must be installed or other mitigation measures agreed upon with the police department. 
(18)  Installation of a silent armed robbery alarm or other mitigation measures agreed upon with the police department. 
(19)  The permittee is ultimately responsible for all activity on the premises. 
(20)  The permit is non-transferable. The permit cannot be transferred to a new owner/operator, under a sublease or by a subcontractor. 
(c)  Category 3. If the establishment has amplified music and dancing, but is not operating after-hours, as defined in this chapter, then an entertainment permit is required and the establishment shall comply with all of the operational standards for category 2 entertainment permits, as well as the following operational standards: 
(1)  The owner or manager of the entertainment venue shall maintain on the premises a written security plan approved by the police department. The category 3 security plan shall consist of a policies and procedures manual containing all of the items required in the category 2 security plan plus the following: 
(A)  A fully-dimensioned site plan showing: 
(i)  The posting locations of any required security guards; 
(ii)  The location of all emergency exits; 
(iii)  The location of primary entrances and exits for patrons; 
(iv)  The location and square footage of the alcohol storage area; 
(v)  The dimensions and locations of the dance floor(s), stage(s) and fixed bar(s); 
(vi)  The location of the designated queuing area including the location of any stanchions; 
(vii)  The location of all cameras for the required closed circuit television system (CCTV); 
(viii)  Occupancy standards and approvals from the building department and Orange County Fire Authority; 
(ix)  Additional items as required to be indicated as determined necessary by the city manager, or designee. 
(B)  Procedures for counting the number of occupants entering and exiting the venue for purposes of enforcing established occupancy limits. 
(2)  Except in case of emergency, the responsible party for the permitted establishment shall not permit its patrons to enter or exit the licensed premises through any entrance/exit other than the primary entrance/exit, excluding entrances/exits from enclosed patio areas. Steps shall be taken by the responsible party for the permitted establishment to discourage unauthorized exiting. 
(3)  The police department will require uniformed, state-licensed security guards and/or Santa Ana police officers, at the owner's expense, to perform crowd control inside and outside of the establishment, based upon the type of activities anticipated at the location or based upon prior history of activity at this establishment or other similar businesses. These security guards will be deployed as per the agreed upon, security policies and procedures manual that has been approved by the police department. At a minimum and at all times, entertainment is being offered, the applicant shall employ a minimum of one (1) uniformed, state licensed security guard for every one hundred (100) persons in attendance per event, for keeping the peace. Mandated security officers will be required to use a radio frequency and communication equipment that is specified by the police department. Radios and communication equipment will be provided by the establishment at the establishment's cost. Guards will be required to provide escort service to patrons of the establishment if requested, insofar as the guard is not off the premises for more than ten (10) minutes. Mandated security guards will be required to participate in mutual aid activities with the police department and other guard companies at the direction of the police department. This may include the adoption of mutual aid communications as well as attendance at information sharing meetings. It is the responsibility of the permittee to keep copies and associated records of all individuals acting as private security for the establishment, which illustrate their state-licensed certification. These copies/records shall be readily accessible and provided to Santa Ana police personnel twenty-four (24) hours a day upon request. 
(4)  An electronic incident log shall be maintained at the licensed premises on a continual basis with at least one (1) year of entries and be readily available for inspection by a police officer. The log is for recording any physical altercations, injuries, and objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance occurring in, on, or at the licensed premises, including the immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, or rented by the licensee. The log will indicate date, time, description of incident, and action taken. "Objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance" means disturbance of the peace, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, loitering, public urination, lewd conduct, drug trafficking, excessive loud noise, etc. 
(5)  Contract security services, proprietary security personnel, or personnel assuming the functions typically associated with security shall be familiar with the establishment's written police department approved security policies and procedures by reviewing them and signing that they have read and understood the policy. The signed acknowledgement shall be kept in a file relating to the security manual and shall be made available to the police department upon request. 
(6)  Security personnel required by the entertainment permit issued for the entertainment venue shall be in a uniform or clothing, which is readily identifiable as a security person. Security uniform standards will be included in the security policy and procedures manual and will not be the same colors as the police department's. They shall maintain order and enforce the establishment's no loitering policy, and shall take "reasonable steps" (as that term is defined in subparagraph (3) of Section 24200 of the California Business and Professions Code) to correct objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance. 
(7)  If there is an increase of twenty-five (25) percent in the number of police-related incidents on or near the premises, the permittee shall increase the number of uniformed, state-licensed security guards to a total number of guards as determined by the chief of the police department. 
(8)  In addition to the above number of state-licensed uniformed security guards, the applicant shall provide a minimum of one (1) state-licensed uniformed security guard to ensure patron safety when going to and from the required parking for the venue whether on-site or off-site. Said guard is specifically assigned to this function until all activity on the premises has ceased and patrons have cleared the parking area. 
(9)  For any concert/live entertainment event where attendance exceeds four hundred (400) persons, it shall be the permittee's responsibility to pay for a minimum of two (2) uniformed Santa Ana police officers to work the event and ensure public safety. If the proposed event is deemed to have special circumstances by the police department, the chief of police or his authorized representative may increase the number of required police officers to ensure public safety. The officer costs shall be the permittee's responsibility to include, at a minimum one-half (½) hour prior to, during, and one-half (½) hour after the time the event is scheduled to end or until all patrons have left the premises and parking areas. Law enforcement presence is required at a minimum of four (4) hours for each officer assigned to the venue. 
(10)  The permittee will be responsible for verifying the age of those wishing to purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages in order to ensure that the business is in compliance with state law restricting the age of the sales and consumption of alcohol to those twenty-one (21) years of age and older. This verification process may include such techniques as, the manual checking of identification by a trained employee, the use of an identification scanner or similar device, or other method as approved in the security plan. This condition is not intended to be used as a means to discriminate against patrons based on race, ethnicity or legal status. 
(11)  The owner/operator shall provide a closed circuit television system approved by the police department and capable of viewing and recording events on the property and inside the premises with a resolution that will clearly identify individuals for later identification. This system will be clearly identified within the agreed upon security policy and procedures manual. Camera system components shall include: 
(A)  A minimum of one (1) color camera at each police department specified location. 
(B)  A color camera recorder or digital system capable of recording events on all cameras simultaneously. 
(C)  Provide an IP-based system. 
(12)  The permittee shall submit a monthly activity schedule to the police department. The schedule must include a brief synopsis of the type of venue, hours of the venue, artist(s) names and expected attendance. The submission must be via e-mail and must be received thirty (30) days prior. Updates to the proposed schedule must be sent immediately. 
(13)  A ticket manifest for an event shall be provided, on demand, to an authorized police department representative, if requested. The ticket manifest must clearly outline the total number of tickets sold for said event. It is generally understood that the industry standard is to utilize an electronic ticketing system. Authorization by the police department to access this online electronic system is the preferred method. 
(14)  Queuing lines shall be managed in an orderly manner and all disruptive and intoxicated patrons shall be denied entry. The business owner or his designate shall be responsible for monitoring and managing the queuing lines at all times. Food or alcohol may not be served to patrons waiting to enter the establishment. 
(15)  The outdoor queuing line shall not block public walkways or obstruct the entry or exit doors of adjacent businesses and residences. Stanchions or barriers must be used to maintain order at all times the queue exceeds twenty-five (25) patrons. Placement of stanchions and barriers must receive public works agency approval. 
(16)  Controls shall be established to maintain occupancy levels allowed by the Orange County Fire Authority and these fire department approved levels will not be exceeded. Methods of controlling occupancy can include, but not limited to the following: Counters used to count the number of occupants entering and exiting the location, which are available for inspection by OCFA or the police department. 
(17)  The permitted establishment shall at all times comply with Santa Ana Municipal Code sections 10-181 through 10-187 regarding curfews for minors. 
(d)  Category 4. If the establishment has amplified music, dancing, and is operating after-hours, as defined in this chapter, then an entertainment permit is required and the establishment shall comply with all of the operational standards for category 2 and category 3, as well as the following operational standards: 
(1)  The owner or manager of the entertainment venue shall maintain on the premises a written security plan approved by the police department. The category 4 security plan shall consist of a policies and procedures manual containing all of the items required in the category 2 and category 3 security plans plus the following: 
(A)  Procedures for the provision of alternate transportation services to patrons. This may include procedures for access to a telephone, the provision of a list of taxi services, or other service that will ensure the safe travel of any patron, particularly those who are intoxicated, in leaving the establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 9, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-8. - Indemnification. 
Anyone possessing an entertainment permit shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, actions or damages suffered by any person or persons by reason of or resulting from any negligence of the permittee or its agents, employees, or patrons or on account of any act or omission of the permittee in its exercise of its permit or use or occupancy of any premises in connection with such permit. In the event any suit or action is brought against the city, the permittee shall, upon notice of the commencement thereof, defend the same, at no cost and expense to the city, and promptly satisfy any final judgment adverse to the city or to the city and the permittee jointly; provided, that in the event the city determines that one (1) or more principles of governmental or public law are involved, the city retains the right to participate in such action. The above liability shall not be diminished by the fact, if it be a fact, that any such death, injury, damage, loss, cost or expense may have been, or may be alleged to have been, contributed to by the negligence of the city or its officers, employees or agents; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the permittee to indemnify the city against liability for damages arising out of bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the city, or its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 10, 8-5-13)  
Secs. 11-9, 11-10. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-11. - Entertainment prohibition; hours. 
No person shall allow, conduct or permit on any premises within the city open to the public any entertainment activities between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. during any day of the week. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 13, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-12. - Entertainment permit fee schedule adoption. 
The city shall adopt and amend, from time to time, a schedule of fees as described in this article by resolution. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 14, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 11-13. - Penalties and revocation. 
(a)  Any establishment obtaining an entertainment permit shall be subject to a penalty in the event that the business is in violation of any of the conditions of approval outlined in this chapter. 
(b)  This penalty shall consist of: 
(1)  A written warning upon the first violation, which shall cite the specific condition(s) of approval that were violated; 
(2)  The payment of a fine upon the second violation; 
(3)  The payment of an increased fine upon the third violation; 
(4)  The setting of an administrative revocation hearing, pursuant to the procedures established in chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, for the fourth violation. 
(c)  In the event of a revocation, the permittee may apply for reissuance of the permit after six (6) months from the date of revocation. Until such time as the permit may be reinstated, all entertainment on the premises must cease. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 15, 8-5-13)  
Chapter 12 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2847, § 16, adopted August 5, 2013, amended the title of ch. 12 to read as set out herein. Previously ch. 12 was titled entertainment. 
 
ARTICLE I. - UNLAWFUL EXPOSURE OF PRIVATE PARTS AND FEMALE BREASTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1662, §§ 1—5, enacted Dec. 20, 1982, amended Art. I, §§ 12-1, 12-3 and 12-4 to read as herein set out, and repealed former §§ 12-5 and 12-6. Prior to the enactment of said Ord. No. 1662, such sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1166, § 2, adopted June 4, 1973, and Ord. No. NS-1174, § 1, adopted July 2, 1973. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Prohibitions: Definitions: Waiters, waitresses, entertainers. 
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment: 
(a)  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(b)  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(c)  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1662, § 1, 12-20-82)  
Sec. 12-2. - Counseling or assisting. 
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in section 12-1. 
(Ord. No. NS-1166, § 2, 6-4-73)  
Sec. 12-3. - Employment or payment not necessary for offense. 
For purposes of section 12-1, a person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed. 
(Ord. No. NS-1662, § 2, 12-20-82)  
Sec. 12-4. - Exemption of theatrical establishments. 
The provisions of sections 12-1 through and including section 12-3 shall not apply to a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. 
As used in this article, and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code, the phrase "theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances" shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall, or other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage upon which theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, and in which the serving of alcoholic beverages is clearly incidental to such performances, and where the revenue derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages is insubstantial when compared to all other sources of gross revenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-1662, § 3, 12-20-82)  
Secs. 12-5—12-8. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-9. - Severability of parts of this chapter. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid, illegal or unenforceable for any reason, by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1166, § 3, 6-4-73)  
Secs. 12-10—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEEP SHOW ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Peep show establishments; purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of peep show establishments, as defined in this Code, should be regulated for the protection of the public from the perils of fire, hazard to health, and for the preservation of the peace of the community. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Peep show establishment" shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time for any consideration and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "specified anatomical areas" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 41-152.1 of this Code and the term "specified sexual activities" shall have the same meaning as defined in section 41-152.2 of this Code. 
(c)  "Peep show device" shall mean any still or motion picture machine, projector or other image-producing device which shows images to five (5) or fewer persons at any one time for any consideration and where the image so displayed is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
(d)  "Viewing area" shall mean the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or peep show device. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1652, § 1, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 12-23. - Permit required. 
No person shall operate a peep show device unless a permit for the operation of said device has been issued by the finance department of the city and remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-24. - Permit term. 
No permit shall be issued by the finance department for a period in excess of one (1) year. The expiration date of said permit shall be December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-2110, § 1, 2-4-91)  
Sec. 12-25. - Permit fee. 
Every person owning or operating a peep show device shall pay a fee for each such device as established by resolution of the city council. Any person applying for a permit for a period of less than one (1) year shall pay a prorated fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1545, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No. NS-2110, § 2, 2-4-91)  
Sec. 12-26. - Applications for permit; investigation fee. 
All applications for a permit, or for the renewal of a permit, shall be accompanied by an investigation fee as established by resolution of the city council. In the event the permit is granted or renewed, the sum shall be applied to the permit fee as described in section 12-25. In the event such permit is denied, said application fee shall be and become the property of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1545, § 2, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 12-27. - Permit; investigation. 
Every applicant shall file an application for a permit, or for the renewal of a permit, with the director of finance of the City of Santa Ana upon the form to be provided by the director of finance. Immediately upon the receipt of an application, the director of finance shall deliver said application to the city manager or his delegate. The city manager or his delegate shall cause to be made an investigation of the application to determine whether: 
(a)  The applicant has knowingly made a false or misleading statement of a material fact or omission of a material fact in the application; or 
(b)  The operation of the business as proposed pursuant to the issuance or renewal of a license or permit will not be in compliance with the building, fire, electrical, zoning, plumbing and health requirements as set forth in this Code; or 
(c)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(d)  The applicant has had a similar type of license or permit previously revoked for good cause within one year immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, and can show no material changes in circumstances since such revocation; or 
(e)  Customers or patrons of the peep show establishment have been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in subsection (a) of Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) or (h) of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct, arising out of acts on the premises or areas under control of the peep show establishment; and the applicant, having been previously advised or notified by the city of the occurrence of such criminal acts, has failed or refused to take or institute reasonable precautions or safeguards to insure that such criminal acts do not further occur. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1652, § 2, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 12-28. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
If the city manager finds that the applicant will be in compliance with the requirements described in section 12-27 the permit shall be granted or renewed. Any application for permit or for the renewal of a permit may be denied if the city manager finds that the applicant will not be in compliance with the requirements described in section 12-27. The city manager shall file a report of the approval or denial of the application with the finance department within thirty (30) days from and after the receipt of said application. If the application for permit or for the renewal of a permit is denied, the reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and be personally delivered or sent to the applicant by means of registered mail. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1545, § 3, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 12-29. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
In the event that any person holding a permit shall violate or cause or permit to be violated any of the provisions of this article, including subsections (b) and (e) of section 12-27, or any provision of any other article, ordinance or law relating to or regulating said business, or shall conduct or carry on the business in a manner which manifests a disability to perform properly the duties of the business as evidenced by the commission of an act or a series of acts, the city manager may, in addition to other penalties provided by this Code, take action to suspend or revoke the permit issued for conducting or carrying on the business. The action of the city manager shall be subject to the appeal provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code except that the city manager may take immediate action with respect to a permit, if a subsequent hearing is provided, where there is an urgency of immediate action to protect the public from injury or harm, or where a permit has been issued based on material misrepresentation in the application and but for the material misrepresentation, the permit would not have been issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1545, § 4, 10-6-80; Ord. No. NS-1652, § 3, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 12-30. - Hearing upon denial of permit, renewal, suspension or revocation. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police or designee to deny issuance or renewal of a permit or to suspend or revoke a permit may appeal as provided in chapter 3 of this Code, in which case the action of the chief of police or designee shall be suspended until the city council has made its decision. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 38, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 12, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 12-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1235, § 39, adopted Dec. 9, 1974, repealed § 12-31 relative to appeal from denial of permits, renewal, suspension or revocation. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, adopted May 17, 1971.  
Sec. 12-32. - No permit within one year after revocation. 
No person who has a permit for a peep show device revoked may obtain a peep show device permit within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-33. - Permit affixed to device; permits not transferable. 
No person shall operate a peep show device unless each such device is plainly marked with a serial number and shall have attached thereto a distinguishing tag, sign, permit or other marker issued by the finance department upon the granting or renewal of a permit, which shall bear a permit number identifying the peep show device as a particular device permitted pursuant to the terms of this Code. Such permit shall be affixed in a conspicuous location on each device and shall remain thereto until a new or different permit has been issued therefor. No permit shall be transferable from one person to another or from one device to another. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-34. - Wall, partition construction. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a room, enclosure or booth in which any peep show device is located is constructed of not less than one-hour fire-resistive material. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-34.5. - Peep show establishments; operating requirements. 
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of a peep show establishment unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  A minimum of one toilet and wash basin shall be provided for the patrons in every peep show establishment. Each wash basin shall be provided with soap or detergent and sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. 
(b)  In toilet rooms, a waterproof floor covering shall be provided which extends up the walls at least six (6) inches and shall be covered at the floor-wall juncture with at least a three-eighths-inch radius. Walls of toilet rooms shall be smooth, waterproof and kept in good repair. 
(c)  All walls, ceilings, floors, booths and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once each day the business is in operation. 
(d)  All establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present, effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination. 
(e)  There shall be no doors or curtains on the entrance to any toilet stall; and there shall be no locks or bolt on the door to the toilet facility. 
(f)  Position of film or peep show device: 
(1)  All viewing areas must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1652, § 4, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 12-35. - Minimum aisle width. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the width of the aisles in any room where a peep show device is located is less than forty-two (42) inches. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-36. - Minimum doorways. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless there are no fewer than two (2) doorways of a width no less than thirty-six (36) inches which provide ingress or egress from any room in which a peep show device is located; provided, however, that one (1) doorway shall be sufficient in the event the fire chief should so determine. Doorway or doorways shall be unlocked during business hours. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-37. - Lighted exit signs. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless over every doorway which provides egress from any room in which a peep show device is located an internally illuminated exit sign with letters at least five (5) inches in height is maintained. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-38. - Patron view of doorway. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless each peep show device located in such establishment is situated so as to permit the person using the peep show device to have a constantly unobstructed view of the doorway or doorways which provide ingress to or egress from the establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-39. - Minimum lighting. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless a light level of no less than ten (10) foot candles at floor level is maintained in every portion of said establishment to which the public is admitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-40. - Maximum occupancy load. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room where a peep show device is located exceeds one (1) person per thirty (30) square feet. The maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-41. - Maximum number of devices. 
No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of peep show devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located. The maximum number of peep show devices permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in a peep show establishment shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-42. - Free access to city manager or delegate. 
No person shall deny the city manager or his delegate free access to a peep show establishment for purposes of a reasonable inspection to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical or plumbing regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Sec. 12-43. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this Code, the operation of any peep show establishment in violation of the terms of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the City of Santa Ana, enjoined. 
(Ord. No. NS-1081, § 1, 6-17-71)  
Sec. 12-44. - Health services fees. 
The county health officer shall periodically make inspections of peep show establishments located in the City of Santa Ana to determine if the proprietors or operators of such establishments are complying with the provisions of this chapter. The proprietor of such establishment shall pay such fees as may be established by the County of Orange as reimbursement for the services provided by the county health officer and retained by the county. 
(Ord. No. NS-1321, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-2145, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Secs. 12-45—12-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2105, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 1991, repealed Art. III of this chapter, relative to lewd films and theatres exhibiting lewd films, which consisted of §§ 12-100—12-106 and derived from Ord. No. NS-1287, §§ 1—6, adopted Jan. 19, 1976, as amended by Ord. No. NS-1325, §§ 1—5, adopted Oct. 26, 1976, and Ord. No. NS-1452, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 18, 1978. 
 
Secs. 12-100—12-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIGURE MODEL STUDIOS 
 
Sec. 12-120. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
(b)  Figure model studio means any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing or procuring figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed, conversed with or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or seminude for persons who pay a fee or other consideration, compensation or gratuity for the right or opportunity to converse with or so depict a figure model or for admission to or for permission to remain upon or as a condition of remaining upon the premises. 
(c)  Figure model means any person who poses to be observed, viewed, conversed with, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted. 
(d)  Nude or seminude means completely without clothing or covering, or with partial clothing or covering with any pubic area exposed or with any portion of the crease of the buttocks exposed, or the exposing of any portion of either breast at or below the areola, or the wearing of any type clothing so that those portions of the aforedescribed anatomy may be observed. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-121. - Exceptions. 
The words "figure model studio" do not include: 
(a)  Any studio which is operated by any state college or public junior college or school wherein the person. operating it has met the requirements established in Section 21 of the Education Code for the issuance or conferring of and is, in fact, authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or honorary diploma; or 
(b)  Any studio which is a part of an institution receiving financial support in whole or in part through contributions of the federal or any state, county or city governments; or 
(c)  Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing, or procuring figure models solely for any studio described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 12-121. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-122. - Figure model studio permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the City of Santa Ana, the business of a figure model studio without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every such figure model studio. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-123. - Figure model studio permit [application.] 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a figure model studio shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the costs of investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize conducting a figure model studio until such permit has been granted. 
(c)  Each applicant for a figure model studio permit shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of three (3) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of birth. 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this ordinance, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The chief of police may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of establishing identification. 
(d)  The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(e)  The chief of police shall have thirty (30) calendar days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The chief of police or his representative shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of the permit to the city manager. The department of building safety and housing, the fire department, and the Orange County Health Department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the figure model studio and shall make separate recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with applicable laws. The proprietor of such establishment shall pay a fee established by resolution of the city council to the county health officer as reimbursement for the county health officer's public health and sanitation services for said inspection. 
(f)  The city manager, after receiving the application and aforementioned recommendations, shall grant the permit if he finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, within five (5) years prior to the application filing date been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of California Penal Code Sections 314, 315, 316, 318 647(a), 647(b), 647(d) or 647(h), or convicted in any other state for an offense which, if committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the aforementioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
(5)  The applicant has not had a figure modeling studio permit or model permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state within the five (5) years prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The figure model studio as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and building safety requirements and standards. 
(7)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(g)  Any person, corporation or partnership denied a permit by the city manager pursuant to these provisions may appeal such decision pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1336, § 1, 12-28-76; Ord. No. NS-2361, § 2, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 12-124. - Figure model permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a figure model in any figure model studio as defined unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the city of Santa Ana pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-125. - Figure model permit [application.] 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to act as a figure model shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this ordinance. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application has been paid. The receipt, or copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize acting as a figure model until such permit has been granted. 
(c)  Each applicant for a figure model permit shall furnish all the information required by section 12-123(c) (1) through (9) of this article, and shall in addition furnish the following information: 
(1)  The figure model studio, if any, at which the applicant expects to be employed. 
(2)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(3)  The chief of police may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of establishing identification. 
(d)  The chief of police shall have thirty (30) calendar days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The chief of police or his representative shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of the permit to the city manager. 
(e)  The city manager, after receiving the application and aforementioned recommendation, shall grant the permit if he finds in accordance with section 12-123(f). 
(f)  Any person denied a permit by the city manager pursuant to these provisions may appeal such decision pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1336, § 2, 12-28-76; Ord. No. NS-2361, § 2, 7-20-98)  
Sec. 12-126. - Figure model studio facilities. 
Every person operating a figure model studio shall maintain facilities meeting the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Sign. Subject to applicable ordinances, a recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a figure model studio. 
(b)  Lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electrical Code, and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where figure modeling services are performed. 
(c)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with Section 1105 of the Uniform Building Code. 
(d)  Compliance with Code. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code shall be provided by the person(s) operating such figure model studio. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-127. - Figure model studio operation. 
Every person operating a figure model studio shall comply with the following operating requirements. These requirements shall be prominently and publicly displayed by the person(s) operating such figure model studio in a conspicuous place upon every premises operating under the provisions of this article: 
(a)  Each person employed or acting as a figure model shall have a valid permit issued by the City of Santa Ana, and it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of the studio to employ or permit a person to act as a figure model as defined in this Code who is not in possession of a valid unrevoked figure model permit. 
(b)  Figure model services shall be carried on, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 mid 
(c)  The figure model permit, and a copy of the permit of each and every figure model employed in the studio, shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. 
(d)  No person shall enter, be or remain, in any part of a figure model studio while in the possession of, consuming, or using any alcoholic beverage or drug except pursuant to a prescription for such drug. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises. 
(e)  No figure model studio shall operate as a massage establishment or school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a massage establishment or school of massage, except as provided below. The nonconforming use of figure model studios as massage establishments or school of massage, existing on or before December 1, 1976, may be continued, but shall be discontinued on or before January 1, 1979. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1336, § 3, 12-28-76)  
Sec. 12-128. - Sale or transfer. 
(a)  Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a figure model studio, the permit shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the figure model studio. A fee established by resolution of the city council shall be payable for each such application involving sale or other transfer of any interest in an existing figure model studio. The provisions of section 12-123 of this chapter shall apply to any person applying for a figure model studio permit for premises previously used as such studio. 
(b)  Any such sale or transfer of any interest in an existing figure model studio or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the figure model studio, shall require inspection and shall require compliance with section 12-126 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1336, § 4, 12-28-76)  
Sec. 12-129. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  A change of location of any of the aforementioned and described premises may be approved by the chief of police and the director of planning, provided all ordinances and regulations of the City of Santa Ana are complied with and a change of location fee as established by resolution of the city council is deposited with the city. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate under any name or conduct any establishment under any designation not specified in his permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76; Ord. No. NS-1336, § 5, 12-28-76)  
Sec. 12-130. - Visibility. 
No person operating a figure model studio shall permit conditions to exist whereby the interior portions of said figure model studio shall be visible from the outside of the premises. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-131. - Records. 
Every person operating a figure model studio shall maintain a record file of all figure models employed by him or using the premises. This file shall contain the true names and all aliases used by the figure model, age, birth date, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, home address, and phone numbers, date of employment and termination. Inactive file cards shall be maintained on the premises for a period of one year following termination of employment. Such persons shall make all records immediately available upon demand of any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-132. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pose as a figure model for the purposes of being observed, sketched, painted, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or seminude in such a manner that the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find that the activities, as a whole, appeal to the prurient interest, depict in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable state law and lacks serious literary or artistic value. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the permit granted hereunder. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a figure model studio to violate the provisions of section 12-122, 12-126, 12-127, 12-129, 12-130, or 12-131 of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any figure model to violate the provisions of section 12-124 or to act as a figure model in any figure model studio which does not have a license therefor as required by section 12-122. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of section 12-132(a), (b), or (c) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-133. - Suspension or revocation. 
When the city manager finds that any person holding a permit under the provisions of section 12-123 or 12-125 has violated the provisions of this article he may revoke the permit. No such revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing by certified mail of his right to appeal the revocation decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise the revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has passed. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-134. - Conducting as a nuisance. 
Any figure model studio operated, conducted or maintained contrary to provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such figure model studio and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a figure model studio contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Sec. 12-135. - Applicability to existing businesses. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of this article, except that those in business prior to the effective date of this article shall have sixty (60) days from such date to comply with the terms herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1334, § 1, 12-20-76)  
Secs. 12-136—12-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ESCORT BUREAU AND INTRODUCTORY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 12-150. - Escort bureau and introductory services; purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council of the City of Santa Ana, by the adoption of this article, that the operation of an escort bureau or introductory service, as defined in this article, should be regulated for the protection of the public from the perils of fire, hazard to health, and for the preservation of the peace and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Business or commerce means that term as is defined in section 41-33 of Division 2 of Article I of Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(b)  Escort means any person who, for pecuniary compensation: 
(i)  Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons to, from or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly or places of amusement located or situated within the City of Santa Ana; or 
(ii)  Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or about any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters located or situated within the City of Santa Ana; or 
(iii)  Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or about any business or commercial establishment, or part or portion thereof located or situated within the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Escort bureau means any business, agency or self-employed or independent escort who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts. 
(d)  Introductory service means a service offered or performed by any person for pecuniary compensation, the principal purpose of which is to aid persons to become socially acquainted or to otherwise assist persons to meet for social purposes, or which service is generally known or should be known by the offering or performing party to be used by the recipients thereof for the purpose of obtaining information about other persons to be used for social purposes. 
(e)  Pecuniary compensation means any commission, fee, gratuity, hire, profit, reward, or any other form of consideration. 
(f)  Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association. 
(g)  Profit interest means any interest or share in the present or prospective profit of an escort bureau or introductory service. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-152. - Escort bureau and introductory service, permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises or real property located or situated within the City of Santa Ana, the activities of an escort bureau or introductory service, unless there has been granted to such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this article. A separate permit shall be required for each location within the City of Santa Ana at which an escort bureau or introductory service is to be established. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-153. - Permit term. 
The term of an escort bureau or introductory service permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-154. - Permit renewal. 
An escort bureau or introductory service permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of not to exceed one year on written application to the chief of police made at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information required by section 12-156 of this article and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-155. - Exception. 
The requirements of this article shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to a person in the lawful business of an employment agency licensed under the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-156. - Application for escort bureau or introductory service permit; contents; renewals; required fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renew an existing permit, to operate an escort bureau or an introductory service, shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application for a permit or renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application or renewal fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance or renewal fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, nor payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize the conducting of an escort bureau or introductory service until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for an escort bureau or introductory service permit, or renewal thereof, shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The present or proposed address where the business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted; 
(3)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(4)  The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant; 
(5)  Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five-year period immediately proceeding the date of filing of the application and the inclusive dates of each such address; 
(6)  California driver's license or identification number and social security number of the applicant; 
(7)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(8)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of birth; 
(9)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the filing or the application; 
(10)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(11)  The permit history of the applicant, for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit issued by such agency revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended, and the reason or reasons therefor; 
(12)  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations but excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction; 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names, residence addresses, and dates of birth of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) per cent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses and dates of birth of each of the partners, including limited partners and profit interest holders. If the applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The corporation or partnership applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(14)  In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the escort bureau or introductory service is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the property acknowledging that an escort bureau or introductory service is or will be located on the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name and address of the owner of record of the property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the escort bureau or introductory service is or will be located; 
(15)  A definition of the service to be provided; 
(16)  The true names and residential addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed as escorts; 
(17)  Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The applicant, if a natural person, or a designated responsible managing officer, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application or renewal fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this section 12-156. 
(e)  The chief of police may require the applicant, if a natural person, or the designated responsible managing officer, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, to appear in person at the police department in order to be photographed and fingerprinted. 
(f)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section 12-256 to be included in the application, the applicant or permit holder, as the case may be, shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours after such change. 
(g)  The chief of police shall have thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the filing of the application in which to investigate the application for the permit or renewal thereof. 
(h)  The chief of police or designee, within fifteen (15) calendar days after completing the investigation, shall grant the permit, or renewal thereof, only if he finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The required fees have been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(5)  The applicant if an individual; or any of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of the corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, the holder of any lien of any nature or profit interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau or introductory service, or a natural person employed or contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services; has not been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d) or (h) of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct; or has permitted, through an act of omission or commission, his or her employee or agent to engage in any type of moral turpitude or sexual misconduct offense, whether misdemeanor or felony (under such circumstances, the conduct of the employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction or a plea of nolo contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the principal and shall be grounds for permit denial); 
(6)  The applicant has not had an escort bureau, introductory service or escort permit or other similar license or permit denied or suspended or revoked for cause by the city or any other city or county located in or out of this state within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(7)  The escort bureau or introductory service, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable city, county and state laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; and 
(8)  The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(i)  If the chief of police or designee does not find that all of the requirements set forth in subsections (h)(1) through (8) of this section 12-156 have been met, he shall deny application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event the application for the permit or renewal thereof is denied by the chief of police or designee, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant, specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit, or renewal thereof, shall be deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at the residence address set forth in the application for the permit or renewal thereof. Any applicant whose application for an escort bureau or introductory service permit, or renewal thereof, has been denied by the chief of police or designee, may appeal such denial as provided in chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-2361, § 2, 7-20-98; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 13, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 12-157. - Employment and activities of escorts. 
(a)  No holder of an escort bureau or introductory service permit shall employ as an escort any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  No holder of an escort bureau or introductory service permit shall furnish any escort or introductory service to, or accept employment from any patron, customer or person to be escorted, who is under eighteen (18) years of age, except at the special instance and request of a parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort or introductory service is engaged. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-158. - Escorts, permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort unless there has been granted to such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such permit shall be issued to the address of the employer of the escort, who must in turn also hold a valid escort bureau or introductory service permit issued by the City of Santa Ana pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-159. - Term of [escort] permit. 
The term of an escort permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-160. - Employee permit renewal. 
An escort permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of one year on written application to the chief of police made at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information required in section 12-162 of this article, and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-161. - [Escort] permit identification card. 
Each escort permit holder shall be issued an identification card which will also serve as an escort permit. The permit holder shall carry such card in a visible position upon his or her person when acting as an escort and produce the same for inspection upon request. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender, to the chief of police, any escort permit issued by the City of Santa Ana upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit, or upon leaving employment as an escort. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-162. - Escort permit; renewal application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renewal of an existing permit, to act as an escort, shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application for a permit or renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application or renewal fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Permit fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Neither the filing of an application for a permit, or renewal thereof, nor the payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize a person to act as an escort until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for an escort permit, or renewal thereof, shall furnish the information required by subsections (c) (1) through (12) of section 12-156 of this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the following information: 
(1)  A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the State of California, stating that the applicant has within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the application been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease; 
(2)  Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is employed, or has been offered employment, by an escort bureau or introductory service holding a valid permit issued by the City of Santa Ana, including the name and address of the employer or prospective employer and the fact that such employment or continued employment is contingent upon the issuance of said permit; and 
(3)  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The chief of police may require the applicant to appear in person at the police department in order to be photographed and fingerprinted. 
(e)  The chief of police shall have thirty (30) calendar days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. 
(f)  The city manager, within an additional thirty (30) days after investigating the application shall grant the permit, or renewal thereof, only if he finds that all of the requirements of subsections (h)(1) through (4) of section 12-156 of this article have been met, and, in addition, if he finds that the following additional requirements have been met: 
(1)  The applicant has furnished an acceptable medical certificate in compliance with subsection (c)(1) of this section 12-162; 
(2)  The applicant has not had an escort bureau, introductory service or escort permit or other similar license or permit denied or suspended or revoked for cause by the city or any other city or county located in or out of this state within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
(3)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(4)  The applicant has not been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or a misdemeanor or felony crime involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (h) of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct. 
(g)  If the chief of police or designee does not find that all of the requirements set forth in subsection (f) of this section 12-162 have been met, he shall deny the application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event the application for the permit, or renewal thereof, is denied by the chief of police or designee, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit, or renewal thereof shall be deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit or renewal thereof. Any applicant whose application for an escort permit, or renewal thereof, has been denied by the chief of police or designee, may appeal such denial as provided in chapter 3 or this Code. 
(h)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section 12-161, the applicant or permit holder, as the case may be, shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours after such change. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. NS-2361, § 2, 7-20-98; Ord. No. NS-2792, § 14, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 12-163. - Prohibited activities [by escorts.] 
No holder of an escort permit shall escort, offer to escort or perform any activity described in this article to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, except at the special instance and request of the parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person on whose behalf the escort or introductory service is engaged. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-164. - Sale or transfer [of bureau or service.] 
Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an escort bureau or introductory service, the permit shall immediately become null and void. A new application shall be made by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the escort bureau or introductory service. A fee as established by resolution of city council shall be payable for each such application. Any application involving the sale or other transfer of any interest in an existing escort bureau or introductory service, as well as any permit which may thereafter be granted, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-165. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  A change of location of any premises or real property where a permitted escort bureau or introductory service is conducted may be approved by the chief of police provided all requirements of this article and all ordinances and regulations of the City of Santa Ana are complied with and a change of location fee as established by resolution of the city council is deposited with director of finance. Application for such change shall be made within three (3) days of such change. 
(b)  No permit holder shall operate an escort bureau or introductory service under any name or designation not specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-166. - Prohibited conduct. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Revocation or suspension of a permit issued under this article shall not be a defense against prosecution. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-167. - Suspension or revocation of a permit. 
If the city manager finds that any person holding an escort bureau or introductory service permit under provisions of this article has violated any of the provisions of this article or conducts such business in such a manner as would have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in subsection (h) of section 12-156 of this article, or if the city manager finds that any person holding an escort permit is engaging in behavior or actions which violate any of the provisions of this article or which would have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in subsection (f) of section 12-162 of this article, he may suspend or revoke the permit. No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit holder to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. Notification of the permit holder shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a permit or renewal thereof. If a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise the suspension or revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has expired. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-168. - Conducting as a nuisance. 
Any escort bureau or introductory service operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an escort bureau or introductory service contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Sec. 12-169. - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article into law. All such persons and businesses shall have sixty (60) days from said effective date to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1593, § 1, 9-8-81)  
Chapter 13 - FUNDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; special enforcement services fund, § 10-250 et seq.; special tax financing improvement code, Ch. 20; parking meter fund, § 36-406. 
 
ARTICLE I. - LIABILITY INSURANCE FUND 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Creation of liability insurance fund. 
There is hereby created and established the liability insurance fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Sec. 13-2. - Deposit of moneys. 
The city council may, from time to time, transfer to the liability insurance fund moneys from the general fund or any other fund which may be used for the purposes set forth in section 13-3, in such amounts as are necessary to establish such fund and maintain its solvency. The city council may abolish said fund when the purposes set forth in section 13-3 have been satisfied and no further need exists for said fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Sec. 13-3. - Expenditure of moneys. 
Moneys in the liability insurance fund shall be expended for payment of claims and judgments for damages incurred by the city in the operation of a self-insured liability insurance program. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Secs. 13-4—13-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL INSURANCE FUND 
 
Sec. 13-10. - Creation of general insurance fund. 
There is hereby created and established the general insurance fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Sec. 13-11. - Deposit of moneys. 
The city council may, from time to time, transfer to the general insurance fund moneys from the general fund or any other fund which may be used for the purposes set forth in section 13-12, in, such amounts as are necessary to establish such fund and maintain its solvency. The city council may at any time transfer moneys from said general insurance fund to any other appropriate fund or may abolish said fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Sec. 13-12. - Expenditure of moneys. 
Moneys in the general insurance fund shall be expended for expenses incurred by the city in the operation of a self-insured liability insurance program, as well as a general insurance program, including, but not limited to, wages, salaries and fringe benefits of city employees charged with the management and administration of said program, adjustment and litigation of claims and suits, and necessary clerical support services, and for other operating expenses of such program, including, but not limited to, purchase of supplies, material and equipment necessary to conduct said programs, contractual and professional services for litigation and settlement of claims, expert services, auditing services, and premiums for excess liability and general insurance policies. 
(Ord. No. NS-1306, 7-19-76)  
Secs. 13-13—13-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FUND FOR MUSEUM PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 13-20. - Creation of a fund for museum purposes. 
There is hereby created and established the fund for museum purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1372, 7-18-77)  
Sec. 13-21. - Deposit of moneys. 
The board of trustees of the Bowers Museum may, from time to time, transfer to the fund for museum purposes all amounts derived from gifts, devises and bequests of money to the museum, except moneys to be deposited in the museum expansion fund pursuant to section 13-101, and all proceeds received from the sale of items considered by the Bowers Museum Board of Trustees to be surplus to the collections of the museum. 
(Ord. No. NS-1372, 7-18-77; Ord. No. NS-1617, § 6, 1-18-82)  
Sec. 13-22. - Expenditure of moneys. 
Moneys in the fund for museum purposes shall be expended for personal property, including necessary publications and objects of natural, historical, or artistic value. No expenditures shall be made unless the requirements of Santa Ana Municipal Charter, Section 421, have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. NS-1372, 7-18-77)  
Secs. 13-23—13-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
Sec. 13-30. - Creation of special gas tax street improvement funds. 
There is hereby created and established the special gas tax street improvement fund pursuant to Section 2113 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1448, 9-5-78)  
Sec. 13-31. - Deposit of money from the highway users tax fund. 
All apportionment of moneys from the highway users tax fund to the City of Santa Ana shall be deposited in the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1448, 9-5-78)  
Sec. 13-32. - Expenditure of funds from the special gas tax street improvement fund. 
In making any expenditure from the special gas tax street improvement fund, the City of Santa Ana shall follow the law governing it in regard to the doing of the particular type of work in cases which are not exclusively municipal affairs. 
(Ord. No. NS-1448, 9-5-78)  
Sec. 13-33. - Interest and other income. 
Interest received by the City of Santa Ana from the investment of money in its special gas tax street improvement fund, and all other income derived from the use of such moneys, including, but not limited to, rental income and funds derived from sale of surplus properties purchased with such moneys, shall be deposited in the fund and shall be used for street purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1448, 9-5-78)  
Secs. 13-34—13-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REVENUE SHARING TRUST FUND 
 
Sec. 13-40. - Creation of a general revenue sharing trust fund. 
There is hereby created and established a trust fund for the deposit of all general revenue sharing funds pursuant to the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (31 U.S.C. 1221 et seq., as amended, and regulations pursuant thereto). 
(Ord. No. NS-1455, 10-2-78)  
Sec. 13-41. - Deposit of money from general revenue sharing funds. 
All apportionment of moneys from general revenue sharing funds to the City of Santa Ana shall be deposited in the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1455, 10-2-78)  
Sec. 13-42. - Expenditure of funds from general revenue sharing trust fund. 
The City of Santa Ana shall comply with all laws governing the expenditure of general revenue sharing funds when making any expenditure of funds from the general revenue sharing trust fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1455, 10-2-78)  
Sec. 13-43. - Interest and other income. 
Interest received by the City of Santa Ana from the investment of money in the general revenue sharing trust fund, and all other income derived from the use of such moneys, including but not limited to, rental income and funds derived from sale of surplus properties purchased with such moneys, shall be deposited in the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1455, 10-2-78)  
Secs. 13-44—13-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FUND FOR THERAPEUTIC RECREATION 
 
Sec. 13-50. - Creation of therapeutic recreation fund. 
There is hereby created and established the special therapeutic recreation fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1475, 2-20-79)  
Sec. 13-51. - Deposit of moneys. 
Amounts received from therapeutic fund raising activities, including but not limited to, the sale of bumper stickers, rummage sales, bake sales, service club donations, and amounts derived from gifts, bequests and devises to the therapeutic recreation program shall be deposited in the therapeutic recreation fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1475, 2-20-79)  
Sec. 13-52. - Expenditure of funds. 
Money in the therapeutic recreation fund shall only be expended for therapeutic recreation activities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1475, 2-20-79)  
Secs. 13-53—13-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SEWER CONNECTION FEE FUND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, adopted Aug. 6, 1979, amended Ch. 13 by adding provisions designated Art. VI, §§ 13-50—13-56, which provisions were redesignated Art. VII by the editors inasmuch as Ch. 13 already contained an Art. VI. 
 
Sec. 13-61. - Creation of sewer connection fee fund. 
There is hereby created and established the sewer connection fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-62. - Deposit of moneys. 
All moneys received by the city as a fee for connection to the public sewers, pursuant to section 39-53 of this Code, shall be deposited into the sewer connection fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-63. - Expenditure of moneys. 
Except as provided in section 13-65, moneys in the sewer connection fee fund may be expended for, and only for, the purpose of reimbursing persons, or their successors-in-interest, for all costs incurred by them in paying for construction of sewers, in such manner and in such amount as is provided by contract between such person and the City of Santa Ana pursuant to section 39-54 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-64. - Order of reimbursement. 
Parties contracting for reimbursement for sewer construction cost, or their successors-in-interest, shall be entitled to receive payment as moneys accrue in the sewer connection fee fund until fully reimbursed, in the chronological order of the dates of execution of their respective contracts, except to the extent any such contract may provide for proportional, subordinate or deferred payment to the party thereto with respect to simultaneous or subsequent contracting parties. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-65. - Reimbursement to the city. 
The City of Santa Ana may receive reimbursement from the sewer connection fee fund for all costs of sewer construction in the same manner as parties contracting with the city pursuant to this article, upon a resolution of the city council setting forth manner and amount of such reimbursement. Reimbursement to the city shall be subordinate to the claims of prior contracting parties to moneys accruing in the sewer connection fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-66. - Interest. 
Moneys in the sewer connection fee fund shall be deposited into an interest-bearing account separate and apart from other municipal funds, and interest accruing thereon shall be credited to the sewer connection fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Sec. 13-67. - Transfers to the general fund. 
Upon a finding that a surplus exists in the sewer connection fee fund, in that moneys on deposit therein exceed present and prospective expenditures pursuant to section 13-63, the council may authorize and direct the transfer of all or any part of such surplus from the sewer connection fee fund to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1497, § 3, 8-6-79)  
Secs. 13-68, 13-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL REVOLVING FUND FOR REPAIR AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS DECLARED TO BE A PUBLIC NUISANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1512, enacted Dec. 3, 1979, amended Ch. 13 by adding provisions designated Art. VI, § 13-60, which provisions were redesignated Art. VIII, § 13-70, by the editors inasmuch as Ch. 13 already contained an Art. VI. 
 
Sec. 13-70. - Repair and demolition fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a special revolving fund to be designated as the repair and demolition fund. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon the demand of the city manager to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by the city in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings as provided in Chapter 8 of this Code. 
(b)  The city council may at any time transfer to the repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund of the city, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work or repair or demolition, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections provided for in Chapter 8 of this Code All funds collected under such assessment proceedings shall be deposited in the repair and demolition fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1512, 12-3-79)  
Secs. 13-71—13-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - "MAIN-SUNFLOWER CORRIDOR" IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
Sec. 13-80. - Creation; deposits and expenditures. 
There is hereby created and established the "Main-Sunflower Corridor" Improvement Fund, for the purpose of implementing that certain agreement, dated August 12, 1980, between the cities of Santa Ana, Irvine and Costa Mesa for the financing of street improvements in the area of the "Main-Sunflower Corridor," a copy or which is on file in the office of the clerk of the council. Moneys shall be deposited into, and expended from, said fund in accordance with the provisions of the said agreement, as the same now exists and as it may from time to time hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1551, 11-17-80)  
Secs. 13-81—13-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - EXCESS PROCEEDS OF TAXES RESERVE FUND[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1581, enacted April 20, 1981, amended Ch. 13 by adding thereto provisions designated Art. IX, §§ 13-80—13-85, which provisions were redesignated by the editors as Art. X, §§ 13-90—13-95, inasmuch as Ch. 13 already contained an Art. IX. 
 
Sec. 13-90. - Creation of excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund. 
There is hereby created and established the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund. Such fund is established pursuant to Section 5 of Article 13B of the Constitution of the State of California for the purpose of providing for the separate accounting of proceeds of taxes received in a fiscal year prior to the fiscal year in which they are expended, and thereby to distinguish between proceeds of taxes which are subject to the appropriations limit of the city applying to the fiscal year in which they are expended and proceeds of taxes which are not subject to the appropriations limit of the city in the fiscal year in which they are expended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1581, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 13-91. - Appropriations to the fund. 
In each fiscal year, the amount, if any, by which those revenues which constitute proceeds of taxes exceed expenditures thereof, as of the close of the last day of such fiscal year, is appropriated to the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund, and shall constitute an appropriation subject to limitation in such fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1581, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 13-92. - Relation to other funds. 
Any moneys which have been contributed to any contingency, emergency, unemployment, reserve, retirement, sinking, trust, or similar fund during the course of a fiscal year and which are appropriated to the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund by operation of section 13-91, shall remain in such other fund and subject to the limitations placed upon expenditures therefrom as well as being within the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund for purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1581, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 13-93. - Expenditures from the fund. 
Moneys in the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund may be expended or authorized for expenditure in the same manner as moneys not in such fund. Such expenditures or authorizations to expend from such fund shall not constitute appropriations subject to limitation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1581, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 13-94. - Separate accounting. 
The director of finance is authorized and directed to establish accounting procedures which distinguish between expenditures of, or authorizations to expend, moneys in the excess proceeds of taxes reserve fund and expenditures of, or authorizations to expend, moneys not in such fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1582, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 13-95. - Terminology. 
As used herein, the terms "proceeds of taxes," "appropriations limit," and "appropriations subject to limitation" shall have the same meaning as they have in Article 13B of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. NS-1581, 4-20-81)  
Secs. 13-96—13-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MUSEUM EXPANSION FUND 
 
Sec. 13-100. - Creations of museum expansion fund. 
There is hereby created and established the museum expansion fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1617, § 7,1-18-82)  
Sec. 13-101. - Deposit of money. 
All moneys received from donation fees collected pursuant to sections 2-554 through 2-558 of this Code and all moneys donated to the city expressly for the purpose of aiding the expansion of the Bowers museum facilities or the long range financial operation of said facilities, and all interest accruing thereon, shall be deposited into the museum expansion fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1617, § 7, 1-18-82)  
Sec. 13-102. - Expenditures of funds. 
No expenditures from the museum expansion fund shall be made except upon order of the museum director for refund of fees or deposits pursuant to sections 2-557 or 2-558 of this Code, or upon by order of the city council of the City of Santa Ana for one of the following purposes: 
(1)  Financial assistance to the expansion of the Bowers Museum facilities, including costs of land acquisition, building construction, landscaping, and furnishing. 
(2)  Contribution to endowment trust fund established for the purpose of building a principal amount through city and private sector contributions, such that interest alone on the investment thereof shall be sufficient to provide for ordinary operating expenses of the Bowers Museum. 
(Ord. No. NS-1617, § 7, 1-18-82)  
Secs. 13-103—13-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT AREA FUNDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Transportation system improvement fee, § 8-44. 
 
Sec. 13-110. - Creation of transportation system improvement program area funds. 
There are hereby created and established separate and distinct funds for each transportation system improvement program area designated by the city council pursuant to section 8-44 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1651, § 3, 10-4-82; Ord. No. NS-1692, § 2, 7-18-83)  
Sec. 13-111. - Deposit of money. 
All monies received from fees collected pursuant to section 8-44 for permits issued within a transportation system improvement program area shall be deposited into the fund established for that area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1651, § 3, 10-4-82; Ord. No. NS-1692, § 3, 7-18-83)  
Sec. 13-112. - Expenditure of funds. 
Monies in a transportation system improvement program area fund shall be expended to improve the transportation system within the area for which such fund was established, or outside such area only when such improvement will substantially benefit such area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1651, § 3, 10-4-82; Ord. No. NS-1692, § 4, 7-18-83)  
Secs. 13-113—13-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES FUND 
 
Sec. 13-120. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established the "Criminal Activities Fund" pursuant to the provisions of Section 11489 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1804, § 1, 11-4-85)  
Sec. 13-121. - Deposits and expenditures. 
All apportionments of monies received pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11489 or any forfeiture disbursements made by the federal government shall be deposited in the criminal activities fund and shall be used solely for investigation, detection and prosecution of criminal activities. Further, any monies which were or were intended to be used as evidence in a criminal prosecution and which have not been claimed, may, after one (1) year from the final disposition of the matter at the trial court level, be transferred into the criminal activities fund, and in the event that a valid claim for any monies so deposited is thereafter presented, such claim may be paid from the criminal activities fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1804, § 1, 11-4-85; Ord. No. NS-1975, § 1, 9-6-88)  
Secs. 13-122—13-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - SPECIAL PENSION OBLIGATIONS FUND[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. NS-1839, adopted March 3, 1986, amended this chapter by the addition of provisions designated as Art. XIII. §§ 13-115—13-120, which provisions have been redesignated and included herein as Art. XIV. §§ 13-130—13-135 in order to facilitate inclusion in this chapter. 
 
Sec. 13-130. - Creation of special pension obligations fund. 
There is hereby created and established the special pension obligations fund, which shall be held and administered by the director of finance, the city manager and the city attorney as custodians. The special pension obligations fund shall be established as a special fund for the purpose of receiving, holding and disbursing amounts relating to the pension obligations of the city and shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 13-131. - Deposit of monies. 
The city shall deposit into the special pension obligations fund, promptly upon the receipt thereof, all amounts relating to the pension obligations of the city. Such amounts shall include, without limitation, (a) all gross revenues and amounts derived with respect to the annuities, and (b) all amounts required to be paid by the city to the Public Employees' Retirement System ("PERS") organized and existing pursuant to the Public Employees' Retirement Law of the State of California (constituting Part 3 of Division 5 of the Government Code of the State of California). All amounts deposited into the special pension obligations fund shall be deemed to be special funds derived with respect to the pension obligations of the city, and shall be accounted for separately and apart from all other monies, funds and accounts of the city and shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 13-132. - Expenditure of monies. 
Amounts in the special pension obligations fund shall be expended solely for the purpose of financing the pension obligations of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 13-133. - Pledge and allocation of monies. 
The city may pledge, and may grant a security interest in and lien upon, all or any portion of the amounts deposited into the special pension obligations fund for the purpose of securing the payment of all or any portion of the pension obligations of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 13-134. - Pension obligations defined. 
As used in this article, the term "pension obligations" shall mean all obligations of the city to finance the retirement system of the city, including but not limited to (a) the obligations of the city to make payment to the public employees' retirement system pursuant to the contract (the "PERS Contract") between the city and PERS dated as of November 25, 1946, as amended from time to time, and (b) the obligations of the city to pay installments of the purchase price of the annuities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 13-135. - Annuities defined. 
As used in this article, the term "annuities" shall mean all annuities purchased by the city with respect to beneficiaries under the PERS contract, including but not limited to all annuities purchased by the city from the Santa Ana Financing Corporation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1839, § 3, 3-3-86)  
Secs. 13-136—13-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - LIBRARY FUND[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Library, § 2-600 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-140. - Creation. 
There is hereby created and established the "Library Fund." 
(Ord. No. NS-2001, § 10, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 13-141. - Deposit of moneys. 
Amounts received from library fund-raising activities, donations, and amounts derived from gifts, bequests and devises to the library shall be deposited in the library fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2001, § 10, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 13-142. - Expenditure of funds. 
Money in the library fund shall only be expended for library purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2001, § 10, 3-6-89)  
Secs. 13-143—13-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND 
 
Sec. 13-150. - Findings. 
The city council of the City of Santa Ana hereby finds and declares that: 
(1)  The city is committed to improving the public health, safety and welfare, including air quality. 
(2)  Mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the South Coast Air Basin. 
(3)  Air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources. 
(4)  The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls upon cities and counties to reduce emission from motor vehicles consistent with the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. 
(5)  To the extent that such programs place demands upon the city's funds, those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for financing from the general fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand to the greatest extent possible. 
(6)  Section 44223, added to the Health and Safety Code by action of the California Legislature on September 30, 1990 (Chapter 90-1705), authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to impose an additional motor vehicle registration fee of two dollars ($2.00), commencing April 1, 1991, increasing to four dollars ($4.00), commencing on April 1, 1992, to finance the implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions of the California Clean Air Act. 
(7)  Forty cents ($0.40) of every dollar collected under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with Section 44223 of the code, based on the jurisdictions' prorated share of population as defined by the State Department of Finance. 
(8)  The City of Santa Ana is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management District and is eligible to receive a portion of revenues from the motor vehicle registration fees upon adoption of this article. 
(9)  The city council of the City of Santa Ana, after careful consideration, hereby finds and declares that the imposition of the motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interests of the general welfare of the city and its residents. Therefore, the city council deems it advisable to adopt this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2128, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 13-151. - Intent. 
This article is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the City of Santa Ana into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. NS-2128, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 13-152. - Definitions. 
As applied in this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  City shall mean the City of Santa Ana. 
(2)  Mobile source air pollution reduction programs shall mean any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(3)  Fee administrator shall mean the executive director of finance and management services of the city or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2128, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 13-153. - Administration of vehicle registration fees. 
(a)  Receipt of fee. Vehicle registration fees due pursuant to this article disbursed by the South Coast Air Quality Management District and remitted to the city shall be accepted by the fee administrator. 
(b)  Transfer of funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate account as hereinafter specified. 
(c)  Establishment of air quality management trust fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by the account shall be credited to that account and shall be used to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs. 
(d)  Use of funds. Funds within the air quality improvement trust fund shall be used solely to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the South Coast Air Quality Management Plan. 
(e)  Audits. The city consents to audits of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues in accordance with Section 44244.1 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-2128, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 13-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - SEWERAGE ENTERPRISE FUND 
 
Sec. 13-155. - Creation of sewerage enterprise fund. 
There is hereby created and established the sewerage enterprise fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2479, § 3, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-156. - Deposit of moneys. 
All moneys received by the city as a sewerage service fee established pursuant to section 39.55.1 of the Code, shall be deposited into the sewerage enterprise fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2479, § 3, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-157. - Expenditure of moneys. 
Moneys in the sewer enterprise fund shall be expended only for: 
(1)  Repair, replacement and preventative maintenance of city owned main/trunk sewer lines; 
(2)  Repair and replacement of sewer laterals, from city owned main/trunk lines and only for that portion located in the public right of way, if in the sole and final determination of the executive director of the public works agency or designee this portion of lateral is in need of replacement or repair; provided, however that moneys in the fund shall not be expended for maintenance or cleaning of said laterals; 
(3)  Planning, study, administrative, record-keeping, and mapping costs directly relating to subsections (a) and (b); 
(4)  Costs of inspection of city owned mains/trunks; and 
(5)  Repayment of and costs associated with issuance of bonds, certificates of participation or other financing tools, whose proceeds shall be used exclusively for those activities set forth in subsections (1) through (4). 
(Ord. No. NS-2479, § 3, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-158. - Interest and other income. 
Interest received by the city from the investment of money in the sewerage enterprise fund, and all other income derived from the use of such moneys, shall be deposited in the sewerage enterprise fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2479, § 3, 9-17-01)  
Sec. 13-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - TRENCH CUT FEE FUND 
 
Sec. 13-160. - Creation of trench cut fee fund. 
There is hereby created and established the trench cut fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 4, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 13-161. - Deposit of moneys. 
All funds received pursuant to the provisions of section 33-59 of this Code shall be placed in the trench cut fee fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 4, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 13-162. - Expenditure of funds. 
Funds maintained in the trench cut fee fund shall only be expended for the rehabilitation and resurfacing of the public right of way where excavation has occurred after the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 4, 10-15-01)  
Secs. 13-163—13-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - MAINTENANCE ASSESSMENT DISTRICT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 13-171. - Authority for enactment. 
This article is enacted by the city council pursuant to its powers as a charter city under Article XI of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-172. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide an alternative procedure in compliance with the provisions of California Constitution Articles XIIID and implementing statutes, by which the city council may provide for payment of all or any part of the costs and expenses of maintaining and operating any permanent public improvements which are local in nature. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-173. - Alternative procedure. 
This article is alternative to other provisions of this Code and to the general laws of the state. When the city council elects to proceed under this article, no other provisions of this Code or of the general laws shall apply to the proceedings except as specifically otherwise stated in this article, or as may be required by the California Constitution. The provisions of Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100) of the California Streets and Highways Code shall apply to proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-174. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally to effect its purpose. With respect to any proceeding conducted under this article, no error, irregularity or informality, and no neglect or omission of any city officer or employee, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the city council to order the work, shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any assessment or special tax for the cost of the work done there under. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-175. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings set forth below: 
Agency means any local government as that term is defined in subdivision (b) of Section 1 of Article XIIIC of the California Constitution. 
Assessment district means the territory containing the lands to be specially assessed. 
Clerk means the clerk of the council for the city. 
City means the City of Santa Ana. 
County means the County of Orange. 
Director means the executive director of public works agency, or designee. 
District means an assessment district. 
Engineer means the director or designee. 
Fiscal year means the fiscal year of the city. 
Improvement or public improvement means any public improvement of a permanent and local nature, including without limitation those described in this article and any improvement described in the Improvement Act of 1911, the Improvement Act of 1913 of the state of California, the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972, or the Benefit Assessment Act of 1982. 
Maintenance services means maintenance and operation expenses as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 2 of Article XIIID of the California Constitution. 
Proceedings shall have the meaning specified at Streets and Highways Code Section 3100 (k). 
Other terms used in this article shall have the meanings specified in Article XIIID of the California Constitution, and in Government Code Sections 53750 through 53753.5 and Streets and Highways Code Section 3100, as those sections may be amended or renumbered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-176. - Description by reference to plan or map filed and open to public inspection. 
Any resolution, notice, report, diagram, or assessment, or other document which is required to contain a description of the improvements to be maintained, the boundaries of the assessment district or any zones therein, or the lines and dimensions of any parcel of land, may refer to any plan or map which is on file with the clerk, the county auditor, or the county assessor, and which is open to public inspection. The plan or map referred to shall govern for all details of the description. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-177. - Applicable procedures. 
In forming an assessment district pursuant to this article, the city council, clerk and engineer shall employ the report preparation, notice, protest, hearing and balloting procedures specified in Article XIIID of the California Constitution and in Government Code Sections 53750 through 53753.5 and Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100) of the Streets and Highways Code, as those sections may be amended or renumbered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-178. - Boundary map—Resolution of intention. 
(a)  Prior to adoption by the city council of the resolution specified in subsection (b), the engineer shall file with the clerk the map required by Streets and Highways Code Section 3110. 
(b)  Whenever the city council determines to form an assessment district pursuant to this article, it shall adopt a resolution which: 
(1)  States the intention of the city council to form an assessment district pursuant to this article, and assigns a distinctive name or number to the proposed district; 
(2)  Generally describes the public improvements to be maintained, and the maintenance services to be provided by the district; 
(3)  Describes the boundaries of the proposed district, which boundaries need not be contiguous; only land which is specially benefited may be included within the district; 
(4)  Directs the engineer to prepare, or cause to be prepared, and file an engineer's report as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-179. - Inclusion within district of publicly owned parcels. 
Pursuant to California Constitution, Article XIIID, Section 4, subsection (a), parcels within a proposed district which are owned or used by the city, any agency, the state of California or the United States shall not be exempt from assessment unless, based upon clear and convincing evidence, the city council finds and determines that those publicly owned parcels in fact receive no special benefit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-180. - Engineer's report. 
At the direction of the city council, the engineer shall prepare a report for the proposed maintenance district. The report shall comply in all respects with the provisions of California Constitution Article XIIID, sections 4(a), (b) and (c). In addition thereto, the report shall include the following: 
(a)  A description of the public improvements to be maintained. The description may be by reference to plans included in the report or filed with the report although separately bound; 
(b)  An estimate of the total cost of maintaining the improvements during the present or forthcoming fiscal year; 
(c)  A map or diagram prepared in accordance with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 3110, showing: 
(1)  The exterior boundaries of the proposed assessment district, and the boundaries of any zones within the district, 
(2)  The lines and dimensions of each parcel of land within the district. Each subdivision, including each separate condominium interest as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code, shall be given a separate number upon the diagram. The diagram may refer to the county assessor's maps for a detailed description of the lines and dimensions of any parcels, in which case those maps shall govern for all details concerning the lines and dimensions of the parcels. Each parcel shown on the diagram shall be labeled with a distinctive assessment number, which may be the county assessor's parcel number. The lines and dimensions of each parcel shall conform to the county assessor's parcel maps; or the diagram may consist of a copy of the county assessor's parcel maps. The diagram may consist of one or more sheets, and may be included in the report or filed with the report although separately bound; 
(d)  An assessment roll containing the assessment number of each parcel to be specially assessed, and the amount of each proposed assessment for the present or forthcoming fiscal year. If the county assessor's parcel number is not used as the assessment number, the assessment roll shall also contain the county assessor's parcel number, but only where in the judgment of the engineer the proposed district does not contain such a large number of parcels as to render this requirement infeasible or impractical; 
(e)  A detailed explanation, in compliance with the requirements of Article XIIID, Sections 4(a), (b) and (c) of the California Constitution, of the method or formula by which the engineer proposes to divide the cost of maintenance among the parcels to be specially assessed. For this purpose, the district may be divided into subareas or zones of benefit, the boundaries of which shall be shown on the diagram; 
(f)  A list of the names and addresses of all of the record owners of the parcels shown on the diagram and the assessment roll, as they appear on the last equalized secured property tax roll, or in the case of any agency, the state of California, or the United States, the representative of that public entity at the address of that entity known to the engineer. This information may be combined with that required under subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-181. - Use of range of rates or amounts—Adjustment for inflation. 
In accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53739, as that section may be amended or renumbered, the engineer's report may specify that the assessment is to be based upon a range of rates or amounts, and may further include an adjustment pursuant to a clearly identified formula set forth in the report. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-182. - Filing and acceptance of engineer's report. 
Upon completion, the engineer's report shall be filed with the clerk for presentation to the city council. At the hearing for formation of the district, the city council may accept the report as submitted, modify the report and accept it as modified, or reject the report. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-183. - Notice of hearing. 
Notice of hearing on the engineer's report and the proposed assessment shall be provided by mail to each record owner in accordance with the provisions of California Constitution Article XIIID, Sections 4(c), (d) and (e) and Government Code Section 53753, as that section may be amended or renumbered. The hearing shall be held not sooner than forty-five (45) days from the date that the notice was mailed in accordance with the said provisions. The notice of hearing shall: 
(a)  Include a statement of the total amount of the proposed assessment to be charged to the district, the amount chargeable to the record owner's parcel, the duration of the payments, the reason for the assessment and the basis upon which the amount of the proposed assessment was calculated; 
(b)  Specify the date, time and location of the public hearing on the proposed assessment; 
(c)  Include, in a conspicuous place, a summary of the procedures for the completion, return and tabulation of the assessment ballots required pursuant to subsection (e) of this section; 
(d)  Include a statement that the assessment shall not be imposed if the ballots submitted in opposition to the assessment exceed the ballots submitted in favor of the assessment, with ballots weighted according to the proportional financial obligation of the affected property; 
(e)  Include an assessment ballot that conforms to the term of Government Code Section 53753(c) as that section may be amended or renumbered. Where appropriate, the ballot information may include a statement of the total number of ballots possible within the proposed district for purposes of weighting and counting of the ballots in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e) of Section 4 of Article XIIID of the California Constitution; 
(f)  Indicate the date of passage of the resolution of intention, and state that the city council intends to levy an annual special assessment on each parcel of land within the proposed district to pay the cost of maintenance of the public improvements; 
(g)  Generally describe the public improvements to be maintained, and the maintenance services to be provided by the district; 
(h)  Describe the location and boundaries of the district; 
(i)  State that the engineer's report is on file with the clerk and is open to public inspection; 
(j)  State that at the public hearing, the city council will hear all protests of record owners, and will accept testimony from any interested person, whether such person is an owner or not; 
(k)  State the name and telephone number of the city employee or department where questions about the proposed district will be received. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-184. - Procedures for completion, return and receipt of ballots. 
The following procedures shall apply to ballots mailed with the notice of hearing: 
(a)  Each assessment ballot shall include the printed and/or typed name of the signing person, and shall be signed by the record owner or an authorized representative. The clerk may employ reasonable procedures, including but not limited to those specified in Government Code Section 53753(e), as that section may be amended or renumbered, to establish the propriety of any signature or authority for signature. 
(b)  Each assessment ballot shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the address indicated on the assessment ballot. 
(c)  Assessment ballots shall be received only at the address indicated on the assessment ballot, or at the site of the public hearing. 
(d)  Ballots which are not signed, or which are otherwise defective, or which were not delivered to the proper location, shall not be included in the tabulation of a majority protest. Only officially distributed ballots will be accepted. Ballots and ballot forms shall not be duplicated. 
(e)  An assessment ballot may be submitted, changed, or withdrawn prior to the conclusion of the public testimony on the proposed assessment at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-185. - Procedures at public hearing on proposed assessment. 
(a)  At the date, time and place stated in the notice of hearing mailed pursuant to section 13-183 of this article, the city council shall conduct a public hearing upon the proposed assessment. At the public hearing, the city council shall consider all objections or protests, if any, to the proposed assessment. At the public hearing, any interested person shall be permitted to present written or oral testimony. The city council may continue the hearing from time to time. 
(b)  Following the public hearing, the clerk shall cause the assessment ballots to be weighted and tabulated in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53753(e), as that section may be amended or renumbered. 
(c)  At a subsequent city council meeting, the clerk shall report the results of the tabulation, and the city council shall determine whether a majority protest exists pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 53753(e). 
(d)  If a majority protest exists, the city council shall not impose or increase the assessment, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-186. - Formation of district. 
If a majority protest does not exist upon completion of the tabulation, the city council may adopt a resolution ordering the formation of the district, confirming the diagram and assessment, and establishing a district budget for the fiscal year or years referred to in the report. Adoption of this resolution shall constitute the levy of the confirmed assessment. For years following the fiscal year or years referred to in the report, the city council shall adopt an annual budget for the district in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-187. - Recordation. 
Upon levying the initial and any annual assessment as provided in this article, the city council shall direct the clerk to execute and record in the office of the county recorder, pursuant to the provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 3114, the required assessment diagram and notice of assessment in substantially the form described in Section 3114 of the California Streets and Highways Code. The notice of assessment shall state the duration of the assessment. The assessment shall be a lien on the land upon which it is levied. This lien shall be paramount to all other liens, except prior assessments and taxes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-188. - Adoption of annual district budget; engineer's report; annual levy procedures. 
After formation of the district, the district budget shall be established annually by the city council, which may be done as a part of the regular budget approval process for the city as a whole. Where the maintenance services to be provided are not anticipated to change in any substantial manner during an upcoming year, the city council may establish a multi-year budget and assessment and, in such case shall specify any reporting and other obligations imposed as conditions to allowing a multi-year budget and assessment. 
For the purpose of adoption of the annual district budget, the engineer shall annually prepare and file with the clerk a report containing the information specified in section 13-180 of this article. In the event that the city council accepts the report as submitted, or as modified, the city council shall take one (1) of the following two (2) actions: 
(a)  If the city council does not intend to increase the assessment, other than as permitted for inflation adjustment pursuant to section 13-181 of this article, the city council may by resolution adopt the budget and levy the assessment for the fiscal year or years covered by the engineer's report. Adoption of this resolution shall constitute the levy of the confirmed assessment, and the clerk shall follow the procedures specified in section 13-187 of this article. 
(b)  If the city council does intend to increase the assessment, all of the procedures specified in sections 13-183 through 13-186 of this article shall apply and be followed. Upon completion of those procedures, if a majority protest does not exist, the city council may by resolution adopt the budget and levy the assessment for the fiscal year or years covered by the engineer's report. Adoption of this resolution shall constitute the levy of the confirmed assessment, and the clerk shall follow the procedures specified in section 13-187 of this article. 
(c)  A surplus or a deficit in the district's account at the end of a fiscal year shall be carried over to the following fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-189. - Changes to district. 
Subject to the requirement that all procedures required for formation of a district under this article are followed, and subject to compliance with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 3113, if applicable to the change in question, the city council may make the following changes to a district, once formed: 
(a)  Annexation of land to the district. In this case, it shall only be necessary to apply the formation proceedings to the owners of the land to be annexed; 
(b)  Formation of a new zone of benefit within the district. Where, as part of the proceedings for formation of the district, the owners of land within the proposed new zone have given their prior consent to the formation of the new zone of benefit, it shall be unnecessary to apply the formation proceedings to the establishment of the new zone of benefit; 
(c)  An increase in the assessment on any parcel; 
(d)  A change in the method or formula by which the cost of maintenance is distributed among the parcels of land within the district; 
(e)  A material reduction in the scope of the public improvements to be maintained. 
(f)  Subject to compliance with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code Section 3113, where applicable to the change in question, all other changes, including without limitation dissolution of the district, consolidation of two (2) or more districts, may be made without application of the formation proceedings, if there is no increase in the assessment on any parcel of land within the district, or any effect upon the method or formula by which the cost of the maintenance is distributed among the parcels within the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-190. - City council determination. 
The city council may provide for collection of the assessment by the city through city accounting procedures established for that purpose, or for collection by the county through the office of the county auditor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-191. - Collection by the county. 
In the event that the city council directs that the assessment be collected on behalf of the city by the county auditor, the clerk shall file with the county auditor a certified copy of the assessment and diagram, with a request that the assessments be posted to the county roll for general property taxes. This filing shall occur on or before August 1st of the fiscal year in which the assessments are to be collected, or such later date as may be approved by the county. The assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general property taxes and all laws providing for the collection and enforcement of such property taxes shall apply to the collection and enforcement of the assessments. After deduction of the collection charges of the county auditor, the net amount of the assessments collected shall be remitted to the city for the account of the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-192. - Collection by the city. 
In the event that the city council directs that the assessment be collected by the city, the clerk shall file the adopted diagram with the city finance director who shall, within thirty (30) days thereafter, cause all of the owners subject to the assessment to be billed by mail for the amounts shown on the adopted diagram and assessment. Payment of the assessments shall be due no later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the bills are mailed. Any assessment or portion thereof not paid within this period shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty for delinquency in the amount of ten (10) percent of the delinquent amount plus one and one-half (1½) percent of the delinquent amount for each thirty (30) days or portion thereof of delinquency. 
In the event of delinquency, the finance director may initiate collection proceedings by filing a report of delinquent assessments with the city council. Upon receipt of this report, the council shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing on the report and any protests or objections thereto. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the record owner of the delinquent property not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the report and any objections thereto. The city council may accept the report as submitted, modify the report and accept it as modified, or reject the report. The decision of the city council on the report shall be final and conclusive. 
Upon confirmation of the report, the finance director shall be authorized to refer the city's claim in the amount of the delinquent assessment plus any applicable penalties and interest to the county auditor with a request that this amount be posted to the county roll for general property taxes and collected in the manner described in section 13-191 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-193. - Contest of validity. 
The validity of any assessment or special tax levied under this article shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the assessment or tax is levied by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-194. - Work of maintenance. 
The maintenance of the public improvements may be performed by city forces and/or by one or more contractors retained by the city. The letting of contracts for maintenance shall be conducted in the manner authorized for letting of general city contracts of the same nature. If maintenance is to be performed by city forces, the account of the district shall be charged for direct and indirect costs, supervision and administration in accordance with normal and reasonable accounting standards and procedures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 13-195. - Consolidation of procedures. 
Procedures for the formation of a district pursuant to this article may be consolidated with procedures for the construction or acquisition of the public improvements pursuant to any other provision of this Code or pursuant to any law of the state of California including without limitation the Municipal Improvement Act of 1911, the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, the Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972, and other similar statutes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2526, § 2, 5-5-03)  
Secs. 13-196—13-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - CANNABIS PUBLIC BENEFIT FUND 
 
Sec. 13-200. - Establishment of the fund. 
There is hereby established within the City of Santa Ana the "Cannabis Public Benefit Fund," which shall be two sub-funds, one for Enforcement Services and one for Youth Services, within the City's General Fund (the "Cannabis Fund"). 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 13-201. - Purpose. 
The Cannabis Fund shall be used to fund new or additional Youth Services, as of the date of the fund creation, for City of Santa Ana residents. The Cannabis Fund shall not be used to supplement existing Youth Services. The Cannabis Fund shall also be used to fund community enforcement and code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 13-202. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall be construed as having the following definitions: 
Adult Use shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Santa Ana Municipal Code ("SAMC") section 40-2(2) as may be periodically amended. At the time of adoption of this Article, meaning cannabis or cannabis products that are intended to be used for non-medicinal purposes by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
Commercial Cannabis Activity shall have the same meaning as that set forth in SAMC section 40-2(9) as may be periodically amended. At the time of adoption of this Article, meaning the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis or cannabis products as provided for in this Chapter [Chapter 40]. Permitted commercial cannabis activities are listed in Land Use Table 40-5 of this Chapter [Chapter 40]. 
Enforcement Services any and all services provided by City staff for the prevention, detection, investigation and violations of the City's codes and ordinances intended to prevent public nuisances or activities that are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
Medicinal/Medical Cannabis shall have the same meaning as that set forth in SAMC section 40-2(27) as may be periodically amended. At the time of adoption of this Article, meaning cannabis or a product containing cannabis, including, but not limited to, concentrates, and extractions, intended to be sold for use by medicinal cannabis patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Medical cannabis retail is regulated by Chapter 18 and Chapter 21 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
Operating Agreement shall have the same meaning as that set forth in SAMC section 40-1C as may be periodically amended. At the time of adoption of this Article, meaning a legally binding written agreement between each commercial cannabis business operator and the City, executed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, and in a form or substance satisfactory to the Executive Director of Planning and Building and the City Attorney, and containing those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied. A distinct Commercial Cannabis Operating Agreement shall be required for each location and type of commercial cannabis business activity taking place at an approved Commercial Cannabis Business. 
Youth Services means any and all services provided to residents of the City under the age of 24 for athletic, recreational, health, educational, or human services, directly by City staff or through partnerships with third parties. This may include City facility improvements, maintenance and equipment needs related to youth services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 13-203. - Cannabis revenue funding. 
A.  Automatic Deposit of Cannabis Tax Revenues into the Cannabis Fund. The Cannabis Fund shall be funded by an automatic deposit of one-third (?) of all cannabis tax revenues generated each year for Enforcement Services and one-third (?) of all cannabis tax revenues generated each year for Youth Services, commencing with the Fiscal Year Budget for 2018-20 and continuing thereafter in the budget for each Fiscal Year, from all of the following: 1) Operating Agreements for Commercial Cannabis businesses and 2) Any newly adopted Cannabis Business License Tax. For purposes of this subsection, in addition to the descriptions provided directly above in this paragraph, the phrase "cannabis tax revenues" means all revenues generated from any new or increased cannabis tax which has been approved by the voters of the City on or after the effective date of this Chapter and any increase of the cannabis tax authorized by the Santa Ana Municipal Code and approved by the City Council. Tax revenue from Medicinal/Medical Cannabis shall not go into the Cannabis Fund. Funds in these sub-funds shall be carried over from year-to-year. 
B.  Discretionary Deposits into Cannabis Fund Not Prohibited. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City Council, as part of the budgeting process, from contributing additional revenues to the Cannabis Fund, as determined in the City Council's sound legislative discretion. 
C.  Expenditures from the Cannabis Fund. Funds in the Cannabis Fund shall be restricted to 1) Youth Services: expenditures for new, additional or enhanced, as of the date the Cannabis Fund is created, Youth Services for City of Santa Ana residents and 2) Enforcement Services: expenditures for Enforcement Services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 13-204. - Presentation to city council. 
At least two times per year the City Manager shall make a presentation to the City Council and report on the revenue that has been deposited in the Cannabis Fund and expenditures from the Cannabis Fund. 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Sec. 13-205. - Procedure for amending, suspending or rescinding ordinance. 
This ordinance may only be amended, suspended or rescinded by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the City Council after making findings that a structural deficit exists in the same manner as required to access the Economic Uncertainty Account as set forth in the City's Budget and Financial Policy. 
(Ord. No. NS-2959 , § 1, 12-4-18)  
Chapter 14 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, enacted April 16, 1984, amended Ch. 14 to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment Ch. 14, relative to fire protection and prevention, was derived from Code 1952, § 3140 and the following ordinances: 
New Series 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	New Series 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
 939 	1 	12- 2-68 	1462 	1—15 	12- 4-78 
1144 	1—16 	11- 6-72 	1586 	1—7 	 6-15-81 
1235 	26 	12- 9-74 	1596 	8 	 9- 8-81 
1255 	1 	 5- 5-75 	1630 	1—4 	 6- 7-82 
1273 	1 	 9- 2-75 	1711 	1 	12-19-83 
 
Subsequently, Ord. No. NS-2041, § 1, adopted Jan. 2, 1990, amended the title of this chapter by changing "paramedic services" to "emergency services" to accommodate the addition of provisions relative to ambulances. 
Cross reference— Fire department authority to issue citations, § 1-18; uniform hearing and appeals procedure, Ch. 3; buildings and structures generally, Ch. 8. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FIRE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Adoption by reference. 
There is adopted by the city that certain code known as the California Fire Code 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, (hereinafter referred to in this article as the "California Fire Code" or "fire code") and the whole thereof including the Appendices therein, errata issued during and after the publishing date, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted or amended, of which code not less than one (1) copy has been and is now on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection. Said code is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein and, subject to all amendments set forth in this article, shall be in effect within the city from the effective date of this article. Any provision of this article amending the above mentioned codes shall be construed as amending the 2015 and 2016 editions thereof including such provisions enacted prior to this adoption of the said 2015 and 2016 editions and not thereafter repealed. The International Fire Code, 2015 edition and the California Fire Code 2016 edition, as thus amended, together with all other provisions of this article, shall be known as the "Fire Code of the City of Santa Ana." 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. NS-2192, § 1, 4-20-93; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 70, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 49, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 52, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 44, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 16, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 44, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 14-1 to read as set out herein. Previously § 14-1 was titled adoption of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, and the California Fire Code, 2010 Edition.  
Sec. 14-2. - Review of building permits. 
No building permit shall be issued pursuant to Chapter 8, Article II, of the Santa Ana Municipal Code for the construction, addition, alteration or repair of any building or structure which would result in noncompliance with the requirements of this fire code. The fire marshal and the building official shall establish administrative procedures designed to promote expeditious review of building permit applications. 
The fire marshal and the building official may require such site plans, elevations, and other documentation from the applicant as may be necessary to determine such compliance and may impose such conditions on approval of an application as are necessary to assure such compliance. No building or structure subject to such review and approval shall be finally released for utility service or occupancy which is not in compliance with the building permit as approved or conditionally approved. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 2, 5-7-90)  
Sec. 14-3. - Penalties. 
No person shall violate any of the provisions or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under this article, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, or who shall fail to comply with such an order within the time fixed herein shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 3, 5-7-90; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 2, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 14-3.1. - Violation penalties (Section 109.4). 
Section 109.4 Violation penalties. 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall result in penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(a)  Section 109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor is hereby added as follows: 
109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 45, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 17, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-4—14-4.6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 18, adopted December 6, 2016 , repealed §§ 14-4—14-6, in their entirety. Former §§ 14-4—14-6 pertained to "Public safety radio system coverage—Intent and purpose," "Same—Definitions," "Same—Use and occupancy," "Same—Testing procedures," "Same—Amplification systems allowed," "Same—Costs," and "Same—Non-compliance and penalty," respectively; and were derived from Ord. No. NS-2722, § 3, adopted August 21, 2006.  
Secs. 14-5—14-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-10. - Historical property. 
(a)  This section applies only to buildings, or portions thereof, which have been designated as historical property pursuant to section 30-1 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, and which would require either the installation of an automatic sprinkler system, or the installation of one (1) or more fire hydrants with appurtenant water supply, or both, in order to comply with the California Fire Code as amended by this article, by reason of the additions, alterations or repairs or changes of occupancy proposed for such building. 
(b)  An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in any portion of such building which is to be used as a place of public assemblage or a Group H occupancy, as defined in the building code of the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Subject to the overriding requirement of paragraph (b) of this subsection, changes to buildings within the scope of this section shall be subject to approval on the following standard: Installations of automatic sprinkler systems or fire hydrants shall be required only to the extent necessary to avoid an increase in the risk of fire occurring, the danger to life in the event of fire, or the difficulty of fire suppression or to avoid a prolongation of any especially hazardous situation. The need of such installations or alternative fire protection requirements shall be evaluated in view of any modifications in building safety standards due to application of the state historical buildings code, and the fire marshal shall coordinate his review with that of the building official in this regard. The fire marshal may impose alternative fire protection requirements on building changes within the scope of this section as appropriate to maintain this standard and shall waive any requirement of this section which is inconsistent therewith. 
(d)  The fire marshal shall give priority to building changes within the scope of this section which are submitted for his review by the community redevelopment agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2274, § 3, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 53, 11-15-10)  
Secs. 14-11—14-16. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 14-17. - Appointment (Section 103.2). 
Section 103.2 is hereby deleted without replacement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 46, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-18. - Board of appeals (Section 108). 
Section 108 of the California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
The planning commission shall have the power and be required to hear appeals regarding the fire marshal's denial of, or refusal to grant, any application for a permit required under any provision of the fire code, the determination of the suitability of alternative materials and types of construction, and the reasonable interpretation of the provisions of the fire code in the event of a dispute occurring in the permit application process. Any such appeal shall be filed with the secretary for the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 5, 5-7-90; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 4, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 50, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2760, § 50, adopted December 3, 2007, changed the title of § 14-18 from "Appeals (section 103)" to "Board of appeals (section 108)."  
Secs. 14-19, 14-20. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-21. - Definitions (Section 202). 
Section 202 General Definitions is hereby revised by adding "OCFA," "Sky Lantern," and "Spark Arrester" as follows: 
202 General Definitions 
OCFA- Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction. 
SKY LANTERN- An airborne lantern typically made of paper, Mylar, or other lightweight material with a wood, plastic, or metal frame containing a candle, fuel cell, or other heat source that provides buoyancy. 
SPARK ARRESTER- A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
(Ord. No. NS-2760, § 52, 12-3-07; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 55, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 47, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 19, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-22. - General requirements (Chapter 3). 
(a)  Section 304.1.2 Vegetation. Type, amount, or arrangement of weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property needing to comply with OCFA Guidelines, shall be cut, thinned, and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. 
(b)  Section 305.6 Hazardous Conditions is hereby added as follows: 
305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires are not allowed when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official. 
(c)  Section 305.7 Disposal of rubbish is hereby added as follows: 
305.7 Disposal of rubbish. Rubbish, trash or combustible waste material shall be burned only within an approved incinerator and in accordance with Section 307.2.1. 
(d)  Section 307 Outdoor Fireplaces, fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies is hereby added as follows: 
307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R shall comply with this section. 
Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking. 
307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202. 
307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308. 
307.6.2.1 Where prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone. Wood and other solid fuel burning fires in devices other than permanent fireplaces are not allowed within Wildfire Risk Areas (WRA) and Wildland-Urban Interface Areas (WUI) or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI unless determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire. 
(e)  Section 309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars is hereby added as follows: 
309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars. Indoor charging of electric carts/cars where the combined volume of all battery electrolyte exceeds 50 gallons shall comply with following: 
1.  Spill control and neutralization shall be provided and comply with Section 608.5. 
2.  Room ventilation shall be provided and comply with Section 608.6.1 
3.  Signage shall be provided and comply with Section 608.7.1 
4.  Smoke detection shall be provided and comply with Section 608.9. 
(f)  Section 320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
(g)  Section 321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways is hereby added as follows: 
321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces. 
Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. 
(h)  Section 322 Unusual Circumstances is hereby added as follows: 
322 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Difficult terrain. 
2.  Danger of erosion. 
3.  Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species. 
4.  Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees. 
5.  Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical. 
(i)  Section 323 Use of Equipment is hereby added as follows: 
323 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire. 
Exception: 
1.  Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
2.  Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition. 
(j)  Section 323.1 Use of Equipment and Devices Generating Heat, Sparks or Open Flames is hereby added as follows: 
323.1 Equipment and devices generating heat, sparks or open flames. During any time of the year within Wildfire Risk Areas, within or immediately adjacent to any forest- or brush-covered land or non-irrigated grass-covered land, no person shall use or operate any welding equipment, cutting torches, tarpots, grinding devices, or other tools or equipment that may produce a spark, fire, or flame that could result in a wildfire without doing the following: 
1.  First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If 30 foot clearing cannot be achieved then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting. 
2.  Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation. 
3.  Stop work when winds are 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official. 
4.  Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediately in case of a fire. 
(k)  Section 323.2 Spark Arresters is hereby added as follows: 
323.2 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 323 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material. 
(l)  Section 324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices is hereby added as follows: 
324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices. The ignition and/or launching of a Sky Lantern or similar device is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 48, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 20, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 48, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 14-22 in its entirety. Former § 14-22 pertained to open burning and recreational (section 307) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2760, § 53, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Sec. 14-23. - Emergency planning and preparedness (Chapter 4). 
Chapter 4: Emergency Planning and Preparedness. Adopt only the Sections listed below: 
1.  401 
2.  401.3.4 
3.  401.9 
4.  402 
5.  403 
6.  404.5 — 404.6.6 
7.  407 
(a) Section 407.5 is revised to read as follows: 
407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA's Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 49, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 21, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 49, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 14-23 in its entirety. Former § 14-23 pertained to accidental alarms (section 401) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2760, § 54, adopted December 3, 2007 and Ord. No. NS-2810, § 56, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 14-24. - Fire service features (Chapter 5). 
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
(a)  SECTION 501.1 Scope is revised to read as follows: 
501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, "Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development." Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, "Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas." 
(b)  Section 505.1 Address Identification is revised as follows: 
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) for R-3 occupancies, for all other occupancies the numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained. 
(c)  Section 510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage is revised to read as follows: 
510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the local authority having jurisdiction's ordinance and this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed. 
2.  In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of that facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system. 
This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion. 
2.  Elevators. 
3.  Structures that are three stories or less without subterranean storage or parking and that do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story. 
4.  Wood-constructed residential structures four stories or less without subterranean storage or parking that are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure. 
5.  Should construction that is three stories or less that does not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas. 
(d)  Section 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is deleted without replacement. 
(e)  Section 510.4.2.2 Technical Criteria is revised to read as follows: 
510.4.2.2 Technical criteria. The fire code official shall maintain a document providing the specific technical information and requirements for the emergency responder radio coverage system. This document shall contain, but not be limited to, the various frequencies required, the location of radio sites, effective radiated power of radio sites, and other supporting technical information. 
1.  The frequency range supported from the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 851-869 MHz (base transmitter frequencies). 
2.  The frequency range supported to the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 806-824 MHz (radio field transmit frequencies). 
3.  A public safety radio amplification system shall include filters to reject frequencies below 851 MHz and frequencies above 869 MHz by a minimum of 35 dB. 
4.  All system components must be 100 percent compatible with analog and digital modulations after installation without adjustments or modifications. The systems must be capable of encompassing the frequencies stated herein and capable of future modifications to a frequency range subsequently established by the jurisdiction. 
5.  Active devices shall have a minimum of -50 dB 3 rd order intermodulation protection. 
6.  All active in-building coverage devices shall be FCC Part 90 Type Certified. 
(f)  Section 510.5.1 Approval prior to installation is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.1 Approval prior to installation. Amplification systems capable of operating on frequencies licensed to any public safety agency by the FCC shall not be installed without prior plan submittal, coordination and approval from Orange County Communications and a copy of the approved plan provided to the fire and building code officials. 
(g)  Section 510.5.2 Minimum qualification of personnel is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.2 Minimum qualifications of personnel. The minimum qualifications of the system designer and lead installation personnel shall include both of the following: 
1.  A valid FCC-issued general radio operator's license. 
2.  Certification of in-building system training issued by a nationally recognized organization, school or a certificate issued by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed. 
(h)  Section 510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure item 7 is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure. When an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is not less than 90 percent. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows: 
7.  As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at the time of installation and subsequent annual inspections by the FCC licensed technician hired by the property owner and an OCSD/Communications Division FCC-certified technician. 
(i)  Section 510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance is revised to read as follows: 
510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance. The owner of the building or their representative shall have the emergency responder radio coverage system shall be inspected and tested annually or where structural changes occur including additions or remodels that could materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall consist of the following: 
1.  In-building system components shall be tested to determine general functional operability. 
2.  Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. 
3.  Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional 1-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined. 
4.  Other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer's specifications. 
5.  If noncompliance is found, the FCC licensed technician will assess improvements necessary and provide such information to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
6.  At the conclusion of the testing, a certification report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 50, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 22, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 50, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 14-24 in its entirety. Former § 14-24 pertained to required markings for fire apparatus access roads (section 503) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2274, § 5, adopted December 18, 1995 and Ord. No. NS-2760, § 55, adopted December 3, 2007.  
Secs. 14-25—14-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, §§ 51—54, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed §§ 14-25—14-28 in their entirety. Former §§ 14-25—14-28 pertained to access roadways for apparatus (section 503); address numbers (section 505.1); fire flow requirements (section 507) and parade floats (section 315.5), respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 16, 1984; Ord. No. NS-1891, § 1, adopted April 6, 1987; Ord. No. NS-2051, §§ 6, 7, adopted May 7, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2192, §§ 3, 4, adopted April 20, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2274, §§ 6, 8, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 72, 74, adopted February 3, 2003; Ord. No. NS-2760, §§ 56, 57, 59, 60, adopted December 3, 2007 and Ord. No. NS-2810, §§ 57, 59, 60, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 14-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 23, adopted December 6, 2016 , repealed § 14-29, in its entirety. Former § 14-29 pertained to "Building services and systems (Chapter 6)," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2851, § 55, adotped November 18, 2013.  
Sec. 14-30. - Fire protection systems (Chapter 9). 
(a)  Section 903.2 Where required is hereby amended as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
b.  When an addition exceeds 2000 square feet (186 m 2 ) and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet (465 m 2 ) as defined in Section 202; or 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8. 
(b)  Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is hereby added as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity. 
Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and required by the Fire Code Official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3. 
TABLE 903.3.5.3 
HYDRAULICALLY CALCULATED SYSTEMS 
 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 56, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2883, § 3, 9-1-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 23, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 56, adopted November 18, 2013, amended § 14-30 in its entirety. Former § 14-30 pertained to installation of automatic sprinkler systems (section 903) and was derived from Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 16, 1984; Ord. No. NS-1803, § 1, adopted November 4, 1985; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 8, adopted May 7, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2192, § 5, adopted April 20, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 10, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 77, 78, adopted February 3, 2003; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 63, adopted December 3, 2007 and Ord. No. NS-2810, § 63, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 14-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 57, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed § 14-31 in its entirety. Former § 14-31 pertained to high rise amendments (section 907), and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2760, § 65, adopted December 3, 2007 and Ord. No. NS-2810, § 65, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 14-32. - Construction requirements for existing buildings (Chapter 11). 
Chapter 11 Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. Adopt only those Sections and Subsections listed below: 
1103.7 
1103.7.3 
1103.7.3.1 
1103.7.8—1103.7.8.2 
1103.7.9—1103.7.9.10 
1103.8—1103.8.5.3 
1106 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 58, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-33. - Aviation facilities (Chapter 20). 
Aviation facilities (Chapter 20) is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 59, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 24, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-34. - Lumber yards and woodworking facilities (Chapter 28). 
(a)  Section 2801.2 Permit is hereby amended by adding the following statement to the last sentence: 
2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6. For Miscellaneous Combustible Storage Permit, see Section 105.6.29. 
(b)  Section 2808.2 Storage site is hereby amended as follows: 
2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval from the fire code official obtained before transferring products to the site. 
(c)  Section 2808.3 Size of piles is hereby amended as follows: 
2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet (4572 mm) in height, 50 feet (15 240 mm) in width and 100 feet (30 480 mm) in length. 
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles. 
2.  Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile. 
3.  The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants. 
4.  Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained. 
5.  Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program. 
Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features. 
(d)  Section 2808.7 Pile fire protection is hereby amended by adding the following statement to the last sentence: 
2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas. 
(e)  Section 2808.9 Material-handling equipment, is hereby amended by adding the following sentence at the beginning of the section: 
2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations. 
(f)  Section 2808.11 Temperature control, is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2. 
(g)  Section 2808.11.1 Pile temperature control, is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when the internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(h)  Section 2808.11.2 New material temperature control, is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable. 
(i)  Section 2808.12 Water availability is hereby added as follows: 
2808.12 Water Availability. Facilities with over 2500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 GPM @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s). 
(j)  Section 2808.13 Tipping area is hereby added as follows: 
2808.13 Tipping areas shall comply with the following: 
1.  Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet. 
2.  Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time. 
3.  Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20 foot wide fire access lane. 
4.  A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area. 
5.  All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt. 
(k)  Section 2808.14 Emergency Contact is hereby added as follows: 
2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 60, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 25, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 26, adopted December 6, 2016 , repealed § 14-35, in its entirety. Former § 14-35 pertained to "Requirements for wildland-urban interface fire areas (Chapter 49)," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2851, § 61, adopted November 18, 2013.  
Sec. 14-36. - Hazardous materials—General provisions (Chapter 50). 
(a)  Section 5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS), is hereby amended by modifying the starting paragraph as follows: 
5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include Orange County Fire Authority's Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information: 
1.  Product Name 
2.  Component 
3.  Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number 
4.  Location where stored or used. 
5.  Container size 
6.  Hazard classification 
7.  Amount in storage 
8.  Amount in use-closed systems 
9.  Amount in use-open systems. 
(b)  Table 5003.1.1(1) Maximum Allowable Quantity per Control Area of Hazardous Materials Posing a Physical Hazard is hereby amended by deleting Footnote K without replacement. 
(c)  Section 5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances is hereby added as follows: 
5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 62, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 27, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 28, adopted December 6, 2016 , repealed § 14-37, in its entirety. Former § 14-37 pertained to "Cryogenic fluids (Chapter 55)," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2851, § 63, 11-18-13.  
Sec. 14-38. - Explosives and fireworks (Chapter 56). 
(a)  Section 5608.2 Firing is hereby added as follows: 
5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired. 
(b)  Section 5608.3 Application for Permit is hereby added as follows: 
Section 5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 64, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 29, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-39. - Flammable and combustible liquids (Chapter 57). 
Flammable and combustible liquids (Chapter 57) is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 65, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 30, 12-6-16 )  
Sec. 14-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 31, adopted December 6, 2016 , repealed § 14-40, in its entirety. Former § 14-40 pertained to "Highly toxic and toxic materials (Chapter 60)," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2851, § 66, adopted November 18, 2013.  
Sec. 14-41. - Referenced standards (Chapter 80). 
(a)  NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.7.3 is hereby amended as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The FDC shall contain a minimum of two 2 ½" inlets. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½" inlets shall be provided. 
(2)  Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby amended as follows: 
8.3.3.1. When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
1.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
2.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
3.  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
4.  ESFR sprinklers 
5.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
6.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
(3)  Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve "G." Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new occupancy. 
(4)  Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the Fire Code Official: 
1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3)  Utilize the Orange County Fire Authority water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
(b)  NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby is deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
(c)  NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
2.  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
(2)  Section 6.2.9 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
(1)  A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
(2)  A wall post indicator valve 
(3)  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4 
(4)  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
(5)  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior 
(6)  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior 
(3)  Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
(4)  Section 10.4.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
(5)  Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
(6)  Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4. 
(Ord. No. NS-2851, § 67, 11-18-13; Ord. No. NS-2905, § 32, 12-6-16 )  
Secs. 14-42—14-46. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-47. - Appendices. 
The following appendices are not adopted by the City: 
Appendix A is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix D is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix E is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix F is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix G is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix I is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix J is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix K is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix L is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix M is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix N is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
( Ord. No. NS-2905, § 33, 12-6-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2905, § 33, adopted December 6, 2016 , set our provisions for use herein as § 14-47. Prior to the adoption of those provisions § 14-47 was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1774, § 2, enacted May 20, 1985. Former § 14-47 pertained to adding Section 80.112, relative to underground storage of hazardous materials, to the Uniform Fire Code; and was derived from from Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 16, 1984.  
Sec. 14-48. - Fireworks (Section 3309). 
Subsection 3309.1 of the California Fire Code is added to read as follows: 
3309.1 Prohibition. The storage, use and handling of fireworks is prohibited. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  Storage and handling of fireworks is allowed as set forth in Title 19 California Code of Regulations Chapter 6 - Fireworks. 
2.  The use of fireworks for display is allowed as set forth in Title 19 California Code of Regulation Chapter 6 - Fireworks. 
3.  The use of State Fire Marshal approved Safe and Sane Fireworks is allowed as regulated by Article II (commencing with Section 14-51) of Chapter 14 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2192, § 12, 4-20-93; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 14, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 68, 12-3-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2760, § 68, adopted December 3, 2007, changed the reference in the title of § 14-48 from "Fireworks (Section 7802)" to "Fireworks (Section 3309)."  
Sec. 14-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2851, § 68, adopted November 18, 2013, repealed § 14-49 in its entirety. Former § 14-49 pertained to deletions from the California fire code, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 16, 1984; Ord. No. NS-2051, § 14, adopted May 7, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2192, § 13, adopted April 20, 1993; Ord. No. NS-2274, § 15, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 79, adopted February 3, 2003; Ord. No. NS-2760, § 69, adopted December 3, 2007 and Ord. No. NS-2810, § 66, adopted November 15, 2010.  
Sec. 14-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 14-51. - "Dangerous fireworks" defined. 
For purposes of this article "dangerous fireworks" shall mean "dangerous fireworks" as defined in the state fireworks law and the regulations of the state fire marshal adopted pursuant thereto, as they may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-52. - "Safe and sane fireworks" defined. 
For purposes of this article "safe and sane fireworks" shall mean "safe and sane fireworks" as defined in the state fireworks law and the regulations of the state fire marshal adopted pursuant thereto, as they may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-53. - Dangerous fireworks prohibited. 
No person, firm, or organization shall manufacture, store, display, sell, offer for sale, possess, discharge, explode, fire, or set off any dangerous fireworks within the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-54. - Discharging safe and sane fireworks. 
No person shall discharge any safe and sane fireworks except on the days that sales are permitted each year as set forth in section 14-55 below. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-55. - Sale of safe and sane fireworks; hours of sale. 
No person shall display, sell, or engage in the business of selling safe and sane fireworks without first having obtained a permit to do so as hereinafter provided. No person shall sell any type of fireworks at any time except from 12:00 noon through 10:00 p.m. on July 1st; from 10:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on July 2nd and 3rd; and from 10:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. on July 4th of any year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2469, § 2, 5-21-01; Ord. No. NS-2767, § 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 67, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2865, § 3, 6-17-14; Ord. No. NS-2866, § 2, 7-1-14 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 67, adopted November 15, 2010, changed the title of section 14-55 from "Permit for sale of safe and sane fireworks; hours of sale" to "Sale of safe and sane fireworks; hours of sale."  
Sec. 14-56. - Permits, issuance. 
(a)  Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit organizations as recognized by the State of California organized for charitable, fraternal, patriotic service or religious purposes with their principal and permanent meeting place within the City of Santa Ana, and at least fifty (50) per cent of the members residing within the city limits. 
(b)  Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall limit each sponsoring organization to a single location in any given year. 
(c)  Such permits shall expire on July 4th at 8:00 p.m. of the year of issuance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 68, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 14-57. - Application for permit. 
The number of fireworks booths allowed to operate in the City of Santa Ana will be limited to a maximum of eighty-five (85) booths. Organizations that received a permit to operate a firework booth in the previous year will have their operational permit automatically renewed as long as the organization still meets the requirements listed in section 14-56, and have not had any violations of these regulations during the past operational season. 
If the number of returning organizations is less than eighty-five (85) the open fireworks booth operation positions shall be filled by lottery during the following year fireworks season. 
Lottery applications for a permit to operate a fireworks booth in the City of Santa Ana must be received at the City of Santa Ana no later than 5:00 p.m. on April 15th of the year the permit is to be issued. Lottery applications must be complete and all supporting documents included with the application. Lottery applications need not have the booth location, State Fire Marshal permit, or insurance documents submitted until after the lottery is drawn. 
If the firework coordinator determines that a lottery is to be run the lottery will be drawn on the first working day after April 20th. 
Returning organization applications and the remaining documentation for selected lottery groups must be received at the City of Santa Ana no later than 5:00 p.m. on May 1st of the year the permit is to be issued. 
All fireworks booth permit applications submitted with insufficient information or missing documentation must be corrected before May 31st of the same year, or the first working day after May 31st if May 31st lands on a weekend. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 80, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 69, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 69, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-58. - Fee. 
The fee for such permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 70, 11-15-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2810, § 70, adopted November 15, 2010, changed the title of section 14-58 from "Fee; expiration of permit" to "Fee."  
Sec. 14-59. - Sale of safe and sane fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell safe and sane fireworks to anyone under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-60. - Regulations for temporary stands. 
(a)  Any person operating a fireworks stand shall abide by and comply with the provisions of this article and other reasonable conditions and restrictions which may be required by the fireworks coordinator prior to granting the permit. 
(b)  No temporary stand may be erected or constructed on any premises [prior] to June 15th of any year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 70, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-61. - Clean premises deposit. 
(a)  Prior to erecting any such stand, the permittee shall deposit an amount to be set by resolution of the city council, or post a bond in such amount, with the City of Santa Ana to assure the city that the permittee will remove the stand, equipment, materials, and all rubbish from the premises upon which the stand is located, to the satisfaction of the fireworks coordinator, before midnight, July 11th, of the year for which such permit is granted. 
(b)  If the stand, equipment, materials, and rubbish are removed within the said period of time to the satisfaction of the fireworks coordinator, its City or its agents or employees, the said cash or bond shall be returned to the permittee. 
(c)  If the premises are not put in proper order, as determined by the fireworks coordinator, the city or its agents or employees may enter upon the property to do everything necessary to clear the premises, and said cash or bond shall be forfeited as liquidated damages for breach of condition subsequent to the permit. As a condition to the permittee's acceptance of the permit, it is expressly agreed that the city or its agents shall have authority to enter upon the premises to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 71, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 71, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-62. - Insurance. 
Prior to erection of such stand, the permittee shall procure public liability and property damage insurance covering its operation in and about said stand and premises in such minimum amounts as shall be set by resolution of the city council. The permittee shall file a certificate of such insurance with the application for permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-63. - Stand location on premises. 
No such stand shall be erected within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline station or commercial garage or within forth (40) feet of any structure. Minimum setback from the street curbing shall be twenty (20) feet, but no such stand shall be less than six (6) feet back from the inside edge of the sidewalk. 
The firework coordinator may cause any temporary fireworks stand located within the City of Santa Ana to be moved to a different location based upon health and safety concerns. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2522, § 81, 2-3-03; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 72, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-64. - Fire protection in stands. 
There shall be maintained within each stand a 2A rated fire extinguisher. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-65. - Adult on duty. 
There shall be at least one person eighteen (18) years of age or older on duty within each stand at all times during the hours the stand is open. No children under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the stand at any time. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-66. - Sleeping within the stands. 
No one shall be allowed to sleep within any fireworks stand at any time. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-67. - Vehicle parking on premises. 
(a)  There shall be no vehicle parking or parking of gasoline generators or any type of flammable liquid containers within twenty (20) feet of any stand. 
(b)  Barricades sufficient to prevent the parking of motor vehicles within twenty (20) feet of any stand shall be provided and maintained. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-68. - Fires on premises. 
No person shall light, cause or permit to be lighted any fireworks, matches, or any other material within twenty-five (25) feet of such stand. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-69. - No smoking on premises. 
No smoking shall be permitted in any structure used for storage or sale of fireworks nor within twenty-five (25) feet thereof. "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed in a number prescribed by the City of Santa Ana and/or fire authority having jurisdiction, visible on all sides of the structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 73, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-70. - Electric circuits. 
Electrical circuits, wiring, devices and lighting are prohibited in temporary stands unless such installation has been made under a valid electrical permit obtained at the Santa Ana Planning and Building Agency. No permit shall be required for battery-operated portable lighting devices. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 72, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 74, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-71. - Exits. 
Each fireworks stand shall have a minimum of two (2) exits. Exits shall be at least thirty (30) inches in clear width. All exit doors shall remain unlocked at all times when stands are occupied. Exit doors shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. There shall be maintained a thirty-inch clear aisleway from all parts of the stand to exit doors. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-72. - Trash removal. 
All trash shall be removed from the premises and the fireworks stand each evening at the close of business and at regular intervals during hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 73, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 14-73. - Fireworks sale and storage. 
Fireworks shall be stored and sold only in temporary fireworks stands erected solely for such purpose. It shall be unlawful to store or sell fireworks in any building, residence, garage, home, automobile, trailer, or other vehicle within the City of Santa Ana, except for temporary storage of small quantities in the residence of the purchaser during the period of permitted sale as defined in section 14-55. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-74. - Fireworks; public display. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the fireworks coordinator at his or her discretion may grant permits for public displays of fireworks under his or her supervision. Applications for such public display permits shall be filed with the fireworks coordinator not less than fifteen (15) days before the public display and shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the pyrotechnic devices to be used in display. If such permit is granted, no pyrotechnic devices shall be discharged except as listed in the statement and the fireworks coordinator may, in granting such permit, eliminate from said statement of pyrotechnic devices, any items as he or she deems hazardous or an unacceptable risk to public safety. Such public display shall be under the supervision of the fireworks coordinator or such persons as he or she shall designate. The fee for the public pyrotechnic display permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such display shall be held at the place and time as designated in the permit. The application for such permit shall comply with the provisions of Title 19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6; Fireworks. The denial of an application may be appealed to the uniform code appeals board. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 74, 11-15-10; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 75, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-75. - Disposal of unused fireworks. 
Any fireworks that remain after the public display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 14-76. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater performance, or for signal purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 75, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 14-77. - Seizure of fireworks. 
The fire authority having jurisdiction shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, or held in violation of this articles. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2851, § 76, 11-18-13)  
Sec. 14-78. - Prohibited areas. 
No persons shall sell, store, display, or discharge any fireworks of any type in any public oil or gasoline station, or on any premises where gasoline or other flammable liquids are stored or dispensed. No person shall sell, store, display, or discharge any fireworks of any type in any permanent structure, nor within forty (40) feet of the same, except that any purchaser may discharge fireworks in conformance with these regulations in front of his own residence. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-2810, § 76, 11-15-10)  
Sec. 14-79. - Discharge of fireworks. 
No person shall throw, lob, toss, shoot or otherwise discharge any fireworks toward any other person or in any other manner which threatens the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2051, § 15, 5-7-90)  
Secs. 14-80—14-85. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-86—14-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2760, § 70, adopted December 3, 2007, repealed § 14-86 in its entirety, which pertained to amendments to appendices, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2522, §§ 82, 83, adopted February 3, 2003.  
ARTICLE III. - PARAMEDIC SERVICES 
 
Sec. 14-90. - Fees for paramedic services. 
The city may establish and may collect fees for transportation of persons in paramedic or other fire department vehicles owned by the City of Santa Ana to a hospital for medical care and for services rendered to persons by paramedics and for services and medical care rendered to persons by paramedics using City of Santa Ana owned paramedic vehicles or other City of Santa Ana fire department vehicles where the person is not transported by a city-owned paramedic or other fire department vehicle. The city council may establish such fees by resolution. 
The fire chief shall notify the director of finance following such transportation, medical care, or services, in writing, of the name and address of the person, date and time of the transportation, medical care, or services performed, and such other information as may be required. The director of finance shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made. 
The amount of such fees charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons receiving said services and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney fees. 
The executive director of finance and management services may establish a subscription system whereby households and businesses within the city, in return for payment of a periodic subscription charge, may receive paramedic services without payment of any other fee. The amount of such subscription charge shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1727, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-1751, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. NS-1988, § 1, 12-19-88)  
Secs. 14-91—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCE SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, adopted Jan. 2, 1990, amended this chapter by adding provisions relative to ambulance service as Art. IV, §§ 14-101—14-117; similar provisions were formerly codified as Art. III, Ch. 32 of this Code. Section 30 of said ordinance, not specifically amendatory of this Code, provided as follows: 
Section 30: Any person who, as of the date of adoption of this ordinance, is the holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity allowing such person to engage in the business of owning or operating an ambulance or ambulances in the City of Santa Ana issued pursuant to Chapter 32 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code as said chapter read prior to the adoption of this ordinance, may continue to engage in such business, subject to the provisions of such chapter as it read prior to the adoption of this ordinance, and subject to any and all conditions or restrictions attached to such certificate, and subject to all other applicable laws, until the date occurring six (6) months after the date of adoption of this ordinance, or until such person obtains the license for such person's ambulance service required by Article IV of Chapter 14 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code as added to said Code by this ordinance, whichever first occurs. Thereafter, said certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be of no further force and effect, and such person shall be required to comply with all the requirements of Article IV of Chapter 14 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code in order to continue operating an ambulance service. 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to establish operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the City of Santa Ana in both emergency and other situations and to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest. This article is modeled on the requirements for the operation of ambulances in the unincorporated areas of the County of Orange, as set forth in Division 9 of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, and is intended to serve as the basis for the enforcement of ambulance licensing requirements within the City of Santa Ana by county personnel pursuant to contract between the city and the county. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-102. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Advanced life support service and basic life support service mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle, helicopter or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this article. 
Ambulance service means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
Ambulance service operator means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service. 
Attendant means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients. 
City means the City of Santa Ana, California. 
County means the County of Orange, State of California. 
County-city agreement means an agreement between the county and the city by which the county undertakes to perform the licensing and regulation of ambulance services within the corporate limits of the city. 
Department means, during all times when a county-city agreement is in effect, that unit of county government which has the responsibility for the licensing of ambulance services pursuant to the ordinances of the county. At any time when a county-city agreement is not in effect, department means the fire department of the city. 
Dispatcher means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator, responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient. 
Driver means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance. 
Emergency means a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services. 
Emergency service means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency. 
Licensee means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this article to provide ambulance service. 
Licensing officer means, during all times when a county-city agreement is in effect, that officer or employee of the county who has the responsibility for the licensing of ambulance services pursuant to the ordinances of the county or to designation by the board of supervisors of the county. At any time when a county-city agreement is not in effect, licensing officer means the fire chief of the city. 
Medical services means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
Paramedic means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Patient means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid or otherwise incapacitated person. 
Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Physician means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such with the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code. 
Public safety agency means any public law enforcement, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-103. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly without possession of a license issued pursuant to this article. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "state of war emergency," "state of emergency" or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code. 
(2)  Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the city, regardless of destination. 
(3)  Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-104. - Transfer of license. 
No license issued pursuant to this article can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section: 
(a)  Any change in the business structure of a license including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
(1)  A sole proprietorship; 
(2)  A partnership, including any change in the partners; and 
(3)  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise. 
(b)  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver. 
(c)  A sale or transfer of over ten (10) per cent of the assets of a licensee. 
A licensee may apply to the licensing officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-105. - Applications. 
(a)  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set as hereinafter provided and be made upon forms prescribed by the licensing officer. 
(b)  Each applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein; 
(2)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients; 
(3)  The names under which the applicant has engaged, does or proposes to engage in ambulance service; 
(4)  A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicle, a description of the company's program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle's radio(s); 
(5)  Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by state or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made; 
(6)  The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service; 
(7)  Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application; 
(8)  A description of the company's training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers and dispatchers; 
(9)  Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the licensing officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this article; 
(10)  Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the department; 
(11)  As to new applications or transfers as specified in section 14-104, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner or the police chief of the city indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner or the police chief of the city showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of section 14-107(d)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7); 
(12)  A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are or will be based, including hours of operation; and 
(13)  A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service and, if so: 
a.  The number of basic life support or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift; and 
b.  The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants; 
(14)  Such other information as the licensing officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications, except the requirement of item (11) of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The fees referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall be the same as those charged by the county for the same activities undertaken by the county with regard to the licensing of ambulance services in the unincorporated areas of the county, except that, at any time that a county-city agreement is not in effect, the city council may, by resolution, establish fees differing from the county fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-106. - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the licensing officer shall make or cause to be made such investigation as the licensing officer deems necessary to determine if: 
(a)  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate or engage in the provision of ambulance services; 
(b)  The applicant meets the requirements of this article and of other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-107. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the licensing officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this article, determines all requirements of this article have been met and the license fee, if any, has been paid. 
(b)  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed in writing of the reasons therefor. 
(c)  The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the licensing officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this article or any other law of the State of California or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate. Workers' compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the licensing officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the licensing officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a thirty-day notice to be given to the department prior to cancellation, modification or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the licensing officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this article. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply. 
(d)  Grounds for denial of a license application shall be: 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements of any provisions of this article; 
(2)  Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290; 
(3)  Habitual or excessive use of narcotics or dangerous drugs; 
(4)  Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics, addictives or dangerous drugs; 
(5)  Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages; 
(6)  Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California; 
(7)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain. 
(e)  In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the licensing officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the persons involved. The licensing officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is or was accused but not convicted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-108. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The licensing officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of state law or regulation or this article, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license. 
(b)  Before suspension or revocation, the licensing officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the reasons for which the action is to be taken; 
(2)  Set a hearing for not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven (7) days after the date of the notice; 
(3)  Specify the date, time and place of the hearing; and 
(4)  Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any. 
(c)  If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the licensing officer may rescind a suspension or revocation at any time. 
(d)  At the hearing, the licensing officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee. 
(e)  The licensing officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty-four (24) hours when the licensing officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceeding, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five (5) days of the licensee's request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
(f)  During all times when a county-city agreement is in effect, the hearings referenced in this section shall be conducted and decisions shall be made on such hearings in accordance with the procedures established by the county for hearings on the revocation or suspension of the licenses of ambulance services operating in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(g)  During any time when a county-city agreement is not in effect, hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before the fire chief of the city or his designated representative, who shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-109. - Appeals. 
(a)  In the event of a denial, suspension or revocation of a license during any time when a county-city agreement is in effect, the applicant or licensee shall have the same right to appeal such denial, suspension or revocation as is provided by the county to an applicant for, or licensee under, a license to operate an ambulance service in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)  During any time during which a city-county agreement is not in effect, a denial, suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the city council of the city pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-110. - Notification. 
The licensee shall notify the licensing officer within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term "substantial change" shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-111. - Personnel standards. 
(a)  A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this article who comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Attendants shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment and shall hold current "EMT 1A" certification in compliance with all state laws, rules and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the licensing officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the licensing officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefor. All applicants for licenses as attendants shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this article no less than once every four (4) years. Certificates may be denied, suspended or revoked in the same form and fashion as specified for ambulance service licensees in this article. Licenses shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician 1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same fashion as issuance of a new license. 
(c)  Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, "adequate" training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets state standards, if any, or local requirements. As used herein, "local requirements" means county requirements, except that, during any time when a county-city agreement is not in effect, the fire chief of the city may set local requirements which differ from those of the county. 
(d)  Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this article for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-112. - Rates. 
During any period when a county-city agreement is in effect, no licensee shall charge more than those rates approved by the board of supervisors of the county for emergency ambulance services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-113. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Those rules and regulations of the county implementing the county ordinances pertaining to the licensing and regulation of ambulance services, as such rules and regulations may be from time to time amended, except such portions thereof as pertain to emergency response areas, are hereby adopted by the city and shall apply to ambulance services operating in the city, except that, during any period when a county-city agreement is not in effect, the fire chief of the city may revise or modify such rules and regulations as he determines are appropriate to implement this article. 
(b)  The licensing officer or his or her designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment and method of operations of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the licensing officer, at least annually. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-114. - Complaints. 
The department, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that he or another party has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services or services provided were not in compliance with the provision of this article may file a written complaint with the department setting forth such allegations. The department shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of notification. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-115. - Variance. 
The licensing officer may grant variances from the terms of this article if he finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. Such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No variance shall exceed one hundred eighty (180) days in duration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-116. - Violation. 
Violation of any provision of this article by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Sec. 14-117. - Emergency services system. 
The fire chief of the city is authorized to establish procedures to supplement the city paramedics with private ambulance service operators in providing emergency services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2041, § 2, 1-2-90)  
Chapter 15 - FRANCHISES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2468, adopted June 4, 2001, repealed the provisions of former Art. II of this chapter and replaced them with the similar provisions of Art. II as currently set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to Community Antenna Television Systems and derived from Ord. No. NS-1461, §§ 1—11, adopted Nov. 20, 1978; and Ord. No. NS-1504, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 1, 1979. 
Cross reference— Underground utility installations, 41-626. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 15-251. - Title. 
This article is known and may be cited as the "Cable and Video Service Providers Ordinance" of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-252. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The development of cable and video services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. 
(2)  Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable and video services and systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare is best served by the city's exercise of its regulatory powers. 
(3)  This article adopts provisions that authorize the city to regulate cable and video service providers to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations. 
(4)  The cable and video services that are addressed in this article include services provided by cable television systems, open video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite master antenna television systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology. 
(b)  The purpose and intent of this article is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives: 
(1)  To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development. 
(2)  To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property. 
(3)  To promote competition in cable and video services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable and video service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable and video services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city. 
(4)  To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable and video service providers. 
(5)  To encourage the deployment of advanced cable and video infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced government services, and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving cable and video marketplace. 
(6)  To maintain and to enhance public, educational, and governmental programming opportunities that will enable local government to communicate with its residents and to provide its residents with alternate means of disseminating information. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-253. - Defined terms and phrases. 
Various terms and phrases used in this article are defined below in section 15-268 of division 6. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
DIVISION 2. - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 15-254. - Authority and findings. 
(a)  In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits. 
(b)  The city council finds that the development of cable television services may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city. This division 2 is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best possible cable television services, and every franchise issued in accordance with this division 2 is intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this division 2 to adopt regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television services to the maximum extent authorized by federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-255. - Franchise terms and conditions. 
(a)  Franchise purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this division 2 may authorize the grantee to do the following: 
(1)  To engage in the business of providing cable television services that are authorized by law and that grantee elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area. 
(2)  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets and public ways within the designated franchise service area. 
(3)  To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law. 
(b)  Franchise required. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the city without first obtaining either a city franchise under the provisions of this division 2, or a state video franchise under division 6 of this chapter 15. 
(2)  The city council finds and determines that certain multichannel video programming distributors and video providers, as those terms are defined in section 15-268 of division 6, provide cable service, including video programming, to subscribers within limited geographic areas where multifamily dwelling complexes and congregate-living complexes are located. That cable service, including video programming, is sometimes provided, in whole or in part, by the transmission of signals over wires or lines that are owned or controlled by telecommunications service providers or other public utilities and that are within or cross streets or public ways within the boundaries of a local franchising authority. The multichannel video programming distributor or video provider may obtain from the telecommunications service provider or other public utility, by lease, license, or similar contractual arrangement, the right to use those wires or lines in order to provide cable service, including video programming, to subscribers or customers within the multi-family dwelling complexes and congregate-living complexes referenced above. The city council further finds and determines that these contractual arrangements for signal transmission facilitate the provision of cable service, including video programming, and create a nexus between that cable service and the use of the streets and public ways of the city. Consequently, to the maximum extent authorized under state law, it is the intent of the city council to subject multi-channel video programming distributors and video providers that intend to use this signal-transmission methodology to the franchise requirements set forth in this division 2, subject to such waivers and modifications of those requirements as may, in the discretion of the city council or its designee, be warranted in view of the limited geographic area that is proposed to be served. 
(c)  Term of the franchise. 
(1)  A franchise granted under this division 2 will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance adopted by the city council that authorizes the franchise. 
(2)  A franchise granted under this division 2 may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of state and federal law and of this division 2. 
(d)  Franchise service area. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the article granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Federal or state jurisdiction. This division 2 will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this article, to the extent authorized by applicable law. 
(f)  Franchise non-transferable. 
(1)  Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the city council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the written consent of the city council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection. 
(2)  The requirements of subsection (1) apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a partnership or a corporation, prior written authorization of the city council is required where ownership or control of twenty (20) percent or more of the partnership interests or of the voting stock of grantee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, individually or collectively, owns or controls those partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or of grantee's upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the franchise. 
(3)  Grantee must give prior written notice to the city of any proposed foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property. That notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise will take place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior written consent of the city council to that change in control of ownership will apply. 
(4)  For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire as to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to remedy all then-existing defaults and deficiencies, and, during the remaining term of the franchise, to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory, then the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise. 
(5)  Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety (90) days after assuming control. The plan must ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one (1) year unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
(6)  Grantee must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise. 
(g)  Geographical coverage. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the city, subject to any service-area line extension requirements set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(2)  After service has been established by activating trunk or distribution cables for any service area, grantee must provide service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within seven (7) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way and permits necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that seven-day period. 
(h)  Nonexclusive franchise. Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. If an additional franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public hearing must first be held if required under the provisions of Government Code Section 53066.3. 
(i)  Multiple franchises. 
(1)  The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and the following specific local considerations: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage. 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city's opinion, the streets or public ways in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01; Ord. No. NS-2774, § 2, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 15-256. - Franchise applications and renewal. 
(a)  Filing of applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the city. An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the application. That application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs are less than the application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to the applicant. 
(b)  Applications contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable: 
(1)  A statement describing the proposed franchise service area and an explanation whether this proposed service area is, or will be, a part of a larger regional cluster of franchise service areas. 
(2)  A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry. 
(3)  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly-owned partnership or corporation, each owner of ten (10) percent or more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the following information must be provided: the address of its principal executive office; the name and business or residence address of each member and of each holder of an economic interest in the limited liability company, together with the contribution and the share in profits and losses of each member and holder of an economic interest; the name and business or residence address of any manager or managers and the chief executive officer, if any, appointed or elected in accordance with the articles of organization or operating agreement. 
(4)  A list of officers and directors of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person. 
(5)  A statement as to the number of people employed by the applicant, whether on a full-time or part-time basis. 
(6)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
(7)  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct. 
(8)  The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. 
(9)  Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably necessary. 
(c)  Consideration of initial applications. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the city manager or the city manager's designee must prepare a report and make recommendations to the city council concerning that application. 
(2)  A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the city council will make a decision based upon documents and testimony received at the hearing as to whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(d)  Franchise renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. The city and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. A renewal application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request. That renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application, including the review of grantee's prior compliance with the franchise, the ascertainment of the community's cable-related needs and interests, the engagement of technical and legal consultants, and expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the grantee must pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs are less than the renewal application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to the grantee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-257. - Contents of cable television franchise agreements. 
(a)  The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television system must include, without limitation, the following subject matters: 
(1)  The geographical area, duration, and nonexclusive nature of the franchise. 
(2)  The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment. 
(3)  Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system. 
(4)  Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability, and parental control devices. 
(5)  Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise agreement. 
(6)  Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers' compensation insurance, and indemnification. 
(7)  Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, which requirements may include, without limitation, compliance with the statutes, rules, and regulations set forth below in section 15-258 of this division 2. 
(8)  Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for public, educational, and governmental access channels. 
(9)  Requirements relating to the grantee's obligation to provide an institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional network for educational or governmental use, subject to the city's rules and procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for compatibility with any telecommunications network that has been or may be developed by the city. 
(10)  Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the city's streets and public ways, including compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards. 
(11)  Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, performance reviews, the inspection of grantee's books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and franchise fee audits under specified circumstances. 
(12)  Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination. 
(13)  Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise. 
(14)  The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city's operation and management of the cable system. 
(15)  Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(b)  If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the city council and provisions of this division 2, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-258. - Consumer protection and service standards. 
(a)  Operational standards. 
(1)  Grantee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under "normal operating conditions" as that term is defined below in subsection (4): 
a.  Provide sufficient toll free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered promptly. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. Callers who must be transferred may not be required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a service representative. 
b.  Under normal operating conditions, callers may not receive a busy signal more than three (3) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
c.  Provide emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
d.  Provide a conveniently-located local business and service or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight (8) hours daily on weekdays, and at least four (4) hours weekly on evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints. 
e.  Provide an emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a 24-hour per day basis. 
f.  Maintain a trained installation staff to provide service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven (7) days after receipt of a request, or such longer time as may be requested by the subscriber, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" are those that are located up to one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement. 
g.  The grantee must schedule, within a specified four-hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and other activities at the subscriber's location. The grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is delayed in keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. The grantee must undertake appropriate quality control measures to ensure that the customer is satisfied with the work. 
h.  Subscribers who have experienced a late or a missed appointment due to the fault of the grantee will either receive an installation free of charge or a twenty dollar ($20.00) credit. 
i.  Upon a subscriber's request, the grantee will arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided by the grantee at the subscriber's address within fourteen (14) days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections a., b., c., and g., above must be met not less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subparagraph f., above must be met not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  As used in this subsection, the term "normal business hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week, or some weekend hours, or both. 
(4)  As used in this subsection, the term "normal operating conditions" means those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(b)  Service standards. 
(1)  The grantee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than two (2) hours and occurs between midnight and 6:00 a.m. (in which event twenty-four (24) hours prior notice must be given to the city), forty-eight (48) hours prior notice must be given to subscribers. 
(2)  The grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a system outage: Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting five (5) or more subscribers of the system. 
b.  For an isolated outage: Within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels. 
c.  For inferior signal quality: No later than the following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
(3)  The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on a problem that cannot be corrected from a remote location. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival. 
(4)  The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber. 
(5)  The grantee must determine the nature of the problem within twenty-four (24) hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related problems within three (3) business days, unless technically infeasible. 
(c)  Billing and information standards. 
(1)  Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. 
(2)  The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the grantee, including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber. 
(3)  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within ten (10) days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint. 
(4)  Upon request by a subscriber, credits or refunds must be provided by grantee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption, or disconnection of service of four (4) or more consecutive hours, provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance, or construction in circumstances where grantee has provided advance written notice to a subscriber, and the loss of service does not exceed the time period specified by grantee. For subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds must be issued promptly, but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
(5)  The grantee must provide written information on each of the following matters at the time of the installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered. 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services. 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies. 
d.  Instructions on the use of the cable service. 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system. 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city's office designated for dealing with cable related issues. 
g.  Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance. 
(6)  Subscribers must be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of those changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee will endeavor to notify the city of those changes at least five (5) working days before subscribers are notified. 
(7)  The grantee must maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all published promotional offers made by grantee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of two (2) years. 
(d)  Verification of compliance with standards. 
(1)  Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, the city may require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of the consumer service standards specified in this section. The grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the city to verify compliance. 
(2)  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the grantee's receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(3)  With regard to the grantee's telephone response obligations set forth above in subsections a.—c. of subsection 15-258(a)(1), if the city gives written notice to grantee that grantee is in violation of any of these obligations, then upon city's request the grantee must submit summary information on either a monthly or a quarterly basis until such time as Grantee has demonstrated compliance for two (2) consecutive calendar quarters. 
(e)  Subscriber complaints and disputes. 
(1)  The grantee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must include a requirement that the grantee respond in writing to any written complaint from a subscriber within ten (10) days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint, as provided for above in subsection 15-258(c)(3). 
(2)  Upon request, and subject to applicable law protecting subscriber privacy rights, the city has the right to review the grantee's response to subscriber complaints. 
(3)  All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee must act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force. 
(4)  Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, the grantee is entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the cable system. 
(f)  Disconnection/downgrades. 
(1)  A subscriber may terminate service at any time, and the grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber's request within seven (7) days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers. Grantee will impose no charges for the voluntary termination of service unless a service call to the subscriber's premises is required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by grantee. 
(2)  Grantee may, in accordance with applicable law, charge a reasonable fee to downgrade service. 
(3)  The grantee may disconnect a subscriber's service in compliance with paragraphs (i), (j), and (k) of Section 53088.2 of the California Government Code. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the grantee must promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (3) above, immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment. 
(5)  The grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when it causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is disconnected, the grantee will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem if the signal leakage problem is attributable to the grantee. 
(6)  The grantee may also disconnect service in those cases where customers are stealing service or have threatened grantee's personnel with physical violence. 
(7)  Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee will remove its equipment from the subscriber's premises within thirty (30) days. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within such time period unless the grantee has been denied access to the subscriber's premises. 
(g)  Negative option billing prohibited. No charge may be imposed for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative selection. 
(h)  Deposits. Grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed in an interest-bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within thirty (30) days after the equipment is returned to the grantee. 
(i)  Parental control option. Grantee must provide parental control devices at no charge to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any pay channels providing adult programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. For other programming, such devices will be provided at a reasonable charge to the subscriber. 
(j)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  All officers, agents, and employees of the grantee, or of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers' premises, must display a photo identification card. The grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for the grantee. 
(2)  Additional standards relating to service, consumer protection, and response by the grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this section may be adopted by ordinance, and the grantee must comply with those standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement, provided that the grantee receives written notice and an opportunity to cure before any penalty or other remedy is imposed. 
(k)  Penalties for noncompliance. The purpose of this paragraph is to authorize the imposition of monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by this section. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection (k) will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as provided below in subsection (3), below. 
(1)  Administration and appeals. 
a.  The city manager or the city manager's designee is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to assess monetary penalties against the grantee must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final, unless appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 3. 
b.  If the grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may appeal that decision in writing to the city council in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 3. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. 
(2)  Schedule of penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for the material violation of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section, provided that the violation is within the reasonable control of the grantee: 
a.  The maximum penalty for a first material violation is two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day of the material violation. 
b.  For a second material violation of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of the material violation. 
c.  For a third or further material violation of the same nature within a 12-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material violation. 
(3)  Judicial remedy. This paragraph does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard to this subsection. 
(4)  Notice of violation. The city must give the grantee written notice of any alleged violation of the consumer service standards and allow the grantee at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified violation. 
(5)  Assessment of monetary penalties. If a violation has not been corrected or cured by grantee within the time specified by the city, the monetary penalties specified above in subsection (2) may be assessed from the date of delivery to grantee of the city's written notice of violation. 
(6)  In assessing monetary penalties under this paragraph (k), the city manager may take into account the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation and, with respect to the grantee, the degree of culpability, any history of prior violations, and such other matters as may be relevant. If warranted under the circumstances, the monetary penalty to be assessed may be less than the maximum penalty amount specified in subsection (2). 
(l)  Additional consumer protection and service standards. 
(1)  In addition to the consumer protection and service standards that are specified above in paragraphs (a) through (k) of this section, the franchise agreement with a grantee may require compliance with the following: 
a.  Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the Federal Communications Commission, including the following: the provisions of Section 76.309(c) of Title 47 Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended; the provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended; and, the provisions of Section 551 of Title 47, United States Code, as it now exists or may later be amended. 
b.  The provisions of California Government Code Sections 53054, et seq., entitled the "Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act." 
c.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 53088, et seq., entitled the "Video Customer Service Act." 
d.  The provisions of California Civil Code Section 1722(b)(1)-(6) relating to service or repair transactions between cable television companies and their subscribers. 
e.  The provisions of California Penal Code Section 637.5 relating to subscribers' rights to privacy protection. 
(2)  The city may, in its discretion, incorporate in a franchise agreement those customer service and protection standards referenced above in subsection (i) that are the most stringent, and that afford the greatest protection to consumers. These standards will apply, to the extent authorized by law, to all video, voice, and data services that are provided by grantee to its subscribers within the franchise service area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01; Ord. No. NS-2682, § 1, 5-2-05)  
DIVISION 3. - OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 15-259. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division 3 apply to an open video system operator, as defined below in section 15-268 of division 6, that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city over an open video system. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-260. - Application required. 
(a)  Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator must file an application with the city. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable: 
(1)  The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
(2)  Copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of Intent" filed under 47 CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC's rules. 
(3)  The area or areas of the city that the applicant proposes to serve. 
(4)  A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities. 
(5)  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services. 
(6)  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application. 
(7)  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's financial ability to: 
a.  Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city. 
b.  Comply with the city's public, educational, and governmental access requirements as specified below in subsection 15-262(b)(4). 
c.  Comply with the city's requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the sum of five (5) percent, as specified below in subsection 15-262(b)(2). 
(8)  An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease. 
(9)  If the applicant's operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant in the city, the following additional information must be provided: 
a.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates. 
b.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to identify: 
1.  The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed facilities. 
2.  The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other video or telecommunications service providers. 
3.  The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to remove or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis. 
c.  The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees. 
(10)  The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified below in subsection 15-264(b). 
(11)  Such additional information as may be requested by the city. 
(12)  An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  If any item of information specified above in subsection (a) of this section is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-261. - Review of the application. 
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application filed under section 15-260 that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written notice to the applicant of the city's intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 15-262. - Agreement required. 
(a)  No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. 
(b)  The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters are not preempted by federal law or regulations: 
(1)  The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension. 
(2)  The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
a.  The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the maximum amount authorized by Section 653(c)(2)(B) of the Communications Act, which is the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator. 
b.  The term "gross revenue" means: 
1.  All gross revenue received by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and 
2.  All advertising revenue received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the incumbent franchised cable operator. 
The term "gross revenue" does not include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers. 
(3)  The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue that are required to be paid as specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(4)  The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city's requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures apply: 
a.  The open video system operator is subject to the same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service area with which its system overlaps. 
b.  The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the franchise service area in which the city's subscribers are located. 
c.  The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to establish the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may include the city's franchised cable operator if the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire. 
d.  If the open video system operator and the city are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the city's jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be imposed: 
1.  The open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the city's franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the city's franchised cable operator's annual financial contributions in support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and equipment that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city's franchised cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services to the city are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator's depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act. 
2.  The city will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator's use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes. 
e.  The city's franchised cable operator is required under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public rights-of-way. 
f.  All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator's public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator's matching financial contributions set forth above in subparagraph (iv)(A). 
g.  The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable operator. 
h.  If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the open video system operator. 
i.  The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed on the city's franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The open video system operator must comply with those new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity. 
(5)  If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system operator's obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental access under the provisions of subsection (4) set forth above, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved. 
(6)  If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the Communications Act, the city will require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the city's franchised cable operator. In addition, to the extent authorized by federal law, the open video system operator may be required by the city to satisfy the same financial obligations and other requirements that are imposed upon the franchised cable operator to support data-transmission and related services that are provided by the institutional network. 
(7)  The authority of an open video system provider to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(f). 
(8)  The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations relating to customer protection and service standards, including the Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code §§53054, et seq.), the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code §§ 53088, et seq.), and section 15-258 of division 2 of this article. 
(9)  If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner: 
a.  Compliance with all applicable city codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees. 
b.  The coordination of construction activities. 
c.  Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property. 
d.  Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification requirements. 
e.  The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets. 
f.  Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using public property or public rights-of-way. 
(10)  Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the agreement. 
(11)  Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of control of the open video system. 
(12)  Requirements relating to the open video system operator's compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system. 
(13)  Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
Secs. 15-263—15-267. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 15-268. - Defined terms and phrases. 
(a)  The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this article have the meanings set forth below. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular include the plural number. 
Affiliate means, when used in relation to any person, another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person. For purposes of this definition, the term "own" means to own an equity interest, or its equivalent, of ten (10) percent or more. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, "video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and "other programming service" means information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
Cable system, or cable communications system or cable television system, means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Communications Act; or 
(5)  Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
Cable system operator means any person or group of persons: 
(1)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or 
(2)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system. 
City means the City of Santa Ana as represented by its city council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority. 
_____ CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
Communications Act means the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. §§ 151, et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system. 
Franchise fee means any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
(1)  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantees or their services); 
(2)  Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
(3)  Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
(4)  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
Franchise service area or service area means the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement. 
Grantee means any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this article, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee. 
Open video system means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems." 
Open video system operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system. 
Person means an individual, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity. 
Public, educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities, means the total of the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
Subscriber or customer or consumer means any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services. 
Street or public way means each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the definition of a street. 
_____ U.S.C. § _____ means the United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47 U.S.C. § 153" refers to Title 47, section 153, of the United States Code. 
(b)  Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not defined in this article will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that Code, their meaning as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-269. - Violations; enforcement. 
(a)  The penalties for violation of this article, as otherwise specified in this Code, are not applicable to a violation of any provision of this article for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video programming distributor or telecommunications service provider. 
(b)  The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2468, 6-4-01)  
DIVISION 6. - REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDERS 
 
Sec. 15-270. - Purpose and authority. 
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating with the city. 
As of January 1, 2007, the state has the sole authority to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("the Act"). Pursuant to the Act, the city shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (PEG) purposes from all state video franchise holders (hereinafter "state franchisee") operating within the city. Additionally, the city has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state franchisee's operating within the city for violations of customer service standards set by the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-2774, § 3, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 15-271. - State video franchise and PEG fees. 
a.  A state franchisee that offers video service within the boundaries of the city, shall calculate and remit a state franchise fee equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenue of that state franchisee. 
b.  A state franchisee that offers video service within the boundaries of the city of shall calculate and remit, a fee equivalent to one (1) percent of that state franchisee's gross revenue, for the support of public, educational and governmental (PEG) access facilities and activities within the local franchise service area. 
c.  The state franchise fee and PEG support fee shall be remitted to the city on a quarterly basis within forty-five (45) days after the end of each quarter for that calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a detailed summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the state franchise fee and PEG support fee. Payments shall be sent to the city parks, recreation and community services agency. 
d.  Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) above, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code § 5860. 
e.  Not more than once annually, the city manager or his designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchisee(s) to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the Act and this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-2774, § 3, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 15-272. - Customer service penalties under state video franchises. 
a.  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video services. 
b.  The city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall monitor the compliance of state franchisee's with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager will provide the state franchisee written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state franchisee thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the material breach remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each material breach. 
(2)  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each material breach. 
(3)  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the material breach remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
c.  Decisions by the city manager to assess monetary penalties against a state franchisee are final. The state franchisee or any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager may appeal that decision in writing to the city council in accordance with the procedures specified in chapter 3 of this Code. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. 
d.  Any fine imposed on a state franchisee shall be paid to the city. As provided for in the California Public Utilities Code § 5900(g), the city shall submit one-half (frax;1;2;) of all fines received from a state video franchise holder to the digital divide account established by California Public Utilities Code § 280.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-2774, § 3, 9-2-08)  
Secs. 15-273—15-299. - Reserved.  
Chapter 16 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Littering, offensive accumulations—Deposit in illegal manner. 
No person shall place, deposit, dump or stand any paper, cans, bottles, ashtray accumulations, refuse, trash, offal, rubbish, garbage or other filth or offensive matter in or upon any public or private alley or street, or in or upon any public or private property or watercourse within the city, or cause the same to be done, except in such places and in the manner prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1952, §§ 3821, 4276; Ord. No. NS-356, § 1, 12-15-58) 
Cross reference— Water pollution control, § 18-151 et seq. 
State Law reference— Littering rivers and streams, § 374e, Pen. Code; littering parkways, § 888.2 Streets & H. Code.  
Sec. 16-2. - Same—Sweeping into gutter. 
No person shall sweep, push, propel or deposit or cause to be swept, pushed, propelled or deposited into any gutter or street in the city, the accumulation of paper, metal, foil, dirt, trash or rubbish that accumulates upon public or private sidewalks or parkways. 
(Code 1952, § 3822; Ord. No. NS-356, § 1,12-15-58)  
Sec. 16-3. - Same—Throwing handbills. 
No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, paper, or other printed matter or advertising in the yard or grounds of any building, or on any porch, doorstep, vestibule, or in any public hallway of any building when said building is not in the possession or under the control of the person so doing, or in any public street or place, or upon any vacant real property in the city. 
(Code 1952, § 3823; Ord. No. NS-356, § 1, 12-15-58; Ord. No. NS-982, § 1, 9-15-69) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-982, § 1. amended § 3823 of the 1952 Code, § 16-3 herein, by deleting a prohibition against attaching handbills, etc., to a building.  
Sec. 16-4. - Same—Deposit in vehicles. 
No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter in or attach to any vehicle, as defined in the vehicle code of the state, other than his own, any handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, paper, or other printed matter or advertising. 
(Code 1952, § 3824; Ord. No. NS-356, § 1,12-15-58)  
Sec. 16-5. - Same—Exceptions 
Sections 16-1 through 16-4 shall not be denied to prohibit the distribution of the United States mail, the delivery of any newspaper of the general circulation, as defined in section 6000 of the government code of the state, or the distribution or delivery of printed matter from the hand of the deliverer into the hand of any person willing to receive the same, the purpose of said sections being to prohibit the promiscuous depositing any unwanted material in any public place or upon any private property. 
(Code 1952, § 3825; Ord. No. NS-356, § 1, 12-15-58)  
Sec. 16-6. - Same—Constitutes a nuisance. 
Any person violating any provision of section 16-1 through 16-4 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition shall be guilty of creating a public nuisance, which may be abated as provided in section 18-1.  
Sec. 16-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1380, § 1, enacted Jan. 16, 1978, repealed § 16-7 relative to the authority of certain public officers and employees to issue citations. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1085, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 1971, and Ord. No. NS-1119, § adopted May 15, 1972.  
Secs. 16-8—16-27. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2323, § 1, adopted July 7, 1997, specifically changed the title of Art. II from "Refuse Collection Regulations" to "Solid Waste Collection Regulations." 
 
Sec. 16-28. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Solid Waste Collection Regulations" of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 3830; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 1, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 16-28.5. - Purpose of this article. 
It is in the public interest, health and safety that the collection, transportation and recycling, diversion by means of composting, mulching and/or transforming and disposal of all solid waste in the city be regulated by the city. In order for the city to both manage the solid waste generated within the city and to comply with the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (commencing with Section 40000 of the California Public Resources Code), and any amendments made thereto, the city deems it necessary to provide rules and regulations relating to solid waste. 
(Ord. No. NS-2199, § 2, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 16-29. - Definitions. 
(a)  Bin service shall mean all solid waste collection services provided by means of front-loaded collection bins of various sizes. 
(b)  California Integrated Waste Management Act shall mean that act codified by California Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(c)  Commercial/industrial bin service shall mean bin service which is provided by the city's solid waste collection contractor to commercial and/or industrial units. 
(d)  Compost shall mean the product resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic wastes that are source separated from the solid waste stream. 
(e)  Composting shall mean a method of waste treatment which produces a product meeting the definition of compost herein. 
(f)  Composting facility means a state permitted solid waste facility at which composting is conducted and which produces a product meeting the definition of compost. 
(g)  Construction and demolition solid waste includes solid wastes, such as building materials, and packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on streets, pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. 
(h)  Curbside service unit shall mean each single family residence and duplex unit which receives curbside collection services provided by the city's solid waste collection contractor. This shall include commercial curbside users and any multifamily, business or professional user which does not require bin service as determined by the executive director of public works. 
(i)  Executive director shall mean the Executive Director of Public Works of the City of Santa Ana, or his or her designate. 
(j)  Hazardous wastes shall mean those wastes which, because of their physical or chemical characteristics, cannot be disposed of in a Class III landfill under the applicable laws and regulations of the State of California. 
(k)  Permitted solid waste facility shall mean a solid waste facility for which there exists a solid waste facilities permit issued by the local enforcement agency and concurred in by the California Waste Management Board. 
(l)  Person shall include, without limitation, individuals, schools, colleges and all governmental agencies and entities, associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, sole proprietorships, corporations, including the officers of such associations, corporations, etc. 
(m)  Processing shall mean the reduction, separation, recovery, conversion or recycling of solid waste. 
(n)  Recyclable solid waste shall mean and include those solid wastes which may be sorted, cleansed, treated, processed, and/or reconstituted for purpose of reuse. Recyclable solid wastes are not a separate category of materials, but merely an evolving portion of the entire stream of solid waste generated within the city. 
(o)  Recycling means collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, processing and reconstituting recyclable solid wastes for the purpose of reuse. 
(p)  Residential bin service shall mean bin service which is provided by the city's solid waste collection contractor to any and all residential users which request or require such services. 
(q)  Roll-off service shall mean solid waste collection from transportable containers of ten (10) cubic yards or larger which are dropped off at residence, commercial or industrial establishment and later removed for collection of contents of said container. Roll-off service includes compactors which may be used with roll-off containers. 
(r)  Solid waste shall mean all solid wastes, including, but not by way of limitation, yard waste, recyclable solid wastes, whether now recyclable or not, generated and/or accumulated by all residential, commercial and industrial sources, and at all construction and demolition sites within the city; provided, however, that solid waste shall not be deemed, for purposes of this article, to include any hazardous wastes as defined hereinabove. 
(s)  Solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts shall mean those carts furnished or supplied to each curbside service unit in the city by the city or its solid waste collection contractor for the placement of solid waste, recyclable solid waste and yard waste. 
(t)  Source reduction and recycling element means the city's plan for meeting the requirements of California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, Division 30 of the California Public Resources Code, commencing with Section 40000. 
(u)  Waste type shall mean identified wastes having the features of a group or class of wastes which are distinguishable from any other waste type, as identified by the city's source reduction and recycling element. 
(v)  Yard waste shall mean any wastes generated from the maintenance or alteration of public, commercial, or residential landscapes, including but not limited to, leaves, yard clippings, tree trimming, brush, weeds, and prunings. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.1; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 1, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1684, § 1, 6-6-83; Ord. No. NS-1917, § 1, 7-6-87; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 3, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 2, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-29.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2199, § 4, adopted June 7, 1993, repealed § 16-29.5, which pertained to exclusions from "refuse" and derived from Ord. No. NS-1917, § 2, adopted July 6, 1987, and Ord. No. NS-2052, § 1, adopted April 2, 1990.  
Sec. 16-30. - Exclusivity and exclusions thereto. 
(a)  The city and its solid waste collection contractor have the exclusive duty, right, and privilege to collect, transport, process, recycle, divert by means of composting, mulching, and/or transforming, retaining and disposing of all solid waste accumulated, produced or generated in the city, and all solid waste placed for collection either by the city or its solid waste collection contractor shall be deemed to be the property thereof, except as otherwise provided herein. This exclusivity shall not include construction and demolition solid waste which has accumulated and/or been generated at a temporary construction site and which is being disposed of in a roll-off container(s) or in bin(s). 
(b)  A person who generates solid waste, or who owns the premises upon which solid waste has generated or accumulated, may personally collect, transport and dispose of its own solid waste so long as it: 
(1)  Does so in accordance with all governing laws and regulations, and 
(2)  Disposes of such solid waste at a site permitted by the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle). 
(c)  A person who generates solid waste, or who owns the premises upon which solid waste is generated or accumulated, may: (1) sell or, (2) donate its recyclable solid wastes; provided, however, that in both instances: (a) the person must, on its premises, segregate (by waste type) from other solid waste the recyclable solid waste to be sold or donated, and (b) the person may not pay the buyer or donee, or any third party, any tangible consideration, including service, consulting or other fees or discount/reduction of fees, for collecting, processing, or transporting such segregated recyclable solid wastes. A person who simply receives a discount of, or reduction in, the collection, processing or disposal service rates for solid waste shall not be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable solid wastes for purposes of this exception. At the request of the city, a person who sells or donates its recyclable waste shall provide documentation, including receipts from the person buying or receiving the donated recyclables evidencing the sale or donation, and invoices or agreements for hauling or recycling services. 
(d)  A gardener, tree trimmer, or person engaged in landscape maintenance who has a business license to operate in the city may collect yard waste or other organic solid wastes which it generates as an incidental portion of providing its licensed services. Any yard waste or other organic solid waste collected pursuant hereto must be transported by the gardener, tree trimmer or person to a composting facility permitted by CalRecycle in accordance with all laws and regulations. 
(e)  Any person may collect, transport, and dispose of solid waste during a period in which collection services by the city or its solid waste collection contractor are interrupted or delayed due to a labor strike or other circumstances affecting collection services throughout the city, provided such persons comply with any and all directives of the executive director of public works. 
(f)  Any person with whom the city has an agreement for the collection, transportation and disposal of construction and demolition solid waste which has accumulated and/or been generated at a temporary construction site may haul such waste during the term of such agreement. 
(g)  The executive director of public works may, by written permit, authorize provision of bin service if the city's solid waste collection contractor fails to provide such service within five (5) calendar days after a customer order and such service is not thereafter provided within twenty-four (24) hours after notice to the city's solid waste collection contractor of such failure by the executive director of public works. 
(h)  Any person other than the city or its solid waste collection contractor who collects, transports, recycles, composts, or disposes of solid waste, or who pays another to do so, other than as permitted by subsection (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.2; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 2, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1684, § 2, 6-6-83; Ord. No. NS-1826, § 1, 1-20-86; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 5, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2280, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. NS-2354, § 1, 6-15-98; Ord. No. NS-2808, § 2, 10-18-10)  
Sec. 16-31. - Transporting solid waste on city streets. 
(a)  Collectors of solid waste originating outside the city may haul such solid waste over city streets. 
(b)  No person shall transport solid waste pursuant to subsection (a) above or subsections 16-30(b), (c), or (d), or any other waste material, along the streets of the city unless it is enclosed or otherwise secured so as to prevent it from being blown, dropped, spilled, or leaked. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.3; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 3, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 6, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 16-32. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The executive director of public works may make rules and determinations pertaining to the storage, collection, recycling, diversion, conveyance, and disposal of solid waste consistent with this article and with any resolution or contract of the city council pertaining to the same, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The collection day schedules for curbside service and, when necessary to improve sanitation or reduce noise, for residential and/or commercial/industrial bin service. 
(2)  Determinations as to whether waste material falls within the definition of solid waste. 
(3)  Determinations as to whether the conditions for receipt of curbside service have been satisfied. 
(4)  Determinations as to whether processing of solid waste is occurring in compliance with the California Integrated Waste Management Act and the city's source reduction and recycling element. 
(5)  Determinations as to whether agreements between customers and the city's solid waste collection contractor for special or additional collection services or for bin or roll-off service are reasonable and consistent. 
(6)  Regulations pertaining to periods of labor strike or other circumstances affecting collection services throughout the city. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a rule or determination of the executive director of public works shall have the right of appeal to the city manager, who shall have the authority to confirm, modify, or revoke the same. 
(c)  The executive director of public works is authorized to enforce any provision of this article the violation of which is made an infraction or a misdemeanor, or he/she may declare any condition to constitute a public nuisance. The county health officer is likewise authorized to enforce any such provisions insofar as they pertain to the protection of the public health and sanitation. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.4; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 4, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 7, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 16-33. - Curbside service regulations. 
Unless otherwise provided by special agreement for extra services between a curbside service unit and the city's solid waste collection contractor, subject to reasonable fees for extra services, persons receiving curbside service collection shall comply with the following regulations as a condition to regular curbside service collection: 
(a)  All solid waste shall be placed in the appropriate solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Non-recyclable solid waste shall be placed in the burgundy plastic carts; 
(2)  Recyclable solid waste shall be placed in the gray plastic carts; and 
(3)  Yard waste shall be placed in the green plastic carts. 
(b)  Any solid waste placed for collection which is not contained in either the solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts or in the appropriate solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart shall not be collected by the city's solid waste collection contractor. 
(c)  Large, bulky items, such as furniture and household equipment, shall be considered bulky items which shall be disposed of as such. 
(d)  The aforementioned requirements to place non-recyclable solid waste, recyclable solid waste and yard waste in the appropriate solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts shall not apply to Christmas trees properly placed for collection. 
(e)  Solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts shall be placed in the street with wheels adjacent to the curb, or along an alley having street access at both ends; provided, the city or its solid waste collection contractor may condition collection from private streets upon reasonable access and upon the agreement of owners and occupants for the use of the private streets, including a reasonable fee for special services. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.5; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1038, § 1, 9-21-70; Ord. No. NS-1093, § 1, 1-3-72; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 5, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 8, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 3, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-34. - Infractions. 
Any person violating any of the following provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), or, upon a second conviction within one (1) year of a prior conviction for the same offense, by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00): 
(a)  No person shall allow solid waste, recyclable solid waste, yard waste or empty solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts to remain along, at, or near any public street, sidewalk, parkway (excluding alleys), or in any area visible from a public street or in public view, except: 
(i)  Between the hours of 4:00 p.m. of the day preceding the person's weekly collection day and 12:00 midnight of such collection day; or 
(ii)  During any period in which regular collection service is interrupted or delayed. 
(b)  All roll-off containers, bins and solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts obtained from the city's solid waste collection contractor, and all enclosures and surrounding areas, shall be maintained in a reasonably sanitary condition, free from obnoxious odors and from attachments of solid waste likely to create breeding grounds for insects or vermin, beyond that incidental to solid waste deposited since the previous collection; provided that persons receiving bin service may order bin cleaning services, subject to a reasonable fee, from the city's solid waste collection contractor in lieu of cleaning such bins themselves. 
(c)  No person receiving curbside service shall use any container for solid waste collection purposes other than the solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts which are provided either by the city or the city's solid waste collection contractor. 
(d)  No person shall use the solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart of another person for disposal of solid waste without the consent of such other person. 
(e)  No person shall discard any solid waste other than non-recyclable solid waste in the burgundy solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. 
(f)  No person shall discard any solid waste other than recyclable solid waste in the gray solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. 
(g)  No person shall discard any solid waste other than yard waste in the green solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. 
(h)  No person shall remove solid waste, recyclable solid waste or yard waste from a solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart or bin or from the place where it has been put for collection by the city's solid waste collection contractor, except (1) those persons entitled to the use of such plastic cart, bin or place for the disposal of their solid waste, and (2) the city's solid waste collection contractor. 
(i)  No person shall damage or alter the appearance of solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. 
(j)  No person shall remove and/or relocate any solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart from the curbside service unit to which it was furnished or supplied by the city's solid waste collection contractor. 
(Code 1952, § 3830.6; Ord. No. NS-823, § 1, 11-15-65; Ord. No. NS-1093, § 2, 1-3-72; Ord. No. NS-1444, § 6, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 9, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2212, § 6, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2268, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 4, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-35. - Unlawful accumulations. 
(a)  No person shall allow solid waste to accumulate upon the premises under his or her control in an amount which is detrimental to the public health or safety or which results in unsightly or insanitary conditions. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any accumulation of solid waste upon any premises which is detrimental to the public health or safety or which results in unsightly or insanitary conditions constitutes a public nuisance abatable pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Code or other applicable law. 
(c)  In the event that solid waste, recyclable solid waste and/or yard waste being disposed of by a curbside service unit exceeds the solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart(s) capacity for such curbside service unit, the solid waste collection contractor shall notify the executive director of public works who shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises. If the executive director of public works determines that there is insufficient solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart capacity at such location, he or she shall cause written notification to be given to the curbside service unit. Such notification shall contain the date of the reported overflow of solid waste from the plastic cart(s). The notice shall also inform the curbside service unit that should another incident of overcapacity occur within thirty (30) days following the date of the original incident, the curbside service user will be required to increase the number of solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. In the event that this shall occur, the solid waste collection contractor shall furnish such additional solid waste collection and recycling plastic cart(s) as are necessary and the city shall be entitled to compensation from the curbside service user to the same extent as if the property owner requested such additional solid waste collection and recycling plastic carts. 
(Ord. No. NS-1444, § 7, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 10, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 5, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-36. - Disposal of dangerous materials. 
Any person violating any of the following provisions shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(a)  No person shall dispose of any wearing apparel, bedding, or other material from any place where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed except under the supervision and direction of the health officer or his representative. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of any highly inflammable or explosive materials except under the supervision and direction of the fire chief or his representative. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of any hazardous waste except at an authorized hazardous waste collection site or as directed by the health officer, fire chief, or solid waste collection contractor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1444, § 8, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 11, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 16-37. - Service requirements for multifamily residential buildings. 
(a)  It shall be mandatory that residential buildings with three (3) or more dwelling units on a single parcel be served by bin service. This requirement may be waived for residential buildings by the executive director. Any applicant who has been denied a waiver by the executive director of public works may appeal such action to the city council by filing within thirty (30) days after such denial, a written statement of his or her reasons why the city council should reverse the action from which the appeal is taken. 
(b)  Multifamily residential buildings receiving bin service pursuant to subsection (a) shall be required to obtain such service in the amount of not less than one-half (½) of one (1) yard per dwelling unit per week. 
(c)  In the event that solid waste being disposed of at a residential bin service building exceeds the bin capacity for such building, the solid waste collection contractor shall notify the executive director of public works who shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises. If the executive director of public works determines that there is insufficient bin capacity at said location, he or she shall cause written notification to be given to the property owner. Said notification shall contain the date of the reported overflow of solid waste from the bins. The notice shall also inform the property owner that should another incident of overcapacity occur within thirty (30) days following the date of the original incident, the property owner will be required to increase the number of bins, or the frequency of collections, up to the equivalent of two (2) cubic yards per dwelling unit per week. In the event that this should occur, the executive director of public works shall determine whether to increase the number of bins or the frequency of collections and the solid waste collection contractor shall furnish such additional services and shall be entitled to compensation from the customers to the same extent as if the customer requested such additional collections from the solid waste collection contractor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1444, § 9, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1678, § 1, 6-6-83; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 12, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 6, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-37.5. - Service requirements for commercial/industrial buildings. 
(a)  It shall be mandatory that all commercial units and/or buildings and all industrial units and/or buildings be served by bin or roll-off service. This requirement may be waived by the executive director. Any applicant who has been denied a waiver by the executive director may appeal such action to the city council by filing within thirty (30) days after such denial, a written statement of his or her reasons why the city council should reverse the action from which the appeal is taken. Any person in the city who desires or is required to receive bin and/or roll-off service is required to obtain such services from the solid waste collection contractor with which the city has an agreement. Such persons shall be required to enter into an agreement with the solid waste collection contractor for the requested bin and/or roll-off container services. This provision shall not apply to roll-off containers or bins which are obtained for the collection of construction and demolition solid waste which has accumulated or been generated at a temporary construction site. Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In the event that solid waste being disposed of at a commercial/industrial bin or roll-off container service unit exceeds the bin or roll-off container capacity for such building, the solid waste collection contractor shall notify the executive director of public works who shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises. If the executive director of public works determines that there is insufficient bin or roll-off container capacity at said location, he or she shall cause written notification to be given both to the business and the property owner. Said notification shall contain the date of the reported overflow of solid waste from the bin or roll-off container. The notice shall also inform the business and property owner that should another incident of overcapacity occur within thirty (30) days following the date of the original incident, the business and/or property owner will be required to increase the number of bins or roll-off containers, or the frequency of collections. In the event that this should occur, the executive director of public works shall determine whether to increase the number of bins or roll-off containers, the size of the bin or roll-off container, or the frequency of collections and the solid waste collection contractor shall furnish such additional services and shall be entitled to compensation from such customers to the same extent as if the customer requested such additional collections from the solid waste collection contractor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2199, § 13, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2323, § 7, 7-7-97)  
Sec. 16-38. - Service charges. 
(a)  Owners and/or occupants of any improved parcel of real property in the city, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, except any parcel receiving bin or roll-off service exclusively, shall pay to the city a solid waste collection service charge (refuse service charge) in such amounts, at such times, and in such manner as shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such refuse service charge is imposed to provide for the continuing availability of curbside service, and shall be due and payable in accordance with the terms of said resolution regardless of actual use thereof or of any interruptions or delays in such service, except to the extent reductions or refunds may be specifically authorized or directed by the executive director of public works or his/her designee or by the executive director of finance and management services or his/her designee. 
(b)  For purposes of administrative convenience the city council may establish billing units for payment of the said service charge consisting of one (1) or more occupancies within one (1) or more parcels. The said total refuse service charge reflecting the number of billable units shall be billed as provided in section 39-20 as part of the city's regular consolidated municipal utility services account/billing statement, but shall be listed as a separate line item on the municipal utility services account/billing statement. 
(c)  A penalty of ten (10) percent shall be assessed on all unpaid refuse service charge bills thirty (30) days after the billing date. No penalty, however, will accrue until thirty (30) days after the date that the bill has been presented in accordance with section 39-20. 
(d)  The said refuse service charge and any penalties accrued for failure to make timely payment therefore shall be a civil debt owing to the city. 
(e)  In the event the occupant(s) of any property or premises, having registered a municipal utility services account and transferred municipal utility services into their own name as tenant(s), thereafter quit or otherwise vacate the premises, then responsibility for future municipal utility services charges, including refuse charges, shall revert to the municipal utility services account of the property owner in accordance with section 39-16. 
(f)  In addition to all other civil remedies for collection of such indebtedness, in the event that the owner and occupant of the premises or property receiving refuse service are the same, then said civil debt against such customer or person shall be subject to special assessment and lien against said property in the manner provided in Sections 38790.1 and 25831 of the Government Code of the State of California. Establishment of a lien against the property shall remove said refuse charge(s) from the city's regular consolidated municipal utility services account/billing statement and toll the accrual of additional penalties therefore under this section and section 39-20. 
(g)  The city shall not disconnect water utility service for failure to pay the refuse service charge, unless such failure is accompanied by a customer's failure to pay the water utility service, in which case disconnection of water utility service shall be governed by article II of chapter 39. 
(h)  Charges for bin service, roll-off container service or for collection services more frequent or more extensive than that provided in this article for curbside service shall be paid directly to the city's solid waste collection contractor in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by contract or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1444, § 10, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-2199, § 14, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2921, 11, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 16-39. - Bin and roll-off services. 
Any person in the city who desires or is required to receive bin and/or roll-off service is required to obtain such services from the solid waste collection contractor with which the city has an agreement. Such persons shall be required to enter into an agreement with the solid waste collection contractor for the requested bin and/or roll-off container services. This provision shall not apply to roll-off containers or bins which are obtained for the collection of construction and demolition solid waste which has accumulated or been generated at a temporary construction site. Violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2199, § 15, 6-7-93; Ord. No. NS-2280, § 2, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 16-40. - General application and definitions. 
(a)  Sections 16-40 through 16-42 shall apply to any corporation, company, partnership, trust, estate, association, joint venture or other legal or commercial entity operating within the city that employs workers to perform waste disposal services. 
(b)  "Change in contract" shall mean any change by the city of any waste services provider with whom the city contracts to provide waste disposal services. 
(c)  "Change in control" shall mean any sale, assignment, transfer, contribution or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets or a controlling interest (including by consolidation, merger, or reorganization) of the incumbent operator, or any person who controls such incumbent operator, in a waste services provider, to a new operator. 
(d)  "City" shall mean the City of Santa Ana. 
(e)  "Incumbent operator" shall mean the person who owns, controls, and/or operates a waste services provider prior to a change in control or change in contract. 
(f)  "New operator" shall mean the person who owns, controls and/or operates a waste services provider following a change in control or change in contract. 
(g)  "Person" shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, estate, association, joint venture, agency, instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity, whether domestic or foreign. 
(h)  "Qualified displaced worker" shall mean any person employed by an incumbent operator or any subcontractor of a incumbent operator of a waste services provider who: 
(1)  Is not an "exempt" employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), and 
(2)  Has been employed at the establishment by the incumbent operator or any subcontractor of the incumbent operator for at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the execution of the transfer document. 
(i)  "Transfer document" shall mean the document effecting a change in control or change in contract. 
(j)  "Waste disposal services" shall mean the collection, transfer, transport, recycling, processing and/or disposal of residential, and commercial, industrial solid waste and solid waste generated at temporary construction and demolition sites under contract to the city through a franchise or other exclusive or non-exclusive agreement. 
(k)  "Waste services provider" shall mean any entity identified in section 16-40 of this article and any subcontractor of such an entity providing waste disposal services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2807, § 2, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 16-41. - Employee retention/preferential hiring/wage maintenance. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days of the execution of a transfer document, an incumbent operator shall provide to the new operator and the executive director of public works a list of all of the employees of the incumbent operator of a waste services provider, including each employee's name, last know address, date of hire and job classification at the time of the transfer. The new operator shall offer employment at an establishment to all qualified displaced workers. 
(b)  All new operator work hours performed by a waste services provider must be performed, to the extent feasible, by qualified displaced workers. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the new operator to create additional positions that the new operator does not need. However, prior to reducing the amount of work hours or positions utilized to perform waste disposal services at an establishment, a new operator must obtain written approval from the executive director of public works. 
(c)  A new operator shall not discharge any qualified displaced worker, except for cause, for at least one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of a transfer document, or the date on which the new operator actually begins operating the waste services provider, whichever is later. 
(d)  At the end of such 180-day period, the new operator (or subcontractor, where applicable) shall perform a written performance evaluation for each employee retained pursuant to the ordinance from which this section derives. If the employee's performance during such 180-day period is satisfactory, the new operator (or subcontractor) shall offer the employee continued employment. 
(e)  In the event that, during the 180-day transition period described in above, the new operator determines that fewer positions are needed to deliver and maintain the contracted service, the new operator shall retain qualified displaced workers by seniority. Seniority shall be determined by reference to the collective bargaining agreement covering the qualified displaced workers, if one exists, or, if no such agreement exists, then by reference to the initial hire date with the incumbent operator of each qualified displaced worker. Any qualified displaced workers not retained by the new operator shall be placed on a preferential hiring list and considered by the new operator for any job openings that may arise. 
(f)  Each new operator must provide all employees of a waste services provider with wages in an amount and benefits at a value of not less than the greater of those (a) in effect at the point of execution of the transfer document or (b) in any collective bargaining agreement, whether effective or expired, between an incumbent operator and such employees. For purposes of this article, "wages and benefits" includes all wages or compensation referenced in the existing collective bargaining agreement including provisions addressing how overtime shall be calculated, employer and employee contributions for medical insurance and retirement benefits, any tool, shoe or uniform allowance, sick leave, vacation time and personal or family leave. 
(Ord. No. NS-2807, § 3, 9-7-10)  
Sec. 16-42. - Retaliation and discrimination barred; no waiver of rights; enforcement. 
(a)  No incumbent operator or new operator shall discharge or otherwise discriminate against anyone for making a complaint, participating in any city proceeding, or using any civil remedy to enforce his or her rights, or for otherwise asserting his or her rights under the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(b)  Any waiver by a qualified displaced worker of any or all of the provisions of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be deemed contrary to public policy and shall be void and unenforceable, except where such waiver occurs in a bona fide collective bargaining agreement. Any attempt by an incumbent operator or new operator to have a waste or recycling worker waive rights given by the ordinance from which this section derives shall constitute a willful violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  In addition to any rights and remedies which an employee might have, under any federal or state statute or regulation or municipal ordinance or regulation or at common law, any employee claiming a violation of the ordinance from which this section derives may bring an action against an incumbent operator or new operator in the Superior Court of the State of California, to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, and may seek liquidated damages, back pay, any other actual damages, reinstatement, injunctive relief, punitive damages, and any other legal or equitable relief, as permitted by law. Violations of the ordinance from which this section derives are declared to irreparably harm the public and covered employees generally. 
(d)  The terms of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be included, by reference, in all future waste disposal services contracts entered into by the city, and all future waste services providers shall include the terms of the ordinance, by reference, in all contracts or subcontracts which the waste services provider may enter into involving waste disposal services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2807, § 4, 9-7-10)  
Secs. 16-43—16-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND WEED CONTROL 
 
Sec. 16-46. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Garbage, Rubbish and Weed Control Ordinance" of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 3840; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1085, § 2, 10-18-71)  
Sec. 16-47. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the context indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
Brush. Branches of trees sheared therefrom, a thicket of shrubs, or bushes. 
City finance director. The executive director of the finance and management services of the city or his or her designated representative. 
City public works director. The executive director of the public works agency of the city or his or her designated representative. 
Garbage. Accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable. 
Lot. Any lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, improved or unimproved, including the sidewalk area abutting or adjoining said lot, parcel, tract or piece of land; and the parkways, or areas lying between the curbline and the street line of said adjoining or abutting lot, bounded on the sides by the prolongations in straight lines of the side lines of the lot in front of which such parkway or area exists. 
Noxious growth. Weeds, vines or brush which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or which attain a high growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which contain poisonous oils that become dangerous to the life and health of the community. 
Private premises. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Rubbish. Scrap metals, junk, disassembled parts of automobiles or machinery, construction or demolition materials, debris, litter, paper, cardboard, metal cans, glass, cut brush, dead trees, tree limbs and similar materials. 
Street line. The boundary line between a public street right-of-way and an abutting lot or parcel of land, or between a private street open to public use and an abutting lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1952, § 3841; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1085, § 2, 10-18-71; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 1, 9-3-96) 
Editor's note— The editors arranged the definitions alphabetically, to facilitate reference and use.  
Sec. 16-48. - Noxious growths, rubbish, garbage prohibited; prima facie evidence. 
No person owning, managing or having control or charge or occupancy of any lot or private premises, shall: 
(1)  Allow noxious growths or growths otherwise dangerous to the life, health, comfort or convenience of the community, to grow or remain upon such lot or private premises; 
(2)  Sow or disseminate, or allow or permit to mature, any noxious growth upon such lot or private premises; 
(3)  Suffer or permit any weeds, grass, rank growth or brush to grow or exist in excess of six inches (6?) above the grade in the area of growth; 
(4)  Cause or permit rubbish or garbage to be placed or to exist upon such lot or private property. 
It is the duty of every such person to prevent such growth or existence. To establish a prima facie violation of this section, it shall not be necessary to establish any facts except that the accused person owned, managed, or had charge, control or occupancy of a lot or private premises whereon such condition existed or occurred. 
(Code 1952, § 3842; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1085, § 2, 10-18-71)  
Sec. 16-49. - Order and notice requiring removal of noxious growths, rubbish, garbage—Time limit; posting, mailing. 
(a)  If and when it shall appear that noxious growths, rubbish or garbage have been placed upon or in front of private property in violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any other provisions of this Code, the city public works director may, by appropriate written order, direct the removal thereof and shall cause notices to be posted upon or in front of such property to the effect that such weeds, vines, shrubs, brush, rubbish or garbage must be removed within seven (7) days from and after the date of such posting. Such notices shall be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on or in front of which the condition exists, as follows: 
(1)  One (1) notice shall be posted on or in front of each separately owned parcel; 
(2)  Not more than two (2) notices shall be posted to any parcel of fifty (50) to one hundred (100) feet frontage; 
(3)  Notices shall be placed at intervals of not more than one hundred (100) feet, if the frontage of a parcel is greater than one hundred (100) feet, with one (1) notice for each one hundred (100) feet of frontage. 
(b)  In addition to posting such notices, the city public works director may send a similar notice to the owner of the subject property as shown upon any city record, or upon the last equalized tax roll, by depositing such notice in the United States mail; but the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the power of the city or its officers or employees to proceed as provided in this article. Such notice shall be mailed not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for a hearing upon objections. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.1; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1085, § 2, 10-18-71; Ord. No. NS-1476, § 1, 3-12-79; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 2, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-50. - Same—Form of notice. 
The headings of the notices required by section 16-49 shall be in letters approximately one inch in height. Said notices shall be in substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES 
"NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN to the owner, manager, occupant or persons having charge or control of the property located at (describe property, e.g., address, assessor's parcel number, physical description) that the condition(s) of (describe violation(s)) _______ exists upon the property which is/are in violation of Article III, Chapter 16 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, which provides for the elimination of rubbish, garbage, noxious or dangerous growths, growing upon or accumulated upon or in front of property, obstructing the use of sidewalks, parkways or streets or dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health and welfare of residents in the vicinity. 
"The said condition(s) must be abated on or before ________, 19___. If not abated on or before said date, the City of Santa Ana may abate the condition or cause it to be abated and the costs thereof will be assessed against the land and become a lien thereon. 
"Any person objecting to the abatement work specified in this notice may appeal by filing a written statement of such objection, specifying the address or description of the property concerned, the reasons for objection, and the name, address, phone number (if any) and status (owner, manager, tenant, lessee, or other) of the person making the objection. All such statements must be filed with the Clerk of the Council, City Hall, 20 Civic Center Plaza, Santa Ana, California, not later than the date for abatement set forth hereinabove." 
(Code 1952, § 3842.2; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-6-67; Ord. No. NS-1085, § 2, 10-18-71; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 40, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-1476, § 2, 3-12-79)  
Sec. 16-51. - Hearing. 
If the clerk of the council receives any appeals from the notice specified in section 16-50, the clerk shall set such appeals for public hearing by the city council and shall send written notices of such public hearing to all persons filing such appeals. At the time and place stated in the notices, the city council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed abatement work. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall allow or overrule any objections. 
(Ord. No. NS-2300, § 3, 9-3-96) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 16-51 by Ord. No. NS-2300, Ord. No. NS-1235, § 41, enacted Dec. 9, 1974, had repealed § 16-51, which had pertained to hearings and had derived from Code 1952, § 3842.3 and Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, adopted June 5, 1967.  
Sec. 16-52. - Abatement order—From council. 
At the conclusion of said hearing, the council may order the city public works director to abate said nuisance by entering upon private property to abate and remove the same. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.4; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 42, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 4, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-53. - Same—Service. 
The city public works director shall serve by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, a copy of said abatement order forthwith upon those persons who have filed written statements of objections. The abatement order shall specify that unless the nuisance is removed and abated within seven (7) days from the date of mailing, said officer will abate the same and will, if necessary, enter upon or into the private property of said person without further notice or liability therefor in order to abate said nuisance. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.4; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 5, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-54. - Abatement action by city. 
The city public works director may cause the city's nuisance abatement work force or contractor to enter upon any private property and abate any nuisance found thereon, or in front thereof, provided ten (10) days notice to abate such nuisance shall have been posted or mailed as required by this article, the time allowed by such notice shall have expired, and no person shall have filed a written statement of objections as herein provided within ten (10) days after posting or mailing; in the event objections shall have been duly filed, and overruled by the city council, the city public works director may cause the city's nuisance abatement work force or contractor to enter upon any such private property and, in accordance with the order of the city, abate the nuisance found thereon, or in front thereof. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.6; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 43, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 6, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-55. - Cost of abatement. 
(a)  The city public works director shall keep a separate account of the cost of abatement in front of or on each individual lot or parcel of land where abatement work is done. He shall submit to the city manager for confirmation an itemized written report showing such cost. A copy of the report shall be posted for at least three (3) days prior to its submission to the city council on or near the council chamber door with a notice of the time of submission. At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council may hear the matter or refer it to the hearing officer under the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, establish a standard administrative fee for parcels requiring nuisance abatement work by the city's nuisance abatement work force or contractor. Such fee shall be in addition to the direct cost of the abatement work and shall be in an amount reasonably determined to cover such costs as posting, inspection, contractor supervision, and the like. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution, also establish a standard charge for additional administrative costs for parcels requiring more than one (1) notice of abatement in any twelve-month period. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.7; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 44, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 7, 9-3-96) 
State Law reference— For authority to abate nuisances, see § 38773, Gov. Code.  
Sec. 16-56. - Receiving, receipting and billing for cost to city. 
The city finance director shall receive the amount due on the abatement cost and shall issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the report. The city finance director may bill the owner of record directly at any time he shall desire. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.10; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 8, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-57. - Special assessments—Lien. 
The cost of abatement in front of or upon each lot or parcel of land constitutes a special assessment against that lot or parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it is a lien on the lot or parcel. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.8; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67)  
Sec. 16-58. - Same—Collection procedure. 
After confirmation of a report, a certified copy of the same shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10th of each year. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor's map book for the current year. The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. As an alternative method, the county tax collector, in his discretion, may collect the assessments without reference to the general taxes, by issuing separate bills and receipts for the assessments. Laws relating to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special assessment taxes. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.9; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67)  
Sec. 16-59. - Same—Correction of error. 
(a)  Any assessment erroneously made may be cancelled or reduced so as to correct any error, and the tax paid on account thereof, not including any penalties or interest, may be refunded to the person who paid the same, in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  A claim of error may be filed with the clerk of the council at any time before the expiration of one year following April 10th of the tax year in which such assessment appears or would first appear on the tax bill for the affected property. Such claim shall be in writing, in such form and detail as shall be required by the clerk of the council, and shall be verified; 
(2)  Any claim filed shall be forwarded to the city public works director for review and report to the city finance director. If the city public works director shall determine that such assessment was erroneously made, in whole or in part, the city finance director shall request the county board of supervisors to direct the county auditor-controller to correct the tax rolls as to the affected property by removing or reducing the erroneous assessment, and the direction of the city finance director shall be authority for the auditor-controller so to correct the tax rolls. If such assessment shall have been paid, the part determined to be erroneously levied shall be refunded to the person who paid the same, by the city finance director. In lieu of proof otherwise, the city finance director may presume that the persons to whom the abatement cost was assessed were the persons who paid the same; 
(3)  Any claimant whose claim is not favorably acted upon in whole or in part within sixty (60) days after the filing of the same, or whose claim is denied, in whole or in part in writing, by the city finance director, may, within ten (10) days after such denial or after the expiration of such period, appeal such denial or failure to act favorably to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code; 
(4)  If the city council shall find the disputed assessment to be erroneous in whole or in part it may direct the city finance director to correct the assessment accordingly, to cause the tax rolls to be corrected, and to make a refund of any portion of the assessment paid, all in the manner as hereinabove provided for such corrections and refunds; 
(5)  Not later than thirty (30) days after the correction of any assessment or refund of any monies hereinunder, except by direction of the city council, the city finance director shall transmit to the city council a report of such action, together with the report of the city public works director. 
(b)  Whenever the tax rolls have been corrected or a refund has been made hereunder by reason of an erroneous assessment, a corrected written report of the type required by section 16-55, relating to the work for which such erroneous assessment was levied, may be prepared by the officer who prepared the original report. Such report shall show the cost of abatement in front of or on the parcel or lot where the work has been done and shall state that it is proposed to assess such cost against such lot or parcel. A copy of such corrected report shall be mailed to the owner of said lot or parcel as shown upon the current assessment roll. In all other respects, sections 16-56 through 16-58 shall apply to such corrected assessments, except that the time for doing all things herein specified shall relate from the date of confirmation of the corrected assessment. 
(Code 1952, § 3842.11; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 2, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 9, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 16-60. - Violation a public nuisance; remedies. 
Violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in part 3 of division 4 of the civil code of the state and in chapter 2 of title X of part 2 of the code of civil procedure of the state, which remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy provided in this article or by state law, including section 372 of the penal code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 3843; Ord. No. NS-880, § 1, 6-5-67; Ord. No. NS-2300, § 10, 9-3-96)  
Secs. 16-61—16-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, ETC., VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 16-110. - Purpose. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council of the City of Santa Ana hereby makes the following findings and declarations. 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-111. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  The term "vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  The term "highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
(c)  The term "public property" does not include "highway." 
(d)  The term "enclosed private property" shall mean the fenced-in ground and buildings immediately surrounding a house or dwellings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2069, § 1, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 16-112. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(b)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise on land which such business or enterprise is authorized by the city's zoning regulations. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-113. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee. In the enforcement of this article, subject to other requirements of law, such enforcement officer may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle. If consent to enter enclosed private property for purposes of this section has been sought and refused, or facts and circumstances exist to reasonably justify a failure to seek such consent, such enforcement officer shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to Section 1822.50 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2069, § 2, 7-16-90; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 1, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-114. - Authority to remove. 
The executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee may enter upon private or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
If consent to enter enclosed private property for purposes of this section has been refused by the property owner or occupant, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall obtain appropriate judicial authorization prior to the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2069, § 3, 7-16-90; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 2, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-115. - Administration costs. 
The city council shall, by resolution, from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-116. - Authority to cause abatement and removal. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein and to arrange with and authorize private persons or city employees to accomplish such removal. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 3, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-117. - Notices of intention to abate and remove; mailing; form of notices. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 16, Article IV of the Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number _____, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16, Article IV of the Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this Notice of Intention, request a public hearing, and if such a request is not received by the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee within such ten-day period, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs, as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed_______(date)___ 
/s/___________ 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 16, Article IV of the Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16, Article IV of the Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this Notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee within such ten-day period, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed________(date)___ 
/s/___________ 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 4, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-118. - Public hearing—Request by owner of vehicle or owner of land. 
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 5, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-119. - Same—Conduct; rules of evidence; appearance or statement of owner of land; determination by hearing officer; order; notice of decision. 
All hearings under this article shall be held before the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reason for such denial. 
The executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. He or she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee may find that a vehicle or parts thereof have been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be changed against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 5, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-120. - Appeal to the city council. 
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of the council within five (5) days after his or her decision. 
Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
The clerk of the council shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in this article. 
In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 6, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-121. - Disposition of vehicle after order of appeal. 
Five (5) days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five (5) days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by this article, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-122. - Notice and transfer to department of motor vehicles. 
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, the executive director of the planning and building agency or his or her designee shall give notice to the department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73; Ord. No. NS-2331, § 7, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 16-123. - Assessment of costs against the land. 
The administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this article shall, upon expiration of the time for appeal to the city council if no appeal is request, or upon affirmation of the order of assessment if an appeal is heard, be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted by the clerk of the council to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-124. - Lien; recordation of notice of lien. 
At the same time that the assessment is transmitted to the tax collector, the clerk of the council shall record in the office of the county recorder a notice of lien, substantially in the form set out below. 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
(Claim of City of Santa Ana) 
Pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code and Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code, the City of Santa Ana did on or about the _____ day of _______, 19 ___, cause an abandoned vehicle or parts thereof to be removed from real property described herein as a public nuisance and did, effective ________, cause the costs of removal and administrative costs to be assessed against said real property; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and said City of Santa Ana does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $ _____ and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
The real property hereinabove mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Santa Ana, County of Orange, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
(description) 
Dated: This _____ day of _______, 19___. 
___________ 
Clerk of the Council of 
the City of Santa Ana 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Sec. 16-125. - Nonexclusivity of this article. 
This article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-1169, § 1, 10-15-73)  
Chapter 17 - ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, enacted Sept. 15, 1975, amended this Code by adding Ch. 17. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Public nuisance. 
As used in this chapter, the term "public nuisance" means any condition which is a "nuisance" and a "public nuisance" as defined in Sections 3479 and 3480 of the Civil Code of the State of California or which is specifically declared to constitute a nuisance by any statute of the State of California or by any ordinance of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-13-75)  
Sec. 17-2. - Enforcement officer. 
As used in this chapter, "enforcement officer" means the city manager or any officer of the city designated by him, except that when a public nuisance is created solely by reason of the violation of a state statute or Municipal Code provision, the officer of the city charged with the primary responsibility for enforcement of such provision may act as enforcement officer without the necessity of prior designation by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-3. - Premises. 
As used in this chapter, "premises" means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion thereof, improved or unimproved, including adjacent streets, sidewalks, parkways, and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-4. - Abate; abatement. 
As used in this chapter, the terms "abate" and "abatement" means action to repair, replace, remove, destroy, terminate, or otherwise remedy the condition or activity in question by such means and in such manner as is necessary in the interests of the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-5. - Service of notice. 
Whenever any notice, order, statement or resolution is required to be served upon the owner of any premises by the provisions of this chapter, such service shall be either by personal service upon the owner or by delivery into the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, addressed to the owner as such person's name and address appear on the latest available assessment roll, or as otherwise known to be the more reliable name and address of the owner. In addition, if the owner's mailing address is different from that of the premises, a copy of such notice shall either be likewise served on the person in possession of the premises or conspicuously posted upon the premises, and such service or posting shall constitute service of notice upon the owner in the event that he fails to receive notice mailed to him. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-6. - Procedure not exclusive. 
The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure provided in this Code or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions which may be abated under this chapter, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the abatement of any such condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Secs. 17-7—17-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS 
 
Sec. 17-20. - Initiation of proceedings. 
Whenever it appears that any premises within the city are being maintained in such a way as to create a public nuisance, the enforcement officer may investigate the matter and make a preliminary determination as to whether conditions on the premises constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-21. - Notice to abate; content. 
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a public nuisance exists, he shall cause notice to be served upon the owner of the premises. The notice shall describe the premises involved by street address, if possible, and otherwise by the assessor's parcel number or legal description. It shall give a brief description of the conditions which constitute the public nuisance, a brief statement of the method of abatement recommended as appropriate, and a reasonable period of time for such abatement. It shall inform the owner of his right to a public hearing on the question of whether the conditions constitute a public nuisance. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of person notified) 
As owner of the premises at _______ you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Chapter 17 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code, has determined that the following conditions existing upon said premises constitute a public nuisance: 
You are hereby notified to abate said conditions to the satisfaction of the undersigned within _____ days of the date of this notice. Otherwise such conditions shall be abated by the city and the cost of such abatement shall be assessed upon such premises and shall constitute a special assessment upon such premises until paid. Abatement is to be accomplished in the following manner: 
If you have any objection to the determination by the undersigned that the above-described conditions constitute a public nuisance, you are hereby notified to file a written request for hearing to determine whether such conditions constitute a public nuisance. Such request for hearing must be filed with the Clerk of the Council of the City of Santa Ana within ten (10) days of the date of this notice. 
Date of service: 
(Name and title of officer) 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-22. - Recordation of notice. 
The enforcement officer shall cause a copy of the notice of abatement to be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the County of Orange, and upon such recordation subsequent grantees of the premises shall be deemed to have notice of the potential assessment of costs of abatement against the premises. Failure to record the notice of abatement shall not affect the validity of proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-23. - Hearing on existence of public nuisance. 
If the owner files with the clerk of the council a request for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of service of the notice of abatement, a public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of this Code, upon the question of whether the conditions upon the premises constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall be served with notice of the time, hour and place of such hearing. The burden of proof shall be upon the enforcement officer to show that the conditions constitute a public nuisance. The owner may appear in person or by representative, testify, call witnesses, and cross-examine the witnesses against him. He may, in lieu of such appearance, submit a sworn written statement setting forth the facts in support of his contentions, together with any supporting sworn affidavits by other persons. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-24. - Order to abate. 
At the conclusion of hearing proceedings, if the council determines that the conditions on the premises constitute a public nuisance it may by resolution order a designated officer of the city to abate the same, subject to a reasonable time period for the abatement of such conditions by the owner. The council may order that the cost of any such abatement by the city shall be assessed against the premises and collected in the manner provided in this chapter. A copy of such resolution shall be served upon the owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-25. - Abatement by the city. 
Upon the expiration of the period for abatement of the public nuisance by the owner, if no such abatement has occurred to the satisfaction of the enforcing officer, the officer of the city designated by the city council or by the city manager may enter upon the premises and abate the public nuisance. Such abatement by the city may be accomplished by city employees or by an independent contractor retained by the city. The officer of the city designated to abate the nuisance shall maintain a detailed account of all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Secs. 17-26—17-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS 
 
Sec. 17-40. - Assessment report. 
Upon completion of abatement of a public nuisance by the city, the officer designated to abate such public nuisance shall file with the clerk of the council a written report containing his account of the expenses of abatement, a description of the premises on which such abatement occurred, and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. The clerk shall then set the report for hearing by the city council and shall, not less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for such hearing, serve notice of assessment upon the owners, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council shall hear and pass upon the assessment report together with any objections or protests thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-41. - Hearing on assessment report. 
Upon the date and hour fixed for the hearing the city council shall hear and pass upon the assessment report together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the owners of any property liable to be assessed for the costs of abatement or any other interested persons. The city council may make such revision, correction or modifications in the report as it may deem just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The city council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. The decisions of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-42. - Assessment resolution. 
Upon confirmation of the assessment report, the city council shall adopt a resolution specifying the amount assessed against each respective parcel as shown on the last available assessment roll in accordance with the assessment report. Unless otherwise provided in such resolution, any such assessment shall become due thirty (30) days after adoption of such resolution and shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per year. The city council may provide in the resolution for payment to become due at any later date, in total sum or in installments. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 17-43. - Collection. 
All assessments may be paid by tender of the amount due to the director of finance. The director of finance, prior to August 10 of each year, shall determine if any assessment, or portion thereof, is due and unpaid, and if he so determines, he shall file with the county auditor his statement of the amount due, specifying the parcel on which such amount is assessed, together with a certified copy of the assessment resolution. Pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the State of California, such assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1277, § 1, 9-15-75)  
Secs. 17-44—17-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - URGENCY ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 17-60. - Scope. 
A public nuisance may be abated pursuant to this article if it must be abated immediately in order to avoid an imminent detriment, to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. NS-1381, § 1, 9-19-77)  
Sec. 17-61. - Abatement. 
Every person, within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified by the director of public works, sanitation inspector, health officer, chief of police, fire chief, or the building official, or their designated representatives, to do so, shall abate any public nuisance existing on any premises owned or occupied by them, and in case of refusal or neglect to do so, such official may cause such nuisance to be abated by the city and the cost of such abatement may be recovered from the owner of the premises pursuant to section 17-62. 
(Ord. No. NS-1381, § 1, 9-19-77; Ord. No. NS-1896, § 1, 5-4-87)  
Sec. 17-62. - Recovery of cost of abatement. 
Upon abatement by the city, the official causing such abatement may initiate assessment proceedings pursuant to Article III of this chapter. The assessment report shall include a description of the location, nature, and extent of the public nuisance and the reasons for urgency abatement under this article. The hearing on the assessment shall extend to and include the question of whether the conditions abated did in fact constitute a public nuisance. No assessment report shall be confirmed except upon a finding that the conditions abated did in fact constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1381, § 1, 9-19-77)  
Secs. 17-63—17-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2791, §§ 4, 7, adopted August 17, 2009, redesignated the provisions of article V, §§ 17-70—17-70.2 as portions of chapter 10, article IV. Formerly, article V pertained to graffiti removal, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2720, §§ 2, 3, adopted August 7, 2006. 
 
Secs. 17-70—17-70.2. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PAY TELEPHONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— General abatement provisions, § 17-1 et seq.; abatement proceedings, § 17-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-71. - Prohibited locations. 
(a)  No pay telephone shall be installed, located or maintained on unimproved property. 
(b)  Any existing pay telephone which is located or maintained in violation of subsection (a) shall be removed within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, any pay telephone which is the subject of a written contract authorizing its installation which was entered into prior to the enactment of this article and which contains provisions for termination shall be removed by the first date after enactment of this article on which permissive termination of the written contract by either party could take effect, if either party elected to terminate, or within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article, whichever occurs later. 
(c)  Any pay telephone which is installed, located, maintained or operated in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92)  
Sec. 17-72. - Public nuisance. 
Any pay telephone which is used as an instrumentality for or contributes substantially by its presence to any of the following conditions is hereby declared to be public nuisance: 
(1)  Selling or giving away controlled substances (as defined in Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code); soliciting, agreeing to engage in, or engaging in any act of prostitution; or other criminal activity. 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to a license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(3)  Loitering on nearby public or private property. 
(4)  Excessive noise. 
(5)  Disturbance of the peace, public drunkenness, harassment of passerby, gambling, public urination or lewd conduct. 
As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean standing, sitting, lying or remaining on any property under such circumstances that a reasonable person would conclude that the person who remains on the property does not have a purpose connected with the usual and ordinary use to which such property is put, does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right, and is causing public inconvenience or annoyance. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. NS-2374, § 1, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 17-73. - Abatement generally. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of police or his designee determines that any pay telephone constitutes a public nuisance as defined in sections 17-71 or 17-72, the chief of police or his designee may commence proceedings to abate the nuisance. The abatement proceedings shall conform to article II of this chapter, except as specified in this article. 
(b)  No proceedings to abate a public nuisance as defined in sections 17-71 or 17-72 shall be commenced unless the chief of police or his designee first has made a reasonable effort to work with the property owner where the pay telephone is located or the pay telephone vendor to eliminate the conditions described in sections 17-71 or 17-72 by voluntary measures, such as: 
(1)  Blocking incoming calls; 
(2)  Lighting to be installed to a minimum of one (1) footcandle; 
(3)  Changing the telephone's location on the parcel; 
(4)  Making the telephone inoperative; 
(5)  Temporarily removing the telephone; 
(6)  Changing the type of enclosure of the telephone; 
(7)  Removing all or one (1) of the telephones; 
(8)  Removing the telephone number and ringer from the phone; 
(9)  Shutting off the keypad after the initial number is dialed to eliminate the beeper use; 
(10)  Make the telephone inoperable for designated periods of time; 
(11)  Remove telephone handset; or 
(12)  Move the telephone inside the business. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. NS-2374, § 2, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 17-74. - Replacement prohibited. 
If the public nuisance to be abated is one defined in section 17-72: 
(1)  The hearing notice required by section 17-21 shall specify that abatement shall consist of removal of the pay telephone, revocation of the land use certificate issued pursuant to section 41-198.100, and that no pay telephone shall be installed on the same parcel, or on any contiguous parcel owned by the same property owner, to replace the removed telephone for a period of one (1) year from the date of removal; and 
(2)  Any decision of the hearing officer ordering abatement shall specify that the land use certificate issued pursuant to section 41-198.100 is revoked, and no pay telephone shall be installed on the same parcel, or on any contiguous parcel owned by the same property owner, to replace the removed telephone for a period of one (1) year from the date of removal. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. NS-2489, § 3, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 17-75. - Notice to pay telephone vendor. 
All notices shall also be sent to any vendor of the pay telephone, if known to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92)  
Sec. 17-76. - List of abated locations. 
The chief of police or his designee shall maintain and make available upon request a list of locations where installation of pay telephones is prohibited pursuant to section 17-74. 
(Ord. No. 2154, § 1, 2-3-92)  
Secs. 17-77—17-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI.I. - ILLEGAL TEMPORARY SIGNS 
 
Sec. 17-80. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings: 
Authorized city employee means an employee of the city who has been authorized by the city manager to remove any temporary sign which is a public nuisance pursuant to section 17-132. 
Executive director means the executive director of the planning and building agency of the city or his or her designated representative. 
Illegal temporary sign is a temporary sign which is located on public street or other public property in violation of section 10-27 of this Code, or which is located on private property in violation of any provision of Chapter 41 of this Code. 
Temporary sign means a sign, placard, poster, banner, or advertisement which is temporary in nature because of the materials of which it is constructed or because of the nature of the copy thereon and which has insignificant re-use market value. 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 17-81. - Status of an illegal temporary sign as a public nuisance. 
An illegal temporary sign is a public nuisance and may be abated as such by any authorized city employee in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 17-82. - Removal of illegal temporary signs. 
An authorized city employee may remove an illegal temporary sign from any public street or from any city-owned property. An authorized city employee may remove an illegal temporary sign from any other property if the authorized city employee has the permission of the person in lawful possession of the property to do so or is authorized to do so by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 17-83. - Liability of persons responsible for illegal temporary signs. 
The person who was responsible for the placement of the illegal temporary sign shall be liable to the city for the cost of removal of such sign. In the absence of persuasive evidence to the contrary, the person who benefited from the sign shall be presumed to be the person who was responsible for the placement of the sign. The executive director is authorized to determine the person who was responsible for the placement of the sign and the costs of removal of the sign and to invoice such person for the amount of such costs. The city council may establish reasonable charges for recovery of the costs of sign removal costs, in which event invoices shall be based upon the charges thus established. Any such invoice shall be accompanied by a notice of such person's right to a hearing pursuant to section 17-135. This section shall not apply to noncommercial signs (as defined in section 41-1000 of this Code). 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 17-84. - Hearing. 
(a)  Any person who has received an invoice pursuant to section 17-134 may request a hearing on the responsibility of such person for the placement of the sign and/or the amount stated as the cost of removal of the sign. Any such request for a hearing must be in writing and must be filed with the planning division within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of mailing of the invoice. Such request must set forth the basis of such person's objection to the invoice. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of a request for a hearing, the executive director shall set the hearing date within thirty (30) days after receipt of such request and shall provide the person requesting the hearing date at least five (5) days advance notice of such hearing date. The hearing date may be changed by mutual consent of the executive director and the person requesting the hearing. At the hearing the executive director shall hear such evidence as the person requesting the hearing shall present that such person was not responsible for the placement of the illegal temporary sign or that the amount invoiced for costs of removal of the sign was excessive. 
(c)  Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, if the executive director determines that the person requesting the hearing was not responsible for the placement of the illegal temporary sign, the invoice to such person shall be canceled. Otherwise, the executive director shall either affirm or modify the amount previously determined to be the cost of removal of the sign, as the executive director deems appropriate after taking into consideration the evidence presented at the hearing, and shall add thereto the cost of holding the hearing. The determination of the executive director shall be final, without appeal to any other agency of the city, and the person responsible for the placement of the illegal temporary sign shall be liable to the city for the cost of removal of the sign and the cost of the hearing, as determined by the executive director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Sec. 17-85. - Exemption from criminal prosecution. 
Any person who is sent an invoice pursuant to section 17-134 shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for the placement of the sign which is the subject of the invoice. 
(Ord. No. NS-2294, § 1, 11-18-96)  
Secs. 17-86—17-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ALTERNATIVE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 17-100. - Application of article. 
This article applies to any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of chapter 8 of this Code, including any provision of any uniform code incorporated by reference into chapter 8, or in violation of any provision of chapter 41 of this Code. In accordance with section 1-13 of this Code, any such condition constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-101. - Alternative method of abatement of public nuisances. 
This article provides a method by which to secure the abatement of the types of public nuisances to which it applies as an alternative to any other method provided for such purpose by other articles of this chapter or by other chapters of this Code or by state law and regulations. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to preclude the use by the city of any such other method of nuisance abatement to any nuisance within the scope of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms have the following definitions: 
Director means the executive director of the planning and building agency of the city or his or her designated representative. 
Enforcement officer means any of the following: the director, the planning manager, the building safety manager, coordinator, senior community preservation inspector, community preservation inspectors, supervisor of inspections, senior building inspectors, and building inspectors. 
Expense of abatement means the employee and hearing officer work-hour costs and other expenses incurred in inspecting the premises and seeking abatement of the nuisance, preparing and giving notices, holding hearings, and seeking payment of costs from the responsible party or parties, including any legal actions, and any other cost incurred by the city in the implementation of this article. The city council may establish reasonable work-hour cost rates by resolution, in which event expense of abatement shall be based upon the rates thus established, as applicable. 
Hearing officer means any person, other than an employee of the City of Santa Ana, designated by the director and retained by the city to perform as an independent officer in hearing and deciding the issues presented at any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Nuisance means any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of chapter 8 of this Code, including any provision of any uniform code incorporated by reference into such chapter, or in violation of any provision of chapter 41 of this Code. 
Premises means the parcel of real property on which a nuisance exists. 
Responsible party or parties means the owner or owners of the premises, as shown on the latest equalized assessment role, and/or such person or persons other than the owners, if any, who are in possession and control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-103. - Commencement of proceedings. 
Whenever an enforcement officer determines that conditions constituting a nuisance exist on any premises, he or she shall give written notice to abate the nuisance to the responsible party or parties and to all known parties of interest by certified mail or personal delivery. In the event the premises are unoccupied or the person or persons having the right to possession and control of the premises cannot be identified or located, the enforcement officer shall also affix a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. The timeframe for compliance will commence upon the delivery date of such notice established by the post office or the date such notice is affixed to the premises, whichever occurs first. The failure of any responsible party or parties to receive actual notice shall not affect the validity of proceedings under this article, provided the enforcement officer complied with the aforementioned requirements. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-104. - Content of notice to abate nuisance. 
The notice specified in section 17-103 shall contain the following: 
(1)  Identification of the premises. 
(2)  Identification of the responsible party or parties, to the extent known to the enforcement officer. 
(3)  A description of the conditions constituting the nuisance, including references to the provisions of chapter 8 or chapter 41, which such conditions violate. 
(4)  A time period in which the responsible party or parties are required to abate the nuisance, which shall be reasonable in the circumstances of the particular case. Except in the case of an imminent threat to health or safety, thirty (30) days shall be considered a reasonable time period. 
(5)  A statement of the right of the parties to request a hearing on the issue of whether the conditions constituting the nuisance in fact exist, as provided in section 17-105 of this article. 
(6)  A statement that, unless it is determined that the conditions constituting the nuisance did not in fact exist on the premises, or that the responsible party or parties are otherwise not liable, the responsible party or parties shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred by the city in obtaining the abatement of the nuisance. 
(7)  A statement that the notice has been sent pursuant to this article, article VII (commencing with section 17-100) of chapter 17, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-105. - Hearing on existence of conditions constituting the nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever notice has been given pursuant to sections 17-103 and 17-104 of this article, any responsible party or parties may request a hearing and determination by a hearing officer as to whether the conditions constituting the nuisance in fact exist or existed at the time the notice was given and whether there are any other factors to relieve the responsible party or parties under this article. Any such request shall be in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the director within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. Upon receipt of such request, the director shall arrange for a hearing officer to hear and determine the matter and shall set the date, time and place for the hearing, which shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than forty-five (45) days after the director's receipt of the request for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing at his or her discretion for good cause. 
(b)  At the hearing the responsible party or parties shall be entitled to present evidence to the hearing officer that the conditions alleged to constitute the nuisance did not in fact exist or if there are any other factors which may relieve the responsible party or parties from liability. The responsible party or parties shall be entitled to examine the enforcement officer on these issues. The enforcement officer shall be entitled to present evidence that such conditions did in fact exist. Upon conclusion of the hearing, or within a reasonable time thereafter, the hearing officer shall make written findings as to the existence or non-existence of the responsible party's or parties' liability under this article. The right to a hearing herein provided shall be the final city administrative remedy on the issue of the existence of the nuisance, and the conclusions of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive except for judicial review. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-106. - Referral to city attorney. 
Whenever a nuisance has not been abated by the responsible party or parties within the time set by the notice to abate a nuisance sent pursuant to sections 17-103 and 17-104, or within such extended time period as may be granted by the enforcement officer in his or her reasonable discretion, the enforcement officer may refer the matter to the city attorney for the initiation of civil or criminal proceedings to secure the abatement of the nuisance. The city attorney is authorized to initiate either criminal or civil proceedings or both for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-107. - Liability for abatement and related administrative costs. 
(a)  With regard to any nuisance as to which a notice to abate has been given pursuant to sections 17-103 and 17-104, except in any case where a hearing officer has determined that the conditions alleged to constitute the nuisance did not in fact exist, or that the responsible party or parties are otherwise not liable under this article, the responsible party or parties shall be liable to the city for the expense of abatement. In the case of second or subsequent violations, such liability shall exist even if the nuisance is abated by the responsible party or parties, although the director may, in his or her reasonable discretion, waive recovery of the expense of abatement, in any case where abatement by the responsible party or parties is prompt and complete. 
(b)  With regard to any premises as to which a notice to abate has been given pursuant to sections 17-103 and 17-104, the director and the city attorney shall keep an accounting of the expense of abatement incurred by the planning and building agency and the city attorney's office in implementing this article. Such expenses shall begin to accrue at the time the enforcement officer first expends time in determining that the conditions constituting the nuisance exist on the premises and shall continue until abatement of the nuisance is completed. The expense of abatement shall be assessed at the conclusion of the abatement; provided, however, in the case of an abatement which takes more than six months, the expense of abatement may be assessed at any time after six months, but in no event more than two times a year. The director shall maintain a report detailing the expense of abatement for each assessment. The director is authorized to invoice the responsible party or parties for the expense of abatement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-108. - Hearing on expense of abatement. 
(a)  Any responsible party or parties to whom an invoice for the expense of abatement has been sent pursuant to section 17-107 may request a hearing on the expense of abatement and the invoice shall include a statement that the responsible party or parties may request such a hearing. Any such request shall be in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the director within fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. In the absence of any request for hearing, the amount of the expense of abatement as set forth in the invoice shall be conclusive as to the time period covered by the invoice. Upon receipt of such request, the director shall arrange for a hearing officer to hear and determine the matter and shall set the date, time and place for the hearing, which shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than forty-five (45) days after the director's receipt of the request for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing at his or her discretion for good cause. 
(b)  At the hearing, the responsible party or parties shall be entitled to present evidence to the hearing officer that the assessment of the expense of abatement is incorrect. The hearing officer shall hear and pass upon the report of the director together with any objections or protests raised by any responsible party or parties. Upon conclusion of the hearing, or within a reasonable time thereafter, the hearing officer shall confirm the report of the director and the amount of the expense of abatement or make such revision, correction or modification to the report of the director and the assessment of the expense of abatement as he or she may deem just. The right to a hearing herein provided shall be the final city administrative remedy on the issue of the amount of the expense of abatement, and the conclusions of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive except for judicial review. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-109. - Collection of expense of abatement. 
(a)  With regard to any expense of abatement, which does not exceed the statutory limit for small claims actions, the director is authorized to bring a small claims action on behalf of the city against the responsible party or parties for collection of the expense of abatement. 
(b)  The city attorney is authorized to bring an action on behalf of the city against the responsible party or parties for collection of the expense of abatement in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-110. - Imposition of nuisance abatement liens. 
Pursuant to a judgment in a court of competent jurisdiction, the expense of abatement may be imposed as a nuisance abatement lien against the premises. The director is authorized to impose such a lien on behalf of the city in accordance with section 38773.1 of the Government Code of the State of California, subject to the notice requirements set forth therein. In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the director shall file a notice of discharge in accordance with such section. No lien shall be imposed pursuant to this section unless the owner of the premises has been determined to be a responsible party for the existence of a nuisance located on the premises after a hearing held pursuant to this article, unless the owner of the premises has failed to request or attend such hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-111. - Levy of special assessment. 
As an alternative to the imposition of a nuisance abatement lien pursuant to section 17-110, the director is authorized to make the expense of abatement a special assessment against the premises, in accordance with section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the State of California, by transmitting the report of expenses of abatement to the tax collector of Orange County. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Sec. 17-112. - Guidelines for the implementation of this article. 
The director shall develop policy guidelines for the implementation of this article. Such guidelines, and any amendment thereto, shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2282, § 1, 4-15-96)  
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5; garbage, trash and weeds, Ch. 16; abatement of public nuisances, Ch. 17; massage establishments, Ch. 22; mobile X-ray units, Ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Hazardous materials—Underground storage of. 
Pursuant to Section 25283 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, the City of Santa Ana assumes responsibility for the implementation of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 25280) of Division 20 of the said Health and Safety Code and designates the Santa Ana Fire Department as the local agency responsible for administering and enforcing said chapter. The fire chief is authorized to establish rules and regulations as necessary or convenient for such administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1774, § 3, 5-20-85)  
Sec. 18-2. - Same—Release response plans and inventories. 
Pursuant to Section 25502 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, the City of Santa Ana assumes responsibility for the implementation of Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the said Health and Safety Code and designates the Santa Ana Fire Department as the administering agency responsible for administering and enforcing said chapter. The fire chief is authorized to establish rules and regulations as necessary for such administration and enforcement. Any person who violates Section 25507 of said Health and Safety Code shall be subject to the penalties specified in Section 25515 of said Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1857, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. NS-1890, § 1, 4-6-87)  
Sec. 18-3. - Recovery of costs of emergency response to hazardous substance spills or releases. 
(a)  The expense of an emergency response to any spill or release of a hazardous substance, as hereinafter defined, which poses a significant present threat or potential hazard to human life, property or environment, shall be a charge against the person or entity whose conduct, or that of its employees, agents or contractors, caused or permitted the incident resulting in the emergency response. Said charge shall constitute a debt that is collectible by the public agency incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract. 
(b)  The charge for an emergency response shall be imposed in accordance with a schedule of fees, pursuant to the recommendation of the fire chief of the City of Santa Ana, adopted by resolution of the city council for the City of Santa Ana, as it may from time to time be amended. Implementation of such an assessment procedure shall not be the exclusive remedy of city for recovery of such costs. 
The cost imposed pursuant to the schedule of fees shall be reasonably commensurate to the verifiable costs involved in emergency response to and/or prevention, abatement, mitigation or confinement of spills or releases of hazardous substances within city limits. 
The fire chief of the City of Santa Ana or his designee shall determine the verifiable costs of the city for emergency response to hazardous substance spills or releases within city limits and shall use such costs to develop a cost recovery schedule of applicable charges necessary to recover city costs for such emergency responses. Said schedule shall be the basis for the fire chief's recommendation to the city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
Payment of any charge hereunder shall not relieve a person or entity, its employees, agents or contractors from compliance with any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
(c)  The fire chief of the City of Santa Ana is hereby designated by the city as the person responsible for administering and enforcing this section. 
(d)  For purposes of this section a hazardous substance shall be defined as any material that is identified in: 
(1)  The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49, Section 171.8; 
(2)  California Health and Safety Code, Section 25316; 
(3)  California Administrative Code, Title 8, Subchapter 7, Group 16 List of Legal Carcinogens; 
(4)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Section 261.31—261.33; 
(5)  The list of hazardous substances prepared by the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Section 6382 of the Labor Code, as set forth in Section 339 of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, including, but not limited to, carcinogens, toxic or hazardous water pollutants, hazardous air pollutants, airborne chemical contaminants, restricted pesticides or toxic materials; 
(6)  The list of hazardous or extremely hazardous wastes prepared by the Director of the Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25140 of the Health and Safety Code as set forth in Section 66680 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code, including, but not limited to, wastes which could cause death, contribute to an increase in incapacitating or irreversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed or otherwise managed; or 
(7)  Any substance which is known by the business handling it to be likely to pose a significant present or potential hazard to public health, safety or the environment. 
(e)  A material may be added to the list of hazardous substances as defined in Section (d) hereof, upon a finding by the fire chief of the city of Santa Ana that the material, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristic, poses a significant present threat or potential hazard to human life, property or the environment if released into the community. 
(f)  An emergency response shall be defined as a response by a city department or agency to prevent, abate, mitigate or confine a spill or release of a hazardous substance within city limits in order to protect human life, property or the environment from a significant present threat or potential hazard. 
(g)  A release or spill shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, burning, dumping or disposing into the environment and/or community. 
(h)  Any person or entity, its employees, agents or contractors who causes, permits or is responsible for a spill or release of a hazardous substance within city limits, upon notification of the same, shall immediately cease all activities causing or likely to cause reoccurrence or continuation of such spills or releases and shall not resume such activities unless and until so directed by the fire chief of the City of Santa Ana or his designee. 
(i)  No person or entity, its employees, agents or contractors shall dispose of or store any hazardous substance on public property, except under direction of the fire chief of the City of Santa Ana or his designee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1947, § 1, 1-19-88)  
Secs. 18-4—18-16. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-17. - Water drainage. 
No person shall permit any water or drainage to flow from any premises into, upon or under any gutter or street so as to cause the same to be a nuisance or offensive to the neighborhood or persons passing by, or to permit for any purpose any water from any well, ditch or from any source whatever to drain upon or under any gutter or street without such person first obtaining a permit from the council so to drain said water upon or under the gutter or street in the city. 
(Code 1952, § 4276) 
State Law reference— A misdemeanor to deposit offal on highways, § 374b, Pen. Code; illegal deposits in water courses, § 5650, Fish and G. Code.  
Secs. 18-18—18-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SMOKING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - CITY BUILDINGS AND PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2827, § 2, adopted February 6, 2012, amended division 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 1 pertained to city buildings and derived from Ord. No. NS-1520, § 1, adopted March 17, 1980, and Ord. No. NS-2203, § 1, adopted September 20, 1993. 
 
Sec. 18-39. - Definitions. 
(1)  City building means a building, or portion of a building, owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the city. 
(2)  Park means any public park or recreation or playground area, including Class I Bike Trails and paseos, or building or facility thereon within the City of Santa Ana, owned and maintained by the city as a public park or recreation or playground area, whether or not such areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose. 
(3)  Smoke or smoking as used in this Article II shall include the carrying, holding, possession or smoking of a lighted pipe or cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
(4)  Stadium means the Eddie West Field-Santa Ana Stadium. 
(5)  Zoo means the Santa Ana Zoo at Prentice Park. 
(Ord. No. NS-2827, § 2, 2-6-12)  
Sec. 18-40. - Prohibition in city buildings, parks, stadium and zoo. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) below, no person shall smoke in any city building, park, stadium or zoo. Violation of this section shall be an infraction as specified in Section 19.6 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(b)  Subsection (a) above shall not apply to the following areas: 
(1)  Open-air entryways, courtyards or balconies. 
(2)  Parking structures. 
(3)  Any area of a building occupied by a tenant pursuant to a lease agreement with the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2827, § 2, 2-6-12)  
Sec. 18-41. - Duty to post signs. 
"No smoking" signs shall be conspicuously posted in every room, building, or other place where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the department head, operator, manager, or other person having control of such room, building, or other place. 
(Ord. No. NS-2827, § 2, 2-6-12)  
Secs. 18-42—18-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATELY-OWNED BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 18-50. - Prohibition of smoking in certain specified places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places: 
(1)  Elevators open to and in use by the public. 
(2)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and private or semi-private rooms of public or private health facilities including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices. 
(3)  Within every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, during such time as a meeting required by law to be open to the general public is in progress. 
(4)  Within any building or room not open to the sky when that building or room is open to the public for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance (except when smoking is part of the stage production). 
(5)  In any establishment where food is being served having an occupied capacity of fifty (50) or more persons; provided, however, that this prohibition against smoking shall not apply within an establishment wherein a "no-smoking" area of less than seventy-five (75) percent of the floor space and of the seating capacity in which customers are served is maintained. 
(6)  In the halls, reading and viewing rooms of museums and libraries open to the public. 
(7)  Within retail stores doing business with the general public. 
(8)  Restrooms open to and used by the public. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-51. - Prohibition of smoking in private places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within a private place of employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, health care facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed areas. 
(b)  The smoking prohibition of this section shall be communicated by each private employer to all of its employees and to all its future employees at the time of their entry into employment. 
(c)  For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Private place of employment shall mean any enclosed area under the control of a private employer, which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, working areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. The "dining area" of any establishment where food is being served is not a "private place of employment," for purposes of this article, but shall be governed by the provisions of section 18-50. 
(2)  Private employer or employer means any person, partnership, or corporation, not a governmental entity, who employs the services of one (1) or more individual persons. 
(3)  Employee means any person who is employed by any private employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
(4)  Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways). 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-52. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, no regulation or prohibition of smoking is required in the following areas: 
(1)  Bars. "Bar" means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
(2)  Private residences, except when used as a child care or health care facility, and during such activity. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests. 
(4)  Establishments devoted to the exclusive sale of tobacco, or tobacco-related products. 
(5)  While being used for private functions, rooms in eating establishments, hotel and motel conference/meeting rooms, and private assembly rooms open to the public. 
(6)  An enclosed office in a private place of employment occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such an office workplace may be visited by nonsmokers. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-53. - Construction of this division. 
(a)  This division shall not be interpreted or construed to prohibit any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls a business from declaring that entire business as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(b)  This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable health, safety or fire code ordinances. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-54. - Duty to post signs. 
Signs which designate no-smoking areas established by this article shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in rooms, buildings, or other places so covered by this article, as reasonably deemed necessary, by the department head, operator, manager, private employer or other person having control of such room, building, or other place. Where possible, ash trays, receptacles or other devices used for extinguishing or discarding smoking materials shall be removed from all "no-smoking" areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-55. - Tobacco vending machine elimination. 
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed from a vending machine in any public place other than a bar. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Sec. 18-56. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this division shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation, per day. 
(Ord. No. NS-2221, § 2, 5-16-94)  
Secs. 18-57—18-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSE 
 
Sec. 18-90. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(a)  "Department" means the Santa Ana Police Department. 
(b)  "Chief" means the Chief of Police or designee. 
(c)  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity, and includes the definition of "person" found in Section 1-2 of the Code. 
(d)  "Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
(e)  "Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
(f)  Tobacco product" means: (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; or (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence. 
(g)  "Tobacco retailer" means any person or business who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, or who distributes free or low cost samples of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. "Tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-91. - Tobacco retailer license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer, or to display or advertise the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, without obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this article for each location at which that activity is to occur. 
(b)  It shall be a unlawful for a licensed tobacco retailer, or an agent or employee thereof to violate any local, state, or federal tobacco-related law. 
(c)  Each day on which a prohibited act occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed tobacco retailer or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to sale, display or advertising of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing. 
(e)  Each tobacco retailer license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-92. - Limits on tobacco retail license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at other than a fixed business place. Tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location for which a tobacco retailer license suspension is in effect or during a period of ineligibility following a revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-93. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. 
(c)  No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the City that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
(d)  A license issued contrary to this article, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to section 18-101. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
(f)  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the chief and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business that is seeking a license. 
(2)  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought. 
(3)  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this article. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subparagraph (2). 
(4)  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
(5)  Whether a proprietor has previously been issued a license pursuant to this article that is or was at any time suspended or revoked and, if so, the dates and locations of all such suspensions or revocations. 
(6)  Such other information as the chief deems reasonably necessary for the administration or enforcement of this article. 
(7)  All information required to be submitted in order to apply for a tobacco retailer's license shall be updated with the chief whenever the information changes. A tobacco retailer shall provide the Chief with any updates within ten (10) business days of a change. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-94. - Issuance of tobacco retail license. 
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee required by this article, the chief shall issue a tobacco retail license unless one or more of the following exists: 
(a)  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this article; or 
(b)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which a suspension is in effect pursuant to this article, for which a license has been revoked pursuant to this article, or for which this article otherwise prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses; or 
(c)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom a suspension is in effect pursuant to this article for the subject location or another location, whose license has been revoked pursuant to this article for the subject location or another location, or to whom this article otherwise prohibits a tobacco retailer license to be issued. 
(d)  The city has information that the proprietor or his or her agent or employee has violated any local, state or federal tobacco control law, including this Article, within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(e)  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this article, that is unlawful pursuant to this Code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state, or federal law. 
(f)  Any denial of an application shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for denial of the permit. Such denial shall be subject to appeal in accordance with section 18-102. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-95. - License renewal and expiration. 
(a)  A tobacco retailer license is invalid unless the appropriate fee has been paid in full and the term of the license has not expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year beginning each fiscal year on April 1 and ending on March 31 of the following year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's license and submit the license fee no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the term. 
(b)  A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To reinstate a license that has expired, or to renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subparagraph (a), the proprietor must: 
(1)  Submit the license fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten percent (10%) of the license fee; 
(2)  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor: 
(A)  Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; or 
(B)  Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in subsection 18-101(a), before seeking renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-96. - License nontransferable. 
(a)  A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. Whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in proprietors a new tobacco retailer's license is required. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
(1)  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and 
(2)  The new proprietor(s) provides the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) has acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction. As used in this section, the term "arm's length transaction" shall mean a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this article is not an arm's length transaction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-97. - Fees for license. 
The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer's license shall be set by resolution of the city council from time to time. The fee shall be calculated so as not to exceed that amount which would recover the total cost of both license administration and license enforcement, including, for example, issuing the license, administering the license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators. All fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-98. - Suspension or revocation of license by chief of police. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license may be suspended and eventually revoked if the chief finds pursuant to this article that the licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this article or has pleaded guilty, "no contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in subsection 18-91(d). During any period of license suspension, the retailer must remove all tobacco products from public view. 
(b)  Time period of suspension of license. 
(1)  Upon the first time that the chief makes a finding as set forth in subsection (a), the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended for up to sixty (60) days; 
(2)  Upon the second time that the chief makes a finding as set forth in subsection (a)within sixty (60) months of the first determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended for one hundred twenty (120) days; 
(3)  Upon the third time that the chief makes a finding as set forth in subsection (a) of this section within sixty (60) months of the prior determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be suspended one hundred and eighty (180) days; 
(4)  Upon the fourth and each subsequent time that the chief makes a finding as set forth in subsection (a) within sixty (60) months of the prior determination, the tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked, and no new license may issue for the location until five (5) years have passed from the date of revocation. 
(c)  Revocation of license issued in error. A tobacco retailer's license shall be revoked if the chief finds, after written notice and opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under section 18-94 existed at the time of application was made or at any time before the license was issued. The decision by the chief shall be final. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for license. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-99. - Notice of intended decision. 
(a)  Upon determining the existence of any of the grounds for suspension or revocation of a license, the chief shall issue to the license holder a notice of intended decision. 
(b)  The notice of intended decision shall state all the grounds upon which the revocation or suspension is based. 
(c)  The notice of intended decision shall advise the permit holder that the suspension or revocation shall become final unless the licensee files a written request for hearing before the chief within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision. 
(d)  The notice of intended decision shall specify the effective date of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-100. - Procedure for hearing before the chief. 
(a)  The written request for a hearing before the chief must be received by the chief within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision. 
(b)  Upon timely receipt of a written request for a hearing, the chief shall schedule a hearing which shall be held no later than thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a timely request for hearing. 
(c)  The chief shall serve a notice of hearing on the licensee at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing before the chief, or before a hearing officer at the chief's option, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. 
(e)  The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the chief or hearing officer deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-101. - Decision of the chief. 
(a)  The Chief or hearing officer shall serve on the licensee a written decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the chief's intended decision. 
(b)  The decision by the chief or hearing officer after hearing shall become final unless the licensee files an appeal within the time period specified in section 18-102. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-102. - Chapter 3 appeal. 
(a)  If a licensee is dissatisfied with the written decision of the chief, the licensee may file a written appeal to the city. 
(b)  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the city and must be received by the clerk of the council within ten (10) calendar days of notification of the chief's decision. 
(c)  The appeal, including its hearing, shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-103. - Tobacco retailing without a license—Seizure. 
(a)  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this article are subject to seizure by the chief or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this article. 
(b)  Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be maintained and destroyed pursuant to the chief's policy for seized evidence. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-104. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(b)  Whenever evidence of a violation of this article is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this article and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
(c)  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall also constitute a violation of this article. 
(d)  Violations of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(e)  In addition to other remedies provided by this article or by other law, any violation of this article may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Sec. 18-105. - Notice. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this article, it shall be made as provided in this Code, and addressed to such person to be notified at the authorized address provided in the application for a tobacco retail license pursuant to subsection 18-93(f)(3), or if an authorized address is not supplied, to the business address provided pursuant subsection 18-93 (f)(2). 
(Ord. No. NS-2729, § 2, 11-20-06)  
Secs. 18-106—18-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER POLLUTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2328, §§ 12—26, repealed Div. 2, permits, and Div. 3, hearings, of Art. IV (§§ 18-182—18-191, 18-231—18-235) while §§ 1—10 amended the remaining provisions (§§ 18-151—18-160) in their entirety to read as herein set out; § 11 added § 18-161. The former §§ 18-151—18-160 derived from Code 1952, §§ 550, 5501—5504, 5513—5517, and Ord. No. NS-144, § 1, 11-21-55. Div. 2 derived from Code 1952, §§ 5505—5511, 5518—5520, and Ord. No. NS-144, § 1, 11-21-55. Div. 3 derived from Code 1952, §§ 5512, 5521, 5522, 5524, 5525, and Ord. No. NS-144, § 1, 11-21-55. 
State Law reference— Pollution of waters, § 5650 et seq., Fish & G. Code, and § 13000 et seq., Water Code; authority of city to impose regulations, § 13001. 
 
Sec. 18-151. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Water Pollution Regulations" of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 1, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-152. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to participate in the improvement of water quality and comply with federal requirements for the control of urban pollutants to storm water runoff which enters the network of storm drains throughout the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 2, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-153. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Authorized inspector shall mean the city manager and persons designated by and under his/her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of and/or take actions pursuant to this article. 
City agencies shall mean any city agency, including, but not limited to, the public works agency, the planning and building agency and fire department. 
City manager shall mean the city manager of the city or his or her designate. 
Co-permittee shall mean the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one (1) of the thirty-one (31) municipalities, including the City of Santa Ana, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit. 
DAMP shall mean the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Development project guidance shall mean DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix thereto, entitled Best Management Practices for New Development Including Non-Residential Construction Projects, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Discharge shall mean any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance. 
Discharge exception shall mean the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this article, including only: 
(1)  Discharges composed entirely of storm water; 
(2)  Discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board-issued NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; 
(3)  Discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed; 
(4)  Discharges to the storm water drainage system from potable water line flushing, fire fighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the storm water drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); 
(5)  Discharges from potable water sources, passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoff; 
(6)  Agricultural irrigation water runoff; 
(7)  Water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, noncommercial vehicle washing; 
(8)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(9)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(10)  Discharges of reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility; 
(11)  Public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the city (County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District); 
(12)  Discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under section 18-157 hereof; 
(13)  Discharges allowable under the domestic sewage exception; 
(14)  Discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the extent feasible the amount of pollutants in such discharge; and 
(15)  Discharges authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations. 
In any action taken to enforce this article, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception. 
Domestic sewage exception shall mean discharges which are exceptions to this article and excluded from the definition of "prohibited discharge," as defined herein, including only: Discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of untreated sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly-owned wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the accidental spill. 
Enforcing attorney shall mean the city attorney or district attorney acting as counsel to the city and his/her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the district attorney and/or city attorney, or his/her designee, shall act as the enforcing attorney. 
EPA shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States. 
Executive director shall mean the executive director of the public works agency of the city, or his or her designate. 
Illicit connection shall mean any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the storm water drainage system occurs or may occur. The term "illicit connection" shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the storm water drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made. 
Invoice for costs shall mean the actual costs and expenses of the city, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries and other expenses recoverable where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under section 18-156 of this article is utilized to obtain compliance with this article. 
Legal nonconforming connection shall mean connections to the storm water drainage system existing as of the adoption of this article that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including, but not limited to, any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to Ord. No. NS-144 [repealed by Ord. No. NS-2323, codified in Article II of Chapter 16]. 
New development shall mean all public and private residential (whether single family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required. 
Nonresidential plumbing permit shall mean a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage. 
NPDES permit shall mean the currently applicable municipal discharge permit (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") permit) issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, which permit establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to storm water runoff in the city. 
Person shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above. 
Pollutant shall mean any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including and not limited to: 
(1)  Artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood products or metal shavings); 
(2)  Household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics; cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment); 
(3)  Metals and nonmetals, including compounds of metals and nonmetals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms; 
(4)  Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease); 
(5)  Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including stables, show facilities, or polo fields); 
(6)  Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor; 
(7)  Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime, use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing); 
(8)  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon; 
(9)  Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds; 
(10)  Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and 
(11)  Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state. 
Prohibited discharge shall mean any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property to (i) the storm water drainage system; (ii) any upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm water drainage system; (iii) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough, or (iv) any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception. 
Significant redevelopment shall mean the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required. 
State general permit shall mean either the state general industrial storm water permit or the state general construction permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the state water resources control board, then the term state general permit shall also refer to any EPA-administered storm water control permit for industrial and construction activities. 
Storm water drainage system shall mean street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the county-wide storm water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District or any co-permittee city, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of storm water. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 3, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-154. - Service of notice. 
Whenever any notice, order, statement or resolution is required to be served upon the owner of any premises by the provisions of this article, such service shall be either by personal service upon the owner or by delivery into the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, addressed to the owner as such person's name and address appear on the latest available assessment roll, or as otherwise known to be the more reliable name and address of the owner. In addition, if the owner's mailing address is different from that of the premises, a copy of such notice shall either be likewise served on the person in possession of the premises or conspicuously posted upon the premises, and such service or posting shall constitute service of notice upon the owner in the event that he fails to receive notice mailed to him. Where the owner or occupant of any premises cannot be located after reasonable efforts, any notice, order, statement or resolution required by this article shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of ten (10) business days. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 4, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-155. - Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection; 
(2)  Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge; 
(3)  Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(b)  The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of this article; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following: 
(1)  For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the storm water drainage system, the expiration of five (5) years from the adoption of this article; 
(2)  For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the storm water drainage system, the expiration of six (6) months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this article. 
A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the city manager upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters; 
(2)  The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and 
(3)  The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. 
(c)  A violation of subsection 18-155(a) shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(d)  If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the thirty-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty-day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of subsection 18-154(a). 
(e)  If a request for an extension of use is denied, the owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 3 of this Code, for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 5, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-156. - Control of urban runoff. 
(a)  New development and significant redevelopment. 
(1)  All new development and significant redevelopment within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with: 
a.  The DAMP, including but not limited to the development project guidance; and 
b.  Any conditions and requirements established by city agencies, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in storm water runoff from the project site. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, city agencies shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection 18-156(a)(1). If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit, city agencies shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection 18-156(a)(1) prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the city's discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections 18-156(a)(1) and (2), compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of a (one (1)) single family detached residence unless a city agency determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the storm water drainage system. 
(4)  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this article. 
(5)  If a city agency determines that the project will have a de minimus impact on the quality of storm water runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance. 
(6)  The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection 18-156(a)(1) on the new development or significant redevelopment project. Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection 18-156(a)(1) on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(7)  A city agency may require that the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection 18-156(a)(1) be recorded with the county recorder's office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the city shall not be required for recordation. 
(b)  Cost recovery. The city shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by city agencies in the review of new development or significant development projects for compliance with the DAMP. City agencies may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 6, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-157. - Inspections; scope. 
(a)  Right to inspect. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article or when an authorized inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition which is in violation of this article, the authorized inspector may enter a property at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article, provided that the authorized inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the authorized inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  Entry to inspect. The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the storm water drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the city. Such inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the regulations established by the executive director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 7, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-158. - Tests and inspections. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. 
(1)  Notice of noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge, a notice of noncompliance which notice shall be issued pursuant to the regulations established by the executive director. 
(2)  Administrative compliance orders. The authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be issued pursuant to the regulations established by the executive director. 
(3)  Cease and desist orders. The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be issued pursuant to the regulations established by the executive director. 
(4)  Recovery of costs. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with the provisions of section 18-154. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order. 
(5)  Delivery of notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be served pursuant to section 18-154. 
(b)  Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this article including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. The abatement of any nuisance shall be in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Articles I through IV of Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(c)  Violations of other laws. Any person acting in violation of this article also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the city regional water quality control board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this article. 
(d)  Injunctions. 
(1)  Generally. The enforcing attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Order for reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this article, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law. 
(e)  Other civil remedies. 
(1)  The enforcing attorney may file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: 
a.  All costs incurred in enforcement of the article, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; 
b.  All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and 
c.  Damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
(2)  The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the storm water drainage system from any violation of this article where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the storm water drainage system. 
(3)  The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 8, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-159. - Permits. 
(a)  Discharge permit procedure. 
(1)  Permit. On application of the owner of property or the operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a state general permit or an NPDES permit regulating storm water discharges, the city manager may issue a permit authorizing the release of non-storm water discharges to the storm water drainage system if: 
a.  The discharge of material or constituents is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property; and 
b.  The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established water quality standards. 
(2)  Application. The applicant shall provide all information requested by the city manager for review and consideration of the application including, but not limited to, specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents and quantities thereof, which may be discharged if permission is granted. 
(3)  Permit issuance. The permit shall be granted or denied by the city manager no later than sixty (60) business days following the completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the city manager. 
(4)  Permit conditions. The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this article and as necessary to protect the receiving waters including, but not limited to: 
a.  Identification of the discharge location on the property and the location at which the discharge will enter the storm water drainage system; 
b.  Identification of the constituents and quantities thereof to be discharged into the storm water drainage system; 
c.  Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or nonstructural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this article; 
d.  Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge; 
e.  Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; and 
f.  Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices, guidance documents approved by any federal, California or regional agency. 
(5)  General permit. In the discretion of the city manager, the permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in subsection 18-159(a)(4) hereinabove, be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do so by filing an application to discharge with the city manager. No discharge within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is so filed. 
a.  Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subsection (5), the city manager, in his discretion, may eliminate the requirement that an application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which a general permit has been issued. 
b.  Reserved. 
(6)  Permit fees. The permission to discharge may be conditioned upon the applicant's payment of the city's costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by separate resolution, as follows: 
a.  For individually issued permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit, and the costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program. 
b.  For general permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit which is reasonably attributable to the permittee's application for the general permit, and the costs reasonably related to administering the general permit program. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permit fee shall be charged for a general permit issued to subsection 18-159(a)(5)a. 
(b)  Permit suspension, revocation or modification. 
(1)  The city manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that: 
a.  The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this article; or 
b.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this article; or 
c.  The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this article; or 
d.  Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a regional water quality control board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the city that the discharge should be terminated. 
(2)  The city manager may modify any permit when it is determined that: 
a.  Federal or state law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit; or 
b.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit's terms, conditions or requirements; or 
c.  A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this article or to protect the quality of receiving waters. 
The permittee or, in the case of a general permit, each person who has filed an application pursuant to subsection 18-159(a)(5) shall be informed of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least sixty (60) business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. In the case of a general permit issued pursuant to subsection 18-159(a)(5)a., any change in the permit terms and conditions shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. 
(3)  The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 3 of this Code. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision. 
(c)  Permit enforcement; penalties. Any violation of the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued by the city manager shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the violator to the administrative, civil and criminal remedies available under this article. 
(d)  Compliance. Compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall not relieve the permittee from compliance with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit requirements, applicable to the activity for which the permit is issued. 
(1)  Limited permittee rights. Permits issued under this article are for the person or entity identified therein as the "permittee" only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge. 
(2)  Transfer of permits. No permit issued to any person may be transferred to allow: 
a.  A discharge to the storm water drainage system at a location other than the location stated in the original permit; or 
b.  A discharge by a person other than the person named in the permit, provided, however, that the city may approve a transfer if written approval is obtained, in advance, from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 9, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-160. - Interagency cooperation. 
The city intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over storm water discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying storm water regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) are met. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 10, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 18-161. - Compliance disclaimer. 
(a)  Compliance disclaimer. Full compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this article shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into storm water and/or the protection of storm water quality. 
(b)  Repeal of prior article. The enactment of this article by city shall repeal the provisions of Ord. No. NS-144 enacted for the permitting of discharges of industrial waste to ground or surface waters and no new discharge permits shall be issued thereunder; provided, however, that connection to discharge under the terms and conditions of any individual discharge permit issued prior to the date of enactment of the water pollution article shall be allowed hereunder as a legal nonconforming connection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2328, § 11, 7-21-97)  
Secs. 18-162—18-256. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEST CONTROL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Pest Abatement Districts, § 2800 et seq., Health and S. Code; for similar provisions to this article, see § 1800 et seq.; for relevant authority of board of supervisors, see § 25842, Gov. Code. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-257. - Rodents—Extermination by occupant. 
Every person owning, leasing, occupying, possessing or having charge of or dominion over any land, place, or structure, which is infested with rats, mice, gophers or ground squirrels, or as soon as the presence of the same shall come to his knowledge, shall at once proceed and continue in good faith, either directly or by employing an approved exterminator to exterminate and destroy such rodents, by poisoning, trapping and other appropriate means, and take the necessary steps to prevent the harboring of all such rodents. Said extermination shall be done under the supervision of the health department. 
(Code 1952, § 5403)  
Sec. 18-258. - Same—Entry to inspect. 
The health officers and inspectors shall have authority and shall be permitted to enter into and upon any lands, places, buildings and structures, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same are infested with rodents and whether the requirements of this chapter, as to the extermination and destruction thereof, are being complied with. 
(Code 1952, § 5404)  
Secs. 18-259—18-278. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, enacted Aug. 17, 1970, repealed former §§ 18-279—18-286, pertaining to flies derived from Code 1952, §§ 5600—5608, Ord. No. NS-457, § 1, enacted July 18, 1960, Ord. No. NS-466, enacted Sept. 6, 1960 and Ord. No. 519, § 1, enacted June 5, 1961. Said Ord. No. NS-1030 enacted §§ 18-279—18-287 as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 18-279. - Fly breeding hazard defined. 
Fly breeding hazard as used in these sections shall mean the accumulation, existence or maintenance of any substance, matter, material, or condition resulting in the breeding of flies in an amount or manner such as to endanger public health or safety, or to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment and use of life and property by others. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-280. - Fly abatement board defined. 
Fly abatement board as used in these sections shall mean an administrative board appointed by the board of supervisors as fly abatement board for the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-281. - Public nuisance. 
Any fly breeding hazard in the City of Santa Ana is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-282. - Inspection by health officer. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer of the County of Orange upon routine inspection, or whenever he is informed or has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building, or collection of plant or animal waste or any substance or existing condition on any lot, farm, or other land or on any other premises within the City of Santa Ana is a fly breeding hazard to enter, after demand, upon such premises and to determine whether or not there is an existing fly breeding hazard. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-283. - Abatement proceedings—Notice. 
Whenever there exists in any place within the City of Santa Ana a fly breeding hazard, the county health officer shall notify in writing the record owner or person having control or possession of such place or premises to abate such nuisance and take corrective measures to prevent its recurrence, and to appear at a public hearing to be held by the fly abatement board. A copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon such place or premises. Such hearing shall be set by the Orange County Health Officer at least ten (10) days after the date of such notice. 
The notice shall specify what is claimed to be causing the hazard and what must be done to abate it and shall direct the owner or person in control or possession of the place or premises to abate the nuisance and to perform any and all work necessary to prevent the recurrence thereof in the places or premises specified in the notice, prior to the time set for the public hearing by the fly abatement board, and shall advise such owner or person that in lieu of such abatement, if the fly abatement board determines that a fly breeding hazard still exists at the time of such public hearing, the county health officer will proceed to abate such nuisance, without further notice, unless such nuisance is abated before a date specified by the board, and the owner of such place or premises and the person having control or possession thereof, jointly and severally, shall be liable to the County of Orange for the total cost of such work, including all administrative costs, and such costs shall constitute a charge and lien upon such place or premises. 
The notice shall be served upon the owner of record or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the nuisance exists, or upon the agent of either. Notices may be served by any person authorized by the health officer of Orange County for such purposes in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-284. - Same—Hearing. 
At the time fixed for the hearing by the fly abatement board, such board shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the owner of record or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the fly breeding hazard is stated in such notice to exist, by the county health officer or his agent, and by any other interested person. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make the following findings: 
(1)  Whether or not a fly breeding hazard exists; 
(2)  Specifically, what is causing the hazard; 
(3)  What should be done by the owner to abate hazard; 
(4)  What work, if any, should be done by the owner to prevent its recurrence; 
(5)  Whether the owner or operator shall comply with any specific regulations of the health officer; 
(6)  Whether the health officer shall abate and, specifically, what he may do, at his option; provided that anything not included in the board's order shall not be done by the health officer. 
If the board determines that such a fly breeding hazard exists, it shall direct the county health officer to abate it, without further notice, unless the condition is abated and such work performed by the owner on or before a date to be specified by the board. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-285. - Fly control standards. 
The fly abatement board, upon recommendation of the health officer, is authorized to adopt fly control standards of operation and design of commercial dairy farms, commercial poultry ranches and horse stables to serve as guidelines in the abatement proceedings described in section 18-284. All such standards shall be printed and made available to all dairymen, poultrymen and horse stable owners or operators. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-286. - Costs shall become a special assessment. 
All costs shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such parcel of land. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set by the County of Orange, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Section 25845. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. The city and county shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-287. - Other remedies not excluded. 
The provisions of this section are to be construed as an added remedy of abatement of the nuisance hereby declared and not in conflict with or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law, as may be brought by the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1030, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Secs. 18-288—18-307. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, enacted Aug. 21, 1978, amended Art. VI to read as set out in §§ 18-308—18-321. Formerly Art. VI, pertaining to noise, was derived from Code 1952, §§ 4270, 4270.1, 6390.9, and Ord. No. 1334, adopted Jan. 19, 1953. 
 
Sec. 18-308. - Declaration of policy. 
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from areas of the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this article. 
It is determined that certain sound levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and contrary to public interest. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-309. - Definitions. 
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this article shall have the meaning as indicated below: 
Ambient noise level shall mean the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
Cumulative period shall mean an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
Decibel (dB ) shall mean a unit which denotes the ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to power: The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of this ratio. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Emergency machinery, vehicle or work shall mean any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
Fixed noise source shall mean a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
Grading shall mean any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon. 
Impact noise shall mean the noise produced by the collision of one mass which may be either in motion or at rest. 
Mobile noise source shall mean any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
Noise level shall mean the "A" weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB (A). 
Person shall mean a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
Residential property shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. 
Simple tone noise shall mean a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. 
Sound level meter shall mean an instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
Sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, shall mean twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-310. - Noise level measurement criteria. 
Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in section 18-309. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-311. - Designated noise zone. 
The entire City of Santa Ana is hereby designated as "Noise Zone 1." 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-312. - Exterior noise standards. 
(a)  The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone: 
NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise Zone 	Noise Level 	Time Period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
	50 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.— 7:00 a.m. 
 
In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB (A). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the City of Santa Ana to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential property, to exceed: 
(1)  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour; or 
(3)  The noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or 
(4)  The noise standard plus fifteen (15) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(5)  The noise standard plus twenty (20) dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four (4) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-313. - Interior noise standards. 
(a)  The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone: 
INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise Zone 	Noise Level 	Time Period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
	45 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
 
In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the City of Santa Ana to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property, to exceed: 
(1)  The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The interior noise standard plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
(3)  The interior noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two (2) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-314. - Special provisions. 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this article: 
(a)  Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college. 
(b)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances and shows, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a license issued by the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Activities conducted on any park or playground, provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity. 
(d)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work. 
(e)  Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property, provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or any time on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(f)  All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions. 
(g)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations, provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(h)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the agricultural commissioner. 
(i)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided said activities take place between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a federal holiday, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a federal holiday. 
(j)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-315. - Schools, hospitals and churches; special provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use to exceed the noise limits as specified in section 18-312 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three (3) separate locations within one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-316. - Air conditioning and refrigeration; special provisions. 
During the five-year period following the effective date of this article, the noise standards enumerated in sections 18-312 and 18-313 shall be increased eight (8) dB(A) where the alleged offensive noise source is an air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment which was installed prior to the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-317. - Noise level measurement. 
The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected dwelling unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four (4) feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the alleged offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit open. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-318. - Manner of enforcement. 
The chief of police, the Orange County health officer and their duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of this article. The chief of police, the Orange County health officer and their duly authorized representatives are authorized, pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, to arrest any person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence. 
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this article while such person is engaged in the performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-319. - Variance procedure. 
The owner or operator of a noise source which violates any of the provisions of this article may file an application with the Orange County health officer for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein said owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with said provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of said application and fee, the health officer shall refer it with his recommendation thereon within thirty (30) days to the Orange County Noise Variance Board for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of applicable law. 
An applicant for a variance shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this article until a variance is granted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-320. - Appeals. 
Within fifteen (15) days following the decision of the Orange County Variance Board on an application, the applicant, the health officer, or any member of the city council, may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the Orange County Variance Board. In the case of an appeal by the applicant for a variance, the notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee to be computed by the secretary of the Orange County Variance Board on the basis of the estimated cost of preparing the materials required to be forwarded to the city council as discussed hereafter. If the actual cost of such preparation differs from the estimated cost appropriate payments shall be made either to or by the secretary of the Orange County Variance Board. 
Within fifteen (15) days following receipt of a notice of appeal and the appeal fee, the secretary of the Variance Board shall forward to the city council copies of the application for variance; the recommendation of the health officer; the notice of appeal; all evidence concerning said application received by the variance board and its decision thereon. In addition, any person may file with the clerk of the city council written arguments supporting or attacking said decision and the city council may in its discretion hear oral arguments thereon. The clerk of the city council shall mail to the applicant a notice of the date set for hearing of the appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. 
Within sixty (60) days following its receipt of the notice of appeal, the city council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision, of the variance board. Such decision shall be based upon the city council's evaluation of the matters submitted to the city council in light of the powers conferred on the variance board and the factors to be considered, both as enumerated in section 18-319 and Orange County Ordinance section 4-6-13. 
As part of its decision, the city council may direct the variance board to conduct further proceedings on said application. Failure of the city council to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the variance board within said sixty-day period shall constitute an affirmance of the decision. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Sec. 18-321. - Violations; misdemeanors. 
Any person violating any or the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The provisions of this article shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1441, § 1, 8-21-78)  
Secs. 18-322—18-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - COMMERCIAL MANURE DEALERS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1032, § 1, enacted Aug. 17, 1970, added §§ 18-351, 18-352 to this Code. 
 
Sec. 18-351. - Definition. 
Commercial manure dealer shall mean any person, firm, or corporation who, for a fee, gathers, collects, hauls, stockpiles, spreads or sells any manure or manure-like substance other than in a fully composted and bagged condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1032, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Sec. 18-352. - Registration. 
It shall be unlawful for any commercial manure dealer to gather, collect, haul, stockpile, spread or sell any manure or manure-like substance within the City of Santa Ana without first registering with the county health officer on forms prescribed by him. Such registration shall expire at the end of each calendar year and shall be renewed annually during the first week in January. There shall be no fee for such registration nor any subsequent renewal. 
Failure to register as a commercial manure dealer as provided in this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1032, § 1, 8-17-70)  
Secs. 18-353—18-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS AND OPERATIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 1974, amended Ch. 18 of this Code by adding Art. VIII, §§ 18-400—18-420. 
 
Sec. 18-400. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Tattooing Establishment and Operation Regulations." 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-401. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Health officer. That person or office designated by order of the city council of the City of Santa Ana or by contract approved by the said council as the person or office having responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Operator. Any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo to any customer of a tattooing establishment. 
Proprietor. The person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a tattooing establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business. 
Tattoo. An indelible mark or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars. 
Tattooing establishment. Premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-402. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2171, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed § 18-402, which pertained to posting of regulations and derived from Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 1974.  
Sec. 18-403. - Maintenance of premises. 
(a)  All tattooing establishments shall be equipped with running hot and cold water, with adequate toilet facilities, and with all such appliances, furnishings and materials as may be necessary to enable persons employed in and about such establishments to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The floors, furnishings and equipment of tattooing establishments shall be kept clean at all times during business hours. For purposes of this paragraph a floor shall not be considered clean if it has not been swept and mopped within the preceding twenty-four-hour period. 
(c)  All operating tables in tattooing establishments shall be constructed of metal with white enamel or porcelain finish, or stainless steel. 
(d)  Each tattooing establishment shall have adequate lighting and ventilation. For purposes of this paragraph lighting or ventilation shall be considered as inadequate if it fails to comply with a standard prescribed by the health officer. 
(e)  No tattooing establishment shall be used as a sleeping room or dormitory. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-404. - Source of dyes and inks. 
(a)  Proprietors of tattooing establishments shall, on request of the health officer, submit in writing to the health officer the source of all dyes or inks retained for use in tattooing operations, and thereafter shall notify the health officer in writing of any dyes or inks obtained for use in tattooing operations from any source other than those previously submitted. 
(b)  No dyes or inks from any sources which have been disapproved by the health officer shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-405. - Maintenance of pigments, dyes, and equipment. 
No pigments, dyes, or equipment shall be retained available for use in tattooing operations unless cleaned and sterilized as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, equipment shall include needles, needle tubes, towels, blade holders, wiping cloths, paper towels and napkins, charcoal, gauze bandages (unless purchased in individual sterile packages), and all similar items. 
(a)  All equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. Instruments shall be cleaned with soap or detergent by use of a brush. The interior of needle barrels shall be brushed, After cleaning, equipment shall be thoroughly rinsed under running fresh tap water. 
(b)  All equipment shall be sterilized by autoclaving. Each piece of equipment shall be individually wrapped with paper in an approved method for autoclaving. Metal foil may not be used. Tattooing needles shall be threaded through the metal tube that attaches to the tattooing vibrator and shall be placed in a glass (or autoclavable plastic test tube) with a cotton plug for autoclaving. Wiping tissues shall be sterilized in a single pack to be used for one tattoo only and then be discarded. All packs shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels. 
(c)  Dyes or inks shall be used from containers sterilized in an autoclave after first being filled with the dye. Dye shall be kept in a sterile condition and the dye bottles filled with dye shall be autoclaved at least once a week or more often if necessary to keep the dye in a sterile condition. The dyes may be placed in teflon squeeze bottles that will withstand autoclaving. 
(d)  Steam sterilization of the above listed equipment shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least fifteen (15) pounds pressure per square inch (two hundred fifty-one (251) degrees Fahrenheit) for at least fifteen (15) minutes. Other means of sterilization may be approved by the health officer. 
(e)  All sterilized dyes, pigments and equipment shall be stored in a manner which will insure sterility at the time of use. 
(f)  Proprietors shall maintain sufficient sterilized equipment available at the beginning of each workday to allow completion of such workday without requiring resterilization of such equipment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 2, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-406. - Maintenance of stencils. 
No stencil, whether new or used, shall be retained in a manner available for use in any tattooing operation unless it has been precleaned and disinfected in the following manner: 
(a)  Each stencil must be precleaned by being scrubbed with soap and brush to the extent necessary to remove all accumulations of carbon and vaseline in the etched grooves of the stencil. 
(b)  Each stencil, after being precleaned and dried, must be disinfected by being soaked, design-cut side down, in a closed container of seventy (70) percent alcohol for not less than thirty (30) minutes at room temperature. 
(c)  Each stencil, after being disinfected, shall be air dried for not less than thirty (30) minutes by being suspended in a manner exposing both sides to the air, and thereafter shall be stored for next use in a clean envelope. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 3, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-407. - Tattooing operations—Skin condition of customers. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed on skin surface areas containing any rash, pimples, boils, or infection or otherwise manifesting any evidence of unhealthy conditions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-408. - Same—Potential health risks. 
The establishment owner shall provide written information, as required by the health officer, about blood-borne diseases and their transmission to all tattoo operators and maintain records to verify operator receipt of this information. The tattoo operator shall inform the customer of any potential health risks involved whenever the skin is violated, as required by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 4, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-409. - Same—Health conditions of operator. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the operator is free of communicable diseases and pustular skin lesions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-410. - Same—Smoking. 
No operator shall smoke while performing a tattooing operation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-411. - Same—Apparel of operator. 
The operator must wear a clean, light-colored, shortsleeved smock while performing the tattooing operation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-412. - Same—Cleanliness of operator. 
No operator shall perform a tattooing operation with unclean hands. For purposes of this paragraph, hands shall not be considered clean unless they have been thoroughly washed with soap from a single service dispenser and warm water, vigorously rubbing all surfaces of lathered hands for at least ten (10) seconds, followed by thorough rinsing under a stream of water. Hands shall be dried using single service towels from a dispenser or hot air blower. If a liquid soap is used, the dispenser shall be cleaned and filled with fresh soap only when empty. 
Tattoo operators shall wear protective gloves while handling needles or blades or doing any procedure that may cause bleeding. Gloves shall be discarded between each customer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 5, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-413. - Same—Shaving. 
No tattooing operation involving shaving shall be performed unless the skin is washed with soap prior to the shaving and unless the blade used in shaving is previously unused and unless the blade holder has been autoclaved since its previous use. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-414. - Same—Skin preparation. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the skin is adequately prepared prior to the operation. For purposes of this paragraph, skin shall be considered properly prepared if it is thoroughly washed with soap following shaving and thereafter scrubbed gently three (3) times with seventy (70) percent isopropyl alcohol, using a separate sterile gauze pad each such time; and no alternate method of skin preparation shall be considered adequate unless approved in writing by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-415. - Same—Use of stencils. 
No tattooing operation involving the use of stencils shall be performed unless all of the following requirements have been complied with: 
(a)  Each stencil must be precleaned pursuant to section 18-406. 
(b)  Each stencil, having been precleaned, must be wiped with sterile gauze soaked in seventy (70) percent alcohol and air dryed immediately prior to its use in the tattooing operation. 
(c)  Petroleum jelly used for stencils must be obtained from a collapsible tube which has not previously been used in any tattooing operation and must be applied to the skin with a sterile gauze which has not previously been used. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-416. - Same—Use of approved dyes. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed using dyes or inks of a type that has been disapproved for use by the health officer pursuant to section 18-404. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-417. - Same—Use of sterile dyes. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed unless the following requirements have been complied with: 
(a)  The dye or ink used for the tattoo must be obtained from sterile dye or ink bottles and, prior to the tattooing operation, transferred from such bottles into sterile paper cups which have not previously been used in any tattooing operation. 
(b)  No dye or ink shall be used in which needles used on another person have been dipped. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-418. - Same—Use of sterile equipment. 
No tattooing operation shall be performed using equipment that has not been cleaned and sterilized in the manner set forth in section 18-405. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-419. - Same—Discarding of certain equipment. 
Operators shall discard the following items immediately after use in any tattooing operation: 
(a)  Blade used in shaving. 
(b)  Tubes and gauze used in application of petroleum jelly used for stencils. 
(c)  Paper cups used for dye or ink. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 18-420. - Penalties. 
Each of the following acts or omissions shall constitute an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00): 
(a)  Any performance of a tattooing operation by an operator in violation of any requirement or prohibition imposed by this article. 
(b)  Any failure by a proprietor to maintain a tattooing establishment in conformity with the requirements of this article. For purposes of this subparagraph (b), each day upon which such a failure to conform occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1240, § 1, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 6, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-421. - Health services fees. 
The county health officer shall periodically make inspections of tattooing establishments located in the City of Santa Ana to determine if the proprietors or operators of such establishments are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The proprietor of such establishment shall pay such fees as may be established by the County of Orange as reimbursement for the services provided by the county health officer and retained by the county. 
(Ord. No. NS-1321, § 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. NS-2145, § 2, 9-16-91)  
Secs. 18-422—18-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - WIPING RAG BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 18-451. - Definitions. 
(1)  Health officer shall mean the Orange County Health Officer. 
(2)  Wiping rags shall mean cloths and rags used for any or all of the following purposes: 
Wiping and cleaning the surfaces of machinery, tools, locomotives, engines, motor cars, automobiles, cars, carriages, windows, furniture, and surfaces of articles, appliances, and engines in factories, shops, steamships, and steamboats. 
Generally for cleaning in industrial employment. 
Used by mechanics and workmen for wiping from their hands and bodies soil incident to their employment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 18-452. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any business of laundering, sanitizing or selling wiping rags in the City of Santa Ana unless, in addition to any other permit or license which may be required, he has a valid permit issued annually by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 18-453. - Authority of the health officer. 
The health officer is hereby authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder, pertaining to wiping rags and wiping rag businesses. 
A permit under this article shall be issued by the health officer if the applicant complies with the provisions of Chapter 4, Part 1, Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code and any regulations adopted thereunder. The period of the permit shall be one (1) year from date of issuance. Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked in the manner prescribed in Section 3951 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 9-15-75)  
Sec. 18-454. - Permit fees. 
The Orange County Board of Supervisors shall establish by resolution a schedule of permit fees which is sufficient to cover the implementation costs of this article. This fee shall be collected annually from any person operating a business which launders, sanitizes or sells wiping rags. 
(Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 9-15-75; Ord. No. NS-2145, § 3, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 18-455. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to the Health and Safety Code, Section 3960. 
(Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 9-15-75)  
Secs. 18-456—18-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage warning signs, § 18-551 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-501. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, such definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code: 
(a)  Certified farmers' market shall be as defined in Section 27512 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  Commissary shall be as defined in Section 27513 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(c)  Food establishment shall be as defined in Section 27520 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(d)  Food facility shall be as defined in Section 27521 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(e)  Food processing establishment shall be as defined in Section 28280.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(f)  Health department or department shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
(g)  Health officer shall mean the county health officer or his or her deputy. 
(h)  Inspector shall mean an environmental health specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 517, employed by the health department, or the health officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this article. 
(i)  Mobile food preparation unit shall be as defined in Section 27526 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(j)  Open-air barbecue facility shall be as defined in Section 27528.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(k)  Person shall be as defined in Section 27530 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(l)  Premises shall include land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or on such premises. 
(m)  Produce stand shall be as defined in Section 27533 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(n)  Restricted food service transient occupancy establishment shall be as defined in Section 27535.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(o)  Satellite food distribution facility shall be as defined in Section 27536.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(p)  Temporary food facility shall be as defined in Section 27538 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(q)  Vehicle shall be as defined in Section 27540 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(r)  Vending machine shall be as defined in Section 27541 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(s)  Vending machine business shall mean the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1517, § 1, 2-4-80; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 7, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-502. - Permit required; conditions and terms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the health department under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the health department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this article and such other information as the health department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three (3) service stops which shall include the address or exact location and time of each stop. 
(c)  A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated. 
(d)  Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued. 
(e)  Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-1517, § 2, 2-4-80; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 8, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-503. - Construction, conversion and alteration. 
Any person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or other food handling business governed by this article shall submit three (3) copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The health officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 9, 8-3-92)  
Secs. 18-504, 18-505. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2171, § 10, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed sections 18-504 and 18-505, which pertained to building permits and sanitation requirements and derived from Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1978.  
Sec. 18-506. - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
A permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this article for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  Violation of state law; 
(b)  Violation of this article; 
(c)  Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article; or 
(d)  Upon recommendation by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 11, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-507. - Notice of violation. 
When any of the aforesaid laws, this article or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled "Notice of Violation," specifying: 
(a)  The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged; 
(b)  The provision or provisions violated thereby; 
(c)  The corrective steps required; 
(d)  The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor; 
(e)  That the permittee has a right to a hearing, upon written request, or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled; and 
(f)  That if no hearing is requested or that the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing, and if the health department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date named under (d) above, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until such violations have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 12, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-508. - Hearing. 
The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process. 
The hearing shall be held by the health officer or his duly authorized representative who is a qualified environmental health specialist as defined in Section 517 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in Section 529 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measures taken. 
The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five (5) working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged and shall state the terms of the suspension or that the permit has been revoked. 
The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 13, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-509. - Suspension for refusal of entry. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the food handling establishments described in section 18-501, above, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78)  
Sec. 18-510. - Summary suspension. 
(a)  If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. "Immediate danger to the public health and safety" means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition including, but not limited to, unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent Code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  At any time within fifteen (15) calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection (b), the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 14, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-511. - Supervision of closing down premises. 
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the health department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger public health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 15, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-512. - Rules and regulations. 
The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this article including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to: 
(a)  Forms for applications, permits and notices; 
(b)  Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits; 
(c)  Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 16, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-513. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1403, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 17, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-514. - Mobile food preparation units generally. 
In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this article, mobile food preparation vehicles shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit. 
(b)  All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn. 
(c)  All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges. 
(d)  All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes, or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the health officer. 
(e)  Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the health officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least 188 cm (76 inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area. 
(f)  High voltage (110-120 v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet, or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding 183 cm (6 feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover. 
(g)  Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least 35.5 cm × 35.5 cm (14 inches × 14 inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the vehicle is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three (3) requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(h)  A first aid kit approved by the health officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case. 
(i)  All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows: 
(1)  The LP-gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use. 
(2)  Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body. 
(3)  Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition. 
(4)  When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met: 
a.  All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the vehicle. 
b.  The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward. 
c.  The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment. 
d.  The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the vehicle so as to prevent accumulation of gas. 
(5)  Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials. 
(6)  Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing. 
(7)  Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance. 
(8)  ASME-approved LP-gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout. 
(9)  Protective "thread" caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves. 
(10)  Every appliance fueled by LP-gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished. 
(j)  A minimum five (5) B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or state fire marshal-approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver's door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. 
(Ord. No. NS-1517, § 3, 2-4-80; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 18, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-515. - Additional requirements for mobile food preparation units operating in multi-locations in any day. 
In addition to the requirements specified in section 18-514 above, mobile food preparation units, which operate at more than one (1) location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(a)  Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the vehicle in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges. 
(b)  Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the vehicle is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(c)  Water bath or steam hot food insert warming tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contain hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the vehicle is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(d)  An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the vehicle, with unobstructed passage of 61 cm × 92 cm (24 inches × 36 inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled "Safety Exit" in contrasting colors with at least 2.54 cm (1 inch) high letters. 
(Ord. No. NS-1517, § 4, 2-4-80; Ord. No. NS-2171, § 19, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 18-516. - Health services fees. 
The county may adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of any food handling business. Such fees are to be paid directly to the health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for services related to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2171, § 20, 8-3-92)  
Secs. 18-517—18-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WARNING SIGNS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Sale of liquor at Santa Ana Stadium, § 2-743; use regulations for establishments selling alcoholic beverages, § 41-196. 
 
Sec. 18-551. - Purpose. 
The Surgeon General of the United States has recommended that women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, be advised not to drink alcoholic beverages and to be aware of the alcohol content in anything they eat because alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this ordinance codified in this chapter [article] is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. 
(Ord. No. NS-1952, § 1, 4-4-88)  
Sec. 18-552. - Duty to post. 
Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a premises offering wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages for sale to the public, shall cause one (1) or more signs to be posted or displayed on the premises as provided in this article. The signs shall read substantially as follows: WARNING. DRINKING WINE, BEER AND OTHER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS. Except as specified in section 18-553(c), signs as required herein shall not be smaller than ten (10) inches wide by ten (10) inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than one (1) inch in height. 
(Ord. No. NS-1952, § 1, 4-4-88)  
Sec. 18-553. - Placement. 
A sign or notice required by section 18-552 shall be placed as follows: 
(a)  Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one (1) sign shall be so placed as to assure that it is readable from all locations at which said sale or dispensing occurs. 
(b)  Where the sale of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily for consumption on the premises through over-the-counter service, one (1) or more signs shall be placed to assure that at least one (1) sign is readable from any counter location available to the public. 
(c)  Where the sale of wine, beer, and other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage service persons, at least one (1) sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public entering the premises. In the alternative, signs smaller than ten (10) inches wide by ten (10) inches long may be displayed at each of the tables provided that the signs are as readily visible and readable as materials provided to the public which list food and beverage prices. 
(Ord. No. NS-1952, § 1, 4-4-88)  
Sec. 18-554. - Language. 
In the event a substantial number of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign or notice required by this article shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages involved. 
(Ord. No. NS-1952, § 1, 4-4-88)  
Secs. 18-555—18-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SANITATION SERVICES USERS CHARGE 
 
Sec. 18-600. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a charge for street sweeping and other environmental sanitation services provided by the city, and it is not intended either as a general revenue measure or as a regulation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2129, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 18-601. - Establishment of service charge. 
The city shall make a monthly charge to each residential, commercial, industrial, manufacturing or other unit which is located within the city for street cleaning services and other environmental sanitation services. Such charge shall be in such amount as set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2129, § 1, 6-17-91)  
Sec. 18-602. - Persons obligated. 
(a)  The municipal utility services customer of record for each property, place or premises located in the city, or person responsible to be registered for municipal utility services, including sanitation service charges, shall be liable for payment of all charges as set forth in this article, except to the extent reductions or refunds may be specifically authorized or directed by the executive director of public works or the executive director of finance, or their designees. The said sanitation service charges shall be billed as provided in section 39-20 as part of the city's regular consolidated municipal utility services account/billing statement but shall be listed as a separate line item on the municipal utility services account/billing statement. 
(b)  In the event the occupant(s) of any property, place or premises having registered a municipal utility services account and transferred municipal utility services into their own name as tenant(s), thereafter quit or otherwise vacate the premises, then responsibility for future municipal utility services charges, including sanitation service charges, shall revert to the municipal utility services account of the property owner in accordance with section 39-16. 
(Ord. No. NS-2129, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. NS-2921, 12, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 18-603. - Payment of bills and penalties. 
(a)  Date payment due . Bills for the sanitation charges made pursuant to this article and penalties, if any, are due and payable at the department of finance at the same time and in the same manner as all other parts of the regular consolidated municipal utility services account/billing statement. 
(b)  Penalties. A penalty of ten (10) percent shall be assessed on all unpaid sanitation charges and/or prior sanitation charge related penalties thirty (30) days after the billing date. No penalty, however, will accrue until thirty (30) days after the date that the bill has been presented in accordance with section 39-20. 
(c)  Civil debt. Sanitation service charges and any corresponding penalties accrued for failure to make timely payment therefore shall be a civil debt owing to the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2129, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. NS-2921, 13, 8-1-17 )  
Secs. 18-604—18-609. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA COLLECTIVES/COOPERATIVES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed art. XIII, §§ 18-610—18-612, in its entirety; and enacted a new art. XIII, to read as set out herein. Former art. XIII pertained to medical marijuana dispensaries, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2758, § 2, adopted November 5, 2007. 
 
Sec. 18-610. - Purposes and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate the collective distribution of medical marijuana in order to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Santa Ana. The regulations in this article, in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, and the California Health and Safety Code (collectively referred to as "State Law") do not interfere with a patient's right to use medical marijuana as authorized under State Law, nor do they criminalize the possession or cultivation of medical marijuana by specifically defined classifications of persons, as authorized under State Law. Under State Law, only qualified patients, persons with identification cards, and primary caregivers may cultivate medical marijuana collectively. Medical marijuana collectives shall comply with all provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code ("Code"), State Law, the 2008 California Attorney General Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, and all other applicable local and state laws. Nothing in this article purports to permit activities that are otherwise illegal under state or local law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 18-611. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Cultivation" and/or "Cultivate" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of one (1) or more marijuana plants or any part thereof, as set forth in Business and Professions Code § 26001(l) as amended from time to time. 
(b)  "Medical marijuana collective" or "cooperative" or "collective" means any facility or location where medical marijuana is made available and/or distributed by or to one (1) or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient or a person with an identification card in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 et seq., as sometimes amended. This term shall include any legal form of business recognized in the State of California. A "medical marijuana collective" shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this Code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. 
(c)  "Identification card" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 et seq., as sometimes amended. 
(d)  "Manager" means any person responsible for the establishment, organization, supervision, or oversight of the operation of a Collective, including, but not limited to, members who perform the functions of president, vice-president, director, operating officer, financial officer, secretary, or treasurer. Ability to control one (1) or more of the following functions shall be prima facie evidence that such person is a manager: 
(1)  To hire, select, or separate employees or staff, including volunteers; 
(2)  To acquire facilities, furniture, equipment or supplies other than occasional replenishment of stock; 
(3)  To disburse funds of the business other than occasional expenditures for replenishment of stock; or 
(4)  To make, or participate in making, policy decisions relative to the operations of the business. 
(e)  "Marijuana" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11018 as sometimes amended. 
(f)  "Medical marijuana" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 et seq., as sometimes amended. 
(g)  "Primary caregiver" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 and 11362.7, as sometimes amended. 
(h)  "Qualified patient" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 as sometimes amended. 
(i)  "Private Residence" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.2(5) and 17922. A recreational vehicle does not constitute a lawfully established structure for the purposes of this article. 
(j)  "Premises" means a single, legal parcel of property. Where contiguous legal parcels under common ownership or control, such contiguous legal parcels shall constitute a single "premises" for purposes of this chapter. 
(k)  "Parcel" means property assigned a separate parcel number by the Orange County Assessor. 
(l)  "Marijuana Products" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11018.1. 
(m)  "Marijuana Accessories" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code § 11018.2. 
(n)  "Personal Cultivation" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of marijuana plants for personal use within a private residence or accessory structure to a private residence. 
(o)  "Commercial Cultivation" shall mean the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of marijuana plants in any structure other than a private residence. 
(p)  "Outdoor Cultivation" shall mean the planting, cultivating, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading or trimming of marijuana plants in any location within the City of Santa Ana that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
(q)  "Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a space within a building, greenhouse or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one (1) or more lockable doors. 
(r)  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products from a dispensary, up to an amount determined to be authorized by the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, to qualified patients and their caregivers. "Delivery" also includes the use by a dispensary of any technology platform owned, controlled, and/or licensed by the dispensary, or independently licensed by the State of California under the State law (as amended from time to time), that enables anyone to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products. For the purposes of this article, "delivery" does not include distribution or purchase of cannabis from a licensed cultivator, and cannabis products from a licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed dispensary or a wholesale establishment. 
(s)  "Dispensary" means a premises where medical cannabis or medical cannabis products, or devices for the use of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers, pursuant to Business and Professions Code § 19340, medical cannabis and medical cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
(t)  "Responsible person" means any of the following: 
(1)  A person who causes a Code violation to occur. 
(2)  A person who maintains or allows a Code violation to continue, by his or her action or failure to act. 
(3)  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a Code violation by its action or failure to act. 
(4)  A person who is the owner of, and/or a person who is a lessee or sub lessee with the current right of possession of, real property where a property-related Code violation occurs. 
(5)  A person who is the on-site manager of a business who normally works daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities of such premises. 
For the purposes of this section "person" includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity. 
(u)  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use of Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same. 
(v)  "Testing Facility" or "Testing Laboratory" defined in the Business and Professions Code § 26001, as amended from time to time, means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the State that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
a)  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the State; and, 
b)  Licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2909, § 3, 1-17-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 3, 7-5-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 3, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 4, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 18-612. - Scope of article. 
The operating standards established in this article apply to any site, facility, location, use, cooperative or business currently operating in the City of Santa Ana, or which commences operations after the effective date of this article, that distributes, dispenses, stores, sells, exchanges, processes, delivers, or gives away, medical marijuana to qualified patients, health care providers, patients' primary caregivers, or physicians, pursuant to Health & Safety Code § 11362.5 (adopted as Proposition 215, the "Compassionate Use Act of 1996") or any state regulations adopted in furtherance thereof. Any collective in the City of Santa Ana shall operate in conformance with the operating standards set forth in section 18-613 of this Code to assure that the operations of the collective are in compliance with California law and to mitigate the adverse secondary effects from operations of dispensaries. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 18-613. - Operating Standards. 
(a)  At all times the collective is open, a collective shall provide at least one (1) security guard who is licensed, possesses a valid department of consumer affairs "security guard card", and has a valid Santa Ana Business License. 
(b)  The security guard and collective personnel shall monitor the site and the immediate vicinity of the site to assure that patrons immediately leave the site and not consume medical marijuana in the vicinity of the collective or on the property or in the parking lot. 
(c)  Exterior signage shall comply with Article XI of Chapter 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Interior signage or advertising may not be visible from the exterior. Collectives and dispensaries must comply with the advertising and marketing provisions of Business and Professions Code §§ 26150-26155. 
(d)  No recommendations from a doctor for medical marijuana shall be issued on-site. 
(e)  There shall be no on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco products, and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol, tobacco or marijuana by patrons. 
(f)  Hours of operation shall be limited to: 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily. No licensed dispensary/collective shall be open to the public between the hours of 11:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. of any day. 
(g)  The property shall provide an air treatment system with sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that odor generated inside the location is not detected outside the building, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the collective if the use only occupies a portion of a building. 
(h)  A collective shall only dispense medical marijuana to qualified patients and their caregivers as defined by California Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 (Proposition 215). This shall include possession of an original valid doctor's recommendation, not more than one (1) year old, for medical marijuana use by the patient. 
(i)  A collective shall notify patrons of the following both verbally and through posting of a sign in a conspicuous location: 
(1)  Use of medical marijuana shall be limited to the patient identified on the doctor's recommendation. Secondary sale, barter or distribution of medical marijuana is a crime and can lead to arrest. 
(2)  That loitering on and around the collective site is prohibited by California Penal Code § 647(e) and that patrons must immediately leave the site and not consume medical marijuana in the vicinity of the collective or on the property or in the parking lot. 
(3)  Forgery of medical documents is a felony crime. 
(4)  A warning that patrons may be subject to prosecution under federal marijuana laws. 
(5)  That the use of medical marijuana may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery. 
(j)  A collective shall not provide marijuana to any individual in an amount not consistent with personal medical use. 
(k)  All agents, private security officers or other persons acting for or employed by a collective shall display a laminated identification badge at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size, issued by the collective. The badge, at a minimum, shall include the collective's "doing business as" name and license number, the employee's first and last name, and a color photo of the employee that shows the full front of the employee's face. 
(l)  No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be permitted to enter establishment, unless such person is a qualified patient and is accompanied by his or her primary caregiver, licensed attending physician, parent(s) or documented legal guardian. 
(m)  A collective shall provide the name and phone number of an on-site staff person to the police department and the code enforcement division of the planning and building agency for notification if there are operational problems with the establishment. 
(n)  Each collective owner, operator(s) and employees shall complete a criminal background check and wear a visible photo ID at all times during operating hours. Owners, operator(s), employees, managers or volunteers may not have been convicted of, or pleaded guilty/no-contest to a felony or misdemeanor drug charge within the past four (4) years; nor shall they be a person required to register as a controlled substance offender pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 11590. 
(o)  Marijuana shall not be grown or cultivated at collective sites, except that cuttings of the marijuana plant may be kept or maintained on-site for distribution to qualified patients and primary caregivers as follows: 
(1)  The cuttings shall not be utilized by a collective as a source for the provision of marijuana for consumption on-site, however, upon provision to a qualified patient or primary caregiver, that person may use the cuttings to cultivate marijuana plants off-site for their own use and they may also return marijuana from the resulting mature plant for distribution by the collective. 
(2)  For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "cutting" shall mean a rootless piece cut from a marijuana plant, which is no more than six (6) inches in length, and which can be used to grow another plant in a different location. 
(p)  A collective shall comply with applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 through 11362.83, inclusive. 
(q)  If food is distributed, the collective shall comply with all relevant state laws and city and/or county ordinances pertaining to the preparation, distribution and sale of food. 
(r)  The location, interior and exterior, shall be monitored at all times by web-based closed-circuit television for security purposes. The camera and recording system must be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the ready identification of any individual committing a crime anywhere on or adjacent to the location. The recordings shall be maintained for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. The police department may request the recordings in connection with an investigation. If the recordings are not voluntarily provided, the police department may seek a warrant or court order for the recordings. 
(s)  The location shall have a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system which shall include all perimeter entry points and perimeter windows and the building or the portion of the building where the collective is located shall contain a fire-proof safe or fire-proof filing cabinet and include a safety and security plan. 
(t)  Reserved. 
(u)  Reserved. 
(v)  If the collective operator is not the owner of the property where the collective is to operate, the operator shall provide evidence that the property owner(s) consent to the operation of a collective on the property. 
(w)  Collectives must obtain and maintain a valid city business license at all times as a condition for receiving, renewing, and maintaining their regulatory safety permit. 
(x)  Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2896, § 2, 5-3-16 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 4, 7-5-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2925 , § 3, 10-3-17)  
Sec. 18-614. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-615. - Zones permitted. 
Collectives. No collective shall operate within a residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RE, CR) zone, Professional (P) zone, Arterial Commercial (C-5) zone, Planned Shopping Center (C-4) zone, Specific Development (SD), Specific Plan (SP) or Agricultural (A-1) zone. A Collective may only operate in an Industrial zone (M-1, M-2) in accordance with this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 5, 7-5-17 )  
Sec. 18-616. - Separation requirements. 
(a)  No collective shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another medical marijuana collective or cooperative or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any: 
(1)  School. 
(2)  Park. 
(3)  Residential zone. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 18-617.1 - Cooperative/collective registration required. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the adoption of this Chapter, the Director of Planning and Building shall prepare Cooperative/Collective registration application forms and a related administrative policy. Each collective interested in operating pursuant to this article may submit an application together with a non-refundable processing fee in an amount established by the City Council. Within 60 days after the adoption of this article, the Director shall stop accepting applications and process all applications received. 
(b)  The Director or his or her designee shall determine whether each application demonstrates compliance with this article. Each application that is in compliance with this article shall be placed on the "Qualified Registration Applicant List" and the Director shall notify the applicant in writing that it is a "Qualified Registration Applicant." 
(c)  Once all applications are processed, the Director shall hold an independent selection process ("lottery") in an open and public location and select 20 applications. The 20 applications chosen through the independent selection process (lottery) will be placed on the "Regulatory Safety Permit ("RSP") Eligibility List." Each applicant on the RSP Eligibility List may then choose to file an application for a RSP pursuant to section 18-617.2. Applicants identified on the RSP Eligibility List following the February 5, 2015 independent selection process (lottery) must submit a completed RSP application within four (4) months of April 5, 2016 and no later than August 5, 2016. Failure to submit a completed RSP application by that deadline will disqualify the applicant from the RSP Eligibility List and the Waitlist described in subsection (d). 
(d)  Qualified Registration Applicants will appear on the "Qualified Registration Applicant List" in the order that they are selected during the independent selection process (lottery). This list is the Waitlist. The Waitlist will become active if (1) an applicant on the RSP Eligibility List is disqualified from that List; (2) a location appearing on the RSP Eligibility List becomes available; or (3) a location not appearing on the RSP eligibility list becomes available. A Qualified Registration Applicant's ability to move from the Waitlist to the RSP Eligibility List is determined by the applicant's proposed medical marijuana collective location and the applicant's position on the Waitlist. 
(e)  A Qualified Registration Applicant that moves from the Waitlist to the RSP Eligibility List must submit a completed RSP application within three (3) months following issuance of a written notice advising the applicant of that opportunity. Failure to submit a completed RSP application by that deadline will disqualify the applicant from the RSP Eligibility List and the Waitlist. 
(f)  The Director shall maintain the Waitlist and update it on an annual basis. A Qualified Registration Applicant on that Waitlist must submit a written request each year to maintain its status on the waitlist. The Director may place new applicants on the Waitlist in the order in which the new registration applications are received. 
( Ord. No. NS-2896, § 3, 5-3-16 >; Ord. No. NS-2925 , § 3, 10-3-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2896, § 3, adopted May 3, 2016 , renumbered § 18-617.01 as 18-617.1 and amended it to read as set out herein. Former § 18-617.01 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from " Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 ."  
Sec. 18-617.2. - Medical marijuana collective—Regulatory permit application process. 
(a)  Any medical marijuana collective desiring a regulatory safety permit required by this article shall, prior to initiating operations and after receiving notice of its successful registration under section 18-617.1 as being on the RSP eligibility list, must complete and file a regulatory safety permit application to the director of the planning and building agency or designee on a form supplied by the planning and building agency. The application shall be filed together with a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council, to defray the cost of investigation required by this article. The application shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The address of the property where the proposed medical marijuana collective(s) will operate; 
(2)  A site plan describing the property with fully dimensioned interior and exterior floor plans including electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and disabled access compliance pursuant to Title 24 of the State of California Code of Regulations and the federally mandated Americans with Disabilities Act; 
(3)  Exterior photographs of the entrance(s), exits(s), street frontage(s), parking, front, rear and side(s) of the proposed property; 
(4)  Photographs depicting the entire interior of the proposed property; 
(5)  If the property is being rented or leased or is being purchased under contract, a copy of such lease or contract; 
(6)  If the property is being rented or leased, written proof that the property owner, and landlord if applicable, were given notice that the property will be used as a medical marijuana collective, and that the property owner, and landlord if applicable, agree(s) to said operations; 
(7)  The name, address, telephone number, title and function(s) of each manager, employee, volunteer, etc.; 
(8)  For each manager, employee, volunteer, a fully legible copy of one (1) valid government issued form of photo identification, such as state driver's license or identification card; 
(9)  If the medical marijuana collective is a corporation, a certified copy of the collective's secretary of state articles of incorporation, certificate(s) of amendment, statement(s) of information and a copy of the collective's bylaws; 
(10)  If the medical marijuana collective is an unincorporated association, a copy of the articles of association; 
(11)  The name and address of the applicant's current agent for service of process; 
(12)  A copy of the applicant's board of equalization seller's permit; 
(13)  A copy of the medical marijuana collective operating standards, listed in section 18-613, containing a statement dated and signed by the responsible party on-site stating under penalty of perjury, that they read, understand and shall ensure compliance with the aforementioned operating standards. 
(b)  The director of the planning and building agency or designee shall have sixty (60) calendar days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The department of building safety and housing, the fire department and the Orange County Health Department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the collective establishment and shall make separate recommendations to the director of the planning and building agency or designee or designee concerning compliance with the foregoing provisions. 
(c)  The director of the planning and building agency or designee, after receiving the application and aforementioned recommendations, shall grant the permit if s/he finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application. 
(5)  The applicant has not had a regulatory safety permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state within the five (5) years prior to the date of application. 
(6)  The collective as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements. 
(7)  The applicant has demonstrated compliance with the California Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, "Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use" standards. 
(d)  Failure of an applicant listed on the RSP eligibility list to obtain a certificate of occupancy within six (6) months of submitting a completed RSP application will result in disqualification from the RSP eligibility list and waitlist. This sub-section applies to RSP applications submitted after April 5, 2016. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2896, § 5, 5-3-16 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 5, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 18-617.3. - Medical marijuana collective—Regulatory permit annual renewal. 
(a)  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the director of the planning and building agency or designee at least sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the current permit. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee allowing his or her permit to lapse or which permit expired during a suspension shall be required to submit a new registration application and pay the corresponding original application fees. 
(b)  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his/her respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the chief of police who shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this article. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in his/her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the director of the planning and building agency or designee in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 6, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 18-617.4. - Maintenance of records. 
A medical marijuana collective shall maintain records at the location accurately and truthfully documenting: 
(1)  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner, landlord and/or lessee of the location; 
(2)  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all members who are engaged in the management of the collective and the exact nature of each member's participation in the management of the collective; 
(3)  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all patient members to whom the collective provides medical marijuana, a copy of a government-issued identification card for all patient members; 
(4)  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all primary caregiver members to whom the collective provides medical; 
(5)  All receipts of the collective, including but not limited to all contributions, reimbursements, and reasonable compensation, whether in cash or in kind, and all expenditures incurred by the collective for the cultivation of medical marijuana; and 
(6)  Proof of compliance with the California Attorney General Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use. 
These records shall be maintained by the collective for a period of five (5) years and shall be made available by the collective to the police department and/or community preservation division upon request. If they are not produced as requested the city may seek a search warrant, subpoena, or court order. In addition to all other formats that the collective may maintain, these records shall be stored by the collective at the location in a printed format in its fire-proof safe. Any loss, damage or destruction of the records shall be reported to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours of the loss, destruction or damage. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 18-617.5. - Audits. 
Annual audits. No later than June 30 of every year, each collective shall file with the city an audit or financial review of its operations of the previous calendar year. The form and contents of the document shall be specified by the executive director of finance and management services, or his/her designee. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 6, 7-5-17 )  
Sec. 18-617.11. - Cooperative/Collective regulatory safety permit. 
(a)  Every medical marijuana collective shall obtain a regulatory safety permit from the police department. The applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee in an amount established by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city a medical marijuana collective without the required permit. 
(b)  A copy of the regulatory safety permit shall be displayed at all times in a place visible to the public. 
(c)  A regulatory safety permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, unless sooner revoked. No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the above-referenced period. 
(d)  A Regulatory Safety Permit shall not be issued to an individual or a business entity associated with an individual who must comply with California Health & Safety Code Section 11590. This subsection is applicable to all new registration applications received after April 5, 2016. 
( Ord. No. NS-2896, § 4, 5-3-16 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2896, § 4, adopted May 3, 2016 , renumbered § 18-617.01 as 18-617.11 and amended it to read as set out herein. Former § 18-617.01 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from " Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014 ."  
Sec. 18-618. - Inspection and enforcement responsibilities. 
The code enforcement division of the planning and building agency may enter and inspect the location of any collective between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., or at any reasonable time, to ensure compliance with this article. In addition, a designated unit within the police department may enter and inspect the location of any collective and the recordings and records maintained as required by this article, except that the inspection and copying of private medical records shall be made available to the police department only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order. It is unlawful for any owner, responsible person, landlord, lessee, member (including but not limited to a member engaged in the management), or any other person having any responsibility over the operation of the collective to refuse to allow, impede, obstruct or interfere with an inspection, review or copying of records and closed-circuit monitoring authorized and required under this article, including but not limited to, the concealment, destruction, and falsification of any recordings, records, or monitoring. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 7, 7-5-17 )  
Sec. 18-619. - Applicability to existing medical marijuana operations. 
Any existing medical marijuana collective, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider that does not comply with the requirements of this article must immediately cease operation until such time, if any, when it complies fully with the requirements of this article. No medical marijuana collective, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider that existed prior to the enactment of this article shall be deemed to be a legally established use under the provisions of this article, and such medical marijuana collective, dispensary, operator, establishment, or provider shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 18-620. - Compliance with this article and state law. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(i)  Cause, permit or engage in the giving away of marijuana, or 
(ii)  Own, establish, operate, use or permit the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana collective or cooperative, or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent, responsible person or volunteer of a collective or cooperative, except as provided in this article, and pursuant to any and all other applicable local and state laws. 
(iii)  The prohibition in subsection (ii) above includes, renting, leasing, or otherwise permitting a medical marijuana business to occupy or use a location, vehicle, or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit or engage in any activity related to medical marijuana except as provided in Health and Safety Code § 11362.5 et seq., and pursuant to any and all other applicable local and state laws. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, misleading or inaccurate statements or representations in any forms, records, filings or documentation required to be maintained, filed or provided to the City under this article, or to any other local, state or federal government agency having jurisdiction over any of the activities of collectives. 
(d)  It shall be the sole responsibility of the members engaged in the management of the collective to ensure that the collective is at all times operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state laws and this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law with regard to the cultivation, transportation, provision, and sale of medical marijuana. 
(e)  Cultivation of Marijuana. 
(1)  Personal Cultivation. Individuals twenty-one (21) years of age or older may plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process up to six (6) living marijuana plants for personal (non-commercial) use in a private residence or accessory structure to a single private residence in the City of Santa Ana and must comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  The marijuana cultivation area shall be located indoors within a private residence or accessory structure on a single parcel of property; 
(ii)  No more than six (6) living marijuana plants is permitted for indoor personal cultivation; 
(iii)  Marijuana in excess of twenty-eight and one-half (28.5) grams produced by plants kept for indoor personal cultivation must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence not visible from the public right-of way. 
(iv)  There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence from the public right-of-way, including but not limited to any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, or any light emanating from the cultivation; or 
(v)  The cultivation may not violate any California Building, Electrical or Fire Codes or any other health and safety standards. 
(2)  Commercial Cultivation. Commercial cultivation of marijuana or cannabis is prohibited anywhere in the City except as allowed and regulated in Chapter 40 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(3)  Outdoor Cultivation. Outdoor cultivation of marijuana or medical marijuana is prohibited anywhere in the City. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall engage, permit, or participate in the outdoor cultivation of marijuana in the City. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Public Nuisance Prohibited. 
(i)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within the City to create a public nuisance in the course of cultivating marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location, indoor or outdoor, except as allowed and regulated in Chapter 40 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist, if such activity produces: 
(1)  Odors which are disturbing to people of reasonable sensitivity residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public; 
(2)  Repeated responses to the parcel by law enforcement personnel; 
(3)  A repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood, excessive noise which is disturbing to people of normal sensitivity on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public; 
(4)  Any other impacts on the neighborhood which are disruptive of normal activity in the area including, but not limited to, grow lighting visible outside the dwelling, excessive vehicular traffic or parking occurring at or near the dwelling, and excessive noise emanating from the dwelling. 
(5)  Outdoor and Commercial growing and cultivation of marijuana, except as allowed and regulated in Chapter 40 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(f)  A permitted medical marijuana dispensary may deliver medical marijuana only to a qualified patient or caregiver. Medical marijuana delivery services by dispensaries possessing regulatory safety permits must comply with Business and Professions Code §19340. Delivery of cannabis from a dispensary permitted pursuant to this Chapter can only be made in a city or county that does not expressly prohibit it by ordinance. Delivery services by dispensaries not in possession of regulatory safety permits is expressly prohibited. 
(g)  Non-Retail Commercial Cannabis Businesses for Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis as defined in Chapters 18 and 40 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (SAMC) are permitted subject to the regulations and standards contained within Chapter 40 of the SAMC. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2889, § 2, 1-19-16 ; Ord. No. NS-2909, §§ 4, 5, 1-17-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 8, 7-5-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 7, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 7, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 5, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 6, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 18-621. - Violation and enforcement. 
A.  Violation/enforcement. Each and every violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by this Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this article shall be subject to injunctive relief, revocation of the collective's registration, revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the location, disgorgement and payment to the city of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and state laws for any violations committed by the collective and persons related or associated with the collective. 
B.  Suspension or revocation. When the chief of police finds that any person holding a regulatory safety permit under the provisions of chapter 18 has violated the provisions of this chapter or is found guilty of conduct which would form the basis of denial of the regulatory safety permit as set forth in article XIII of chapter 18, s/he may revoke or suspend the permit. No such revocation shall become effective until the regulatory safety permit holder has been notified in writing by certified mail of the right to appeal the revocation decision pursuant to the provisions or chapter 3. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has passed. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 2, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2918, § 9, 7-5-17 )  
Sec. 18-622. - Transfer of ownership. 
A.  Upon the transfer of any interest in a collective/cooperative, the regulatory safety permit shall be null and void. Any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the collective/cooperative shall make a new application. Prior to or concurrent with the submission of said application the transferee shall obtain all required business licenses, post all required security deposits, acquire all necessary, certificates, permits or other licenses allowing the doing of any act which the person paying or holding the same would not otherwise be entitled to do; and any permit, license, variance or other instrument of approval or evidence that any conditions exist as required by any other section of this Code or by any statute or code provisions of the state must first be obtained or complied with before the doing of any act or thing for which it is required. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be payable for each such application involving transfer of any interest in an existing collective/cooperative. The provisions of section 18-617.1 and 18-617.2 shall apply to any person, firm, or entity applying for a regulatory safety permit for premises previously used as such establishment. 
B.  Any such transfer of any interest in an existing collective/cooperative or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the collective/cooperative shall require inspection and compliance with section 18-618. 
C.  The owner or operator of a collective/cooperative shall be responsible for notifying the city of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person/entity. Notification to the city must be made a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to such transfer. 
( Ord. No. NS-2918, § 10, 7-5-17 )  
Secs. 18-623—18-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - HOOKAH PARLORS 
 
Sec. 18-650. - Purpose and findings. 
The city council finds that hookah parlors have been associated with increases in noise, loitering, public drinking, possession of illegal weapons, underage drinking, and arson; that hookah parlors exacerbate the inherently dangerous behavior of tobacco use around non-tobacco users; diminish the protection of children from exposure to smoking and tobacco while they increase the potential for minors to associate smoking and tobacco with a healthy lifestyle; and weaken the protection of the public from smoking and tobacco-related pollution; and that hookah parlors if allowed in the city would have adverse secondary effects on surrounding properties, including but not limited to lowering property values and introducing incompatible land uses to existing neighborhoods; and that in order to serve public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses within the city, the declared purpose of this article is to prohibit hookah parlors as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2763, § 2, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 18-651. - Hookah parlor defined. 
(a)  Hookah parlor shall mean any facility or location whose business operation, whether as its primary use or as an ancillary use, is denoted by the smoking of tobacco or other substances through one or more pipes (commonly known as a hookah, waterpipe, shisha or narghile) designed with a tube passing through an urn of water that cools the smoke as it is drawn through it, including but not limited to establishments known variously as hookah bars, hookah lounges or hookah cafes. 
(b)  Ancillary use shall be defined as that term is defined in section 41-13.5 of the Code. 
(c)  Primary use shall mean a use that is not an ancillary use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2763, § 2, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 18-652. - Hookah parlors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct, or operate any hookah parlor or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in any hookah parlor in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2763, § 2, 3-3-08)  
Chapter 19 - HEALTH FACILITIES FINANCING LAW[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1664, §§ 1—29, adopted Jan. 3, 1983, did not expressly amend this Code; hence, inclusion herein as Ch. 19, §§ 19-1—19-29, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "City of Santa Ana Health Facilities Financing Law." 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 1, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-2. - Purpose. 
The council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary, essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the city to be authorized to provide financing to health institutions that provide essential services to residents of the city in order to aid such health institutions in containing costs and thereby to enable such health institutions to establish lower rates and charges than would otherwise prevail and to provide better service at such rates and charges. Unless the city intervenes to provide such financing, such rates and charges may increase at an ever accelerated pace because such health institutions cannot obtain financing at equivalent cost from private sources. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 2, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-3. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Bonds means any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  City means the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Cost means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a participating health institution necessary or incident to acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, or improvement or operation of a health facility or the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, improvement or operation. "Cost" shall include, without limitation, the cost of all lands, structures, real or personal property, franchises, rights and interests acquired or used in connection with a health facility, the cost of, demolishing or removing any structures (including the cost of acquiring any lands to which such structures may be moved), the cost of engineering, architectural, financial and legal services, plans, specifications, studies, surveys, estimates, administration expenses or other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility of or to acquiring, constructing, rehabilitating, improving or financing a health facility, including all costs of issuance of bonds for such purposes, reserves for debt service and for repairs, replacements, additions and improvements, and capitalized bond interest for such period as the city may determine. 
(d)  Council means the city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
(e)  Health facility means any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention and treatment of human illness, physical or mental, including convalescence, rehabilitation and care during and after pregnancy, or for any one or more of these services, and which provides and will continue providing to residents of the city essential health care services designated as such in an agreement between the city and the participating health institution providing or operating such facility, place or building. "Health facility" also includes retirement centers and medical office buildings. 
"Health facility" includes a portion of one of the above types of facilities and includes the following facilities if operated in conjunction with one of the above type of facilities: A laboratory, a laundry, a nurses' or interns' residence, a housing facility for patients, staff or employees and the families of any of them, an administration building, a research, maintenance, storage, utility or parking facility and all real and personal property, land, buildings, structures, facilities, equipment, fixtures and furnishings related to any of the foregoing or required or useful for the operation of a health facility. 
"Health facility" shall not include any facility, place or building used or to be used primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place for devotional activities or religious worship. 
(f)  Participating health institution means a private corporation or association authorized by the laws of the state to provide or operate a health facility as defined in this chapter and which, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, undertakes the financing of the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement of a health facility or undertakes the refunding or refinancing of obligations incurred to finance such acquisition, construction, rehabilitation or improvement. 
(g)  Revenues means amounts received by the city as repayment of principal, interest, and all other charges with respect to a loan, lease, sublease or sale agreement under this chapter, any proceeds received by the city from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with respect to rents, charges, fees, income and receipts derived by the city from the financing of a health facility under this chapter, any amounts received by the city as investment earnings on moneys deposited in any fund or account securing bonds, and such other moneys as the council may, in its discretion, lawfully designate as revenues. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 3, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-4. - Loans for health facilities. 
The city may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city shall deem proper, to any participating health institution for the cost of a health facility. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 4, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-5. - Refinancing loans for health facilities. 
The city may make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of, a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city shall deem proper, to any participating health institution to refund or refinance outstanding obligations of such participating health institution incurred to finance the cost of a health facility, including expenses incident to paying or otherwise discharging the obligations to be refunded or refinanced, whether such obligations were incurred prior to or after the enactment of this ordinance, if the city finds that such refunding or refinancing is in the public interest and either alleviates a financial or operating hardship of such participating health institution, or is in connection with other financing by the city for such participating health institution, or may be expected to result in lower costs of health care than would otherwise prevail and a saving to third parties, including, government, and to others who must pay for care, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 5, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-6. - Acquisition, construction, leasing and selling of health facilities. 
The city may acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip, own, and lease as lessee a health facility for the purpose of selling or leasing such health facility to a participating health institution, and may contract with such participating health institution to undertake on behalf of the city to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish and equip such health facility. 
The city may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the city shall deem proper, to a participating health institution any health facility owned by the city under this chapter, including a health facility conveyed to the city in connection with a financing under this chapter but not being financed or refinanced hereunder. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 6, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-7. - Fees. 
The city may charge participating health institutions application, commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 7, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-8. - Insurance. 
The city may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of the United States or of the State of California or of any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest, principal, rents, fees or other charges or any part thereof on any loan, lease or sale agreement or any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and may accept payment in such manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a participating health institution, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security for bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 8, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-9. - Rents and charges. 
The city may fix rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates for financing under this chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in interest rates on bonds, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses related to this chapter, including city administrative expenses. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 9, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-10. - Security for loans. 
The city may hold deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests as security for loans and other obligations under this chapter and may pledge or assign the same as security for repayment of bonds. Such deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests may be assigned to, and held on behalf of the city by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the city in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 10, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-11. - Professional services. 
The city may employ such engineering, architectural, financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the city for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 11, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-12. - Additional powers. 
In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this chapter, the city may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 12, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-13. - Issuance of bonds; bonds not debt of city. 
(a)  The city may, from time to time, issue bonds for any of the purposes specified in sections 19-4, 19-5 and 19-6. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of such bonus for registration. 
(b)  Every issue of bonds shall be a limited obligation of the city payable from all or any specified part of the revenues and the moneys and assets authorized in this chapter to be placed or assigned to secure payment of bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be the sole source of repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from specified revenues, moneys and assets. The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the city to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect: 
Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the city is pledged to the payment of the principal of or premium, if any, or interest on this bond. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 13, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-14. - Costs of issuance. 
In determining the amount of bonds to be issued, the city may include all costs of the issuance of such bonds, reserve funds and capitalized bond interest. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 14, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-15. - Resolution; bond provisions. 
Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as such resolution or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the city may provide. Bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the city shall determine. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 15, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-16. - Bond provisions. 
Any resolution authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds, or any indenture authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the city, may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of such bonds: 
(a)  The terms, conditions and form of such bonds and the interest and principal to be paid thereon: 
(b)  Limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of such bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such proceeds to secure the payment of such bonds; 
(c)  Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds; 
(d)  The setting aside of reserves and sinking funds and such other funds as are necessary or appropriate and the regulation and disposition thereof; 
(e)  The pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and of any other moneys or assets legally available therefor (including loans, deeds of trust, mortgages, leases, subleases, sales agreements and other contracts and security interests) and the use and disposition thereof, subject to such agreements with the holders of bonds as may then be outstanding; 
(f)  Limitation on the use of revenues for expenditures for operating, administration or other expenses of the city; 
(g)  Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of such bonds, and providing the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default, including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders; 
(h)  The appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the city and the holders of its bonds, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of trust, mortgages, leases, subleases, sales agreements, and any other contracts or security interests to such trustee, and the rights of such trustee; 
(i)  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given, and 
(j)  Any other provisions which the council may deem reasonable and proper for the purposes of this chapter and the security of the bondholders. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 16, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-17. - Pledge of revenues, money or property; lien. 
Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made. Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the city shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 17, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-18. - No personal liability. 
Neither the members of the council, the officers or employees of the city, nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof 
(Ord. No. NS1664, § 18,1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-19. - Purchase of bonds. 
The city shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to purchase its bonds. The city may hold, pledge, cancel or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreements with the bondholders. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 19, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-20. - Action by bondholders. 
Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the rights thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized thereby to be entered into by the city, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this chapter or by such resolution or indenture to be performed by the city or by any officer, employee or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of rates, fees, interest and charges authorized and required by the provisions of such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and collected. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 20, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-21. - Refunding bonds. 
(a)  The city may issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any bonds then outstanding including the payment of any redemption premiums thereof and any interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent date or dates of redemption, purchase, or maturity of such bonds. 
(b)  The proceeds of bonds issued for the purpose of refunding any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the city, be applied to the purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption of such outstanding bonds, either at their earliest or any subsequent redemption date or dates or upon the purchase or retirement at the maturity thereof and may, pending such application, be placed in escrow, to be applied to such purchase or retirement at maturity or redemption on such date or dates as may be determined by the city. 
(c)  Pending use for purchase, retirement at maturity or redemption of outstanding bonds, any proceeds held in escrow pursuant to subdivision (b) may be invested and reinvested as provided in the resolution or indenture. Any interest or other increment earned or realized on any such investment may be applied to the payment of the outstanding bonds to be refunded or to the payment of interest on the refunding bonds. 
(d)  All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 21, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-22. - Bond anticipation notes. 
In anticipation of the sale of bonds, the city may issue bond anticipation notes and may renew the same from time to time. Such notes shall be payable from any revenues or other moneys authorized by this chapter to be pledged to secure payment of bonds which are not otherwise pledged, or from the proceeds of sale of the bonds in anticipation of which they were issued. Such notes shall be issued in the same manner as bonds. Such notes and the resolution or indenture providing for their issuance may contain any provisions, conditions or limitations which a bond, or a resolution or indenture providing for the issuance thereof, may contain. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 22, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-23. - Validity of bonds. 
The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the city for approval of any financing or the making of any loan or the entering into of any agreement, or by the failure to make any loan or enter into any agreement, for which bonds are authorized to be issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 23, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-24. - Liberal construction. 
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 24, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-25. - Omissions not to affect validity of bonds. 
If the jurisdiction of the council to order the proposed act is not affected, any omission of any officer or the city in proceedings under this chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 25, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-26. - Full authority. 
This chapter is full authority for the issuance of bonds by the city for the purposes specified herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 26, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-27. - Additional authority. 
This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this chapter notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions, limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 27, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-28. - Chapter controlling. 
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 28, 1-3-83)  
Sec. 19-29. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. The council hereby declares that it would have adopted and passed this chapter and each word hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or words hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. NS-1664, § 29, 1-3-83)  
Chapter 20 - SPECIAL TAX FINANCING IMPROVEMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers of the city, § 200; city council, § 400 et seq.; city manager, § 500 et seq.; revenue and taxation, § 600 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and structures, Ch. 8; funds, Ch. 13; planning, Ch. 27; industrial development bonds, Ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and public works, Ch. 33; subdivisions, Ch. 34; taxation, Ch. 35; underground utility districts, Ch. 37; zoning Ch. 41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Santa Ana Special Tax Financing Improvement Code" and shall be referred to herein as the "code." 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-2. - Municipal and state affairs; authority conferred by code; applicability of laws. 
This code is adopted pursuant to section 200 of Article II of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana. In proceedings had pursuant to this code which are a municipal affair, any general laws referred to in this code are deemed a part of this code. 
In the event that any proceedings had pursuant to this code shall be adjudged a state affair, it is declared to be the intention that the proceedings were had pursuant to any applicable general law or laws. 
This code provides an alternative method of financing certain public and private capital facilities and municipal services. The provisions of this code shall not affect or limit any other provisions of law authorizing or providing for the furnishing of facilities or services or the raising of revenue for these purposes. The city may use the provisions of this code instead of or in conjunction with any other method of financing part or all of the cost of providing the authorized kinds of public and private capital facilities and municipal services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-3. - Conflicting provisions; severability. 
Any provision in this code which conflicts with any general law or act shall prevail over the other such provision in connection with any proceedings taken pursuant to this code. 
In the event any portion of this code shall be declared illegal, unenforceable or unconstitutional, such provision shall be deemed severable from the rest of the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-4. - Actions or determinations; proceedings. 
The city council may take any actions or make any determinations which it determines are necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this code and which are not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-5. - Establishment of community facilities district to finance certain services. 
A community facilities district may be established under this code to finance any one (1) or more municipal services within an area including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Police protection services including, but not limited to, criminal justice services. Criminal justice services shall not be limited to providing services for jails, detention facilities and juvenile halls. 
(b)  Fire protection and suppression services and ambulance and paramedic services. 
(c)  Recreation program services, library services and the operation and maintenance of parks, parkways; open space, and museums and cultural facilities. 
(d)  Flood and storm protection services including, but not limited to, the operation and maintenance of storm drainage systems. 
(e)  Maintenance of sanitary sewer facilities and storm drainage facilities of the city including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer mains, laterals, manholes, pump stations and appurtenances of the city to convey, treat and dispose of sewage, and all storm drainage lines, mains, inlets, channels and all appurtenances of the system of the city designed to convey stormwaters by cleaning, repairing and removal of debris, rubbish and other solid waste. 
(f)  Any other municipal service which the city is authorized by law to provide. 
For purposes of this code, municipal services that may be financed include the performance by employees of functions, operations, maintenance and repair activities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-6. - Other financing power of community facilities district. 
A community facilities district may also finance the purchase, construction, expansion, improvement or rehabilitation of any real or other tangible property with an estimated useful life of three (3) years or longer or may finance planning and design work which is directly related to the purchase, construction, expansion or rehabilitation of any real or tangible property. The facilities need not be physically located within the district. A district may finance the purchase of facilities whose construction has been completed before or after the adopted of the resolution of formation, if the facility is or was constructed pursuant to plans approved by the city and the facility is inspected by the city and found to be in compliance with applicable city building codes and standards. For example, a community facilities district may finance facilities including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Local park, recreation, parkway and open space facilities. 
(b)  Elementary and secondary school sites and structures. 
(c)  Libraries. 
(d)  The district may also finance the construction or undergrounding of natural gas pipeline facilities, telephone lines, facilities for the transmission or distribution of electrical energy, and cable television lines. The district may enter into an agreement with a public utility to utilize those facilities to provide a particular service and for the conveyance of those facilities to the public utility. Any reimbursement by the public utility made to the district shall be utilized to reduce or minimize the special tax levied within the district or improvement area, or to construct or acquire additional facilities within the district or improvement area, as specified in the resolution of formation. 
(e)  The district may also pay in full all amounts necessary to eliminate any fixed special assessment liens or to repay or defease any indebtedness secured by any tax, fee, charge or assessment levied within the area of a community facilities district or may pay debt service on that indebtedness. 
(f)  Improvements to or the rehabilitation of real property related to fire suppression and/or asbestos removal. 
(g)  Any other facilities, public or private, which the city is authorized by law to contribute revenue to, or construct, own or operate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-7. - School facilities financed by community facilities district; cost sharing by state allocation board; ownership transferred to state; saving. 
(a)  All or any part of the cost of any school facilities financed by a community facilities district may be shared by the state allocation board pursuant to Section 17718.5 of the California Education Code. 
(b)  If the state allocation board shares in any part of the cost of the school facilities, the ownership of those facilities and the real property upon which the facilities are located shall be transferred to the State of California. A copy of the deed by which the title is transferred shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located. In addition, the community facilities district shall take one (1) or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Reduce the amount of bonds authorized to be issued by the community facilities district. 
(2)  Reduce the amount of any special tax which is levied within the community facilities district. 
(3)  Reduce the amount of outstanding bonds or provide for the defeasance of outstanding bonds. 
(4)  Shorten the period of time during which a special tax is levied within the community facilities district. 
(c)  The amount of savings achieved pursuant to the actions taken in accordance with subsection (b) shall be in an amount equal to the amount of costs shared by the state allocation board pursuant to Section 17718.5 of the California Education Code. 
(d)  The city council hereby finds and declares that this section 20-7 is intended to be in furtherance and not in derogation of education and school financing and thus an appropriate part of this code, despite the fact that education is a state affair. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-8. - Transfer of funds; use of money; interest. 
The city council may from time to time transfer moneys to a community facilities district or to a zone within a community facilities district, for the benefit of the district or zone, from any funds available to the city. The city council also may appropriate any of the city's available moneys to a revolving fund to be used for the acquisition of real or personal property, engineering or other services, or the construction of structures or improvements needed in whole or in part to provide one (1) or more of the facilities or services of a community facilities district. 
The district may reimburse the city for any amount transferred or appropriated pursuant to this section 20-8, together with interest at the rate per annum as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-9. - Advances of funds or work-in-kind; acceptance by legislative body; use; repayment; agreement; conditions. 
(a)  At any time either before or after the formation of a community facilities district, the city council may accept advances of funds or work-in-kind from any source including, but not limited to, private persons or private entities and may provide for the use of those funds or that work-in-kind for any authorized purpose including, but not limited to, paying any cost incurred by the city in creating a community facilities district. The city council may enter into an agreement with the person or entity advancing the funds or work-in-kind to repay all or a portion of the funds advanced, or to reimburse the person or entity for the value or cost, whichever is less, of the work-in-kind as determined by the city council, with or without interest, under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The proposal to repay the funds or the value or cost of the work-in-kind, whichever is less, is included in the resolution of intention or the resolution of formation to establish the district, or in the resolution of consideration to alter the types of public facilities and services provided within an established district. 
(2)  Any proposed special tax or change in a special tax is approved by the qualified electors of the district pursuant to this code. Any agreement may specify that, if the qualified electors of the district do not approve the proposed special tax or change in a special tax, the local agency shall return any funds which have not been committed for any authorized purpose by the time of the election to the person or entity advancing the funds. 
(3)  Any work-in-kind accepted pursuant to this section shall have been performed or constructed pursuant to plans approved by the city, and the work-in-kind shall be inspected by the city and found to be in compliance with applicable city building codes and standards. 
(b)  Any such agreement shall not constitute a debt or liability of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-10. - Liberal construction of code; error, irregularity, neglect or omission. 
This code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes. No error, irregularity, and no neglect or omission of any officer in any procedure taken under this code, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the city council to order the installation of the facility or the provisions of service or the levy of special taxes, shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any levy for the costs of a facility or service. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-11. - Failure to receive notice, resolution, order or other matter not affecting proceedings. 
The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution, order or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceedings taken under this code or prevent the legislative body from proceeding with any hearing so notice. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-12. - Application of code; municipal officials; powers and duties. 
This code applies insofar as the city has the power to install or contribute revenue for any of the facilities or provide or contribute revenue for any of the services authorized under this code. The officers of the city who have similar powers and duties as the municipal officers referred to in this code shall have the powers and duties given by this code to the municipal officials. Where no similar officer exists, the city manager of the city shall appoint a person or designate an officer to perform the duties under this code. 
The city may initiate proceedings pursuant to section 20-18 to include territory proposed for annexation to the city within a community facilities district, if a petition or resolution of application for the annexation of the territory to the city has been accepted for filing and a certificate of filing has been issued by the executive officer of the city formation commission at the time the proceedings to create the district are initiated. Those proceedings may be completed only if the annexation of the territory to the city is completed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-13. - Joint community facilities agreement or joint exercise of powers agreement. 
(a)  The city council may enter into a joint community facilities agreement with any other local agency pursuant to this section or into a joint exercise of powers agreement pursuant Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code to exercise any power authorized by this chapter, if the city council adopts a resolution declaring that such a joint agreement would be beneficial to the residents of the city or the district. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code, a contracting party may use the proceeds of any special tax or charge levied pursuant to this code or of any bonds or other indebtedness issued pursuant to this chapter to provide facilities or services which that contracting party is otherwise authorized by law to provide, even though another contracting party does not have the power to provide those facilities or services. 
(c)  The agreement entered into pursuant to this section 20-13 may provide for the division of responsibility to provide any of the facilities or services among the entries entering into the agreement. The agreement shall provide for the allocation and distribution of the proceeds of any special tax levy among the parties to the agreement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-14. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this article shall govern the construction of this code. 
Clerk means the city clerk of the city. 
Community facilities district or district means a district established pursuant to this code for the sole purpose of financing facilities and/or services. 
Cost means the expense of constructing or purchasing the facility and of related land, right-of-way, easements, including incidental expenses, and the cost of providing authorized services, including incidental expenses. 
Debt means any binding obligation to repay a sum of money, including obligations in the form of bonds, certificates of participation, long-term leases, loans from government agencies, or loans from banks, other financial institutions, private businesses or individuals. 
Incidental expense includes all of the following: 
(1)  The cost of planning and designing facilities to be financed pursuant to this code, including the cost of environmental evaluations of those facilities. 
(2)  The costs associated with the creation of the district, issuance of bonds, determination of the amount of taxes, collection of taxes, payment of taxes, or costs otherwise incurred in order to carry out the authorized purposes of the district. 
(3)  Any other expenses incidental to the management, administration, completion and inspection of the construction and/or acquisition of the facilities. 
Landowner or owner or owner of land means any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized assessment roll or otherwise known to be the owner of the land by the city clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, "landowner" or "owner" or "owner of land" means, with respect to any land which is the subject of a condemnation action, the person entitled to possession of the land. The city council has no obligation to obtain other information as to the ownership of the land, and its determination of ownership shall be final and conclusive for the purposes of this code. The city or any other public agency is not a landowner or owner of land for purposes of this code, unless the land owned by the city or any public agency or any leasehold therein would be subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this code, as provided in sections 20-15 or 20-16. 
Legislative body means the legislative body or governing board of any local agency and, with respect to the city, shall mean the city council. 
Local agency means any city or county, whether general law or chartered, special district, school district, joint powers entity created pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1, or any other municipal corporation, district or political subdivision of the state. 
Rate means a single rate of tax or a schedule of rates. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-15. - Special tax—Property acquired by public entity through negotiated transaction or by gift or devise; voluntary application of special tax. 
If property not otherwise exempt from a special tax levied pursuant to this code is acquired by a public entity through a negotiated transaction or by gift or devise, the special tax shall, notwithstanding section 20-54, continue to be levied on the property acquired and shall be enforceable against the public entity that acquired the property. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any public agency other than a city, county or school district may subject property owned by it to the levy of special taxes, if it shall certify to the city council: (a) its agreement to do so; (b) that it intends to dispose of such property by transfer to a nongovernmental agency at some time in the future; and (c) that it agrees to cooperate in the sale of the property if necessary to obtain funds to pay any special taxes levied upon such property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-16. - Same—Special assessment on property acquired by public entity through eminent domain. 
If property subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this code is acquired by the city or any public entity or entities through eminent domain proceedings, the obligation to pay the special tax shall be treated, pursuant to Section 1265.250 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, as if it were a special annual assessment. For this purpose, the present value of the obligation to pay a special tax to pay the principal and interest on any indebtedness incurred by the district prior to the date of apportionment determined pursuant to Section 5082 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code shall be treated the same as a fixed lien special assessment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-17. - Lease of possessory interest by exempt person or entity to nonexempt person or entity; lease provisions; collection. 
(a)  If a public agency owning property, including property held in trust for any beneficiary, which is exempt from a special tax pursuant to section 20-54 grants a leasehold or other possessory interest in the property to a nonexempt person or entity, the special tax shall, notwithstanding section 20-54, be levied on the leasehold or possessory interest and shall be payable by the owner of the leasehold or possessory interest. 
(b)  When entering into a lease or other written contract creating a possessory interest that may be subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (a), the public agency shall include or cause to be included in the contract a statement that the property interest may be subject to special taxation pursuant to this chapter, and that the party in whom the possessory interest is vested may be subject to the payment of special taxes levied on the interest. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall not, however, invalidate the contract. 
(c)  If the special tax on any possessory interest levied pursuant to subsection (a) is unpaid when due, the tax collector may use those collection procedures which are available for the collection of assessments on the unsecured roll. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEEDINGS TO CREATE COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 20-18. - Institution of proceeding; request; petition; fee. 
Proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district may be instituted by the city council on its own initiative or shall be instituted by the city council when any of the following occurs: 
(a)  A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by the requisite number of registered voters, as specified in subsection (d) of section 20-19, is filed with the city clerk. The petition may consist of any number of separate instruments, each of which shall comply with all of the requirements of the petition, except as to the number of signatures. 
(b)  A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by landowners owning the requisite portion of the area of the proposed district, as specified in section (d) of section 20-19, is filed with the city clerk. 
The petitions filed pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount which the finance director determines is sufficient to compensate the city for all costs incurred in conducting proceedings to create a district pursuant to this code and shall not be considered received until such payment has been made to the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-19. - Petition; contents; findings as to requisite number of signers. 
A petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Request the city council to institute proceedings to establish a community facilities district pursuant to this code. 
(b)  Describe the boundaries of the territory which is proposed for inclusion in the district. 
(c)  Generally state the type or types of facilities and/or services to be financed by the district. 
(d)  Be signed by not less than ten (10) per cent of the registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by owners of not less than ten (10) per cent of the area of land proposed to be included within the district. 
If the city council finds that the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by the requisite number of owners of land proposed to be included within the district, that finding shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-20. - Resolution of intention to establish district—Time for adoption. 
Within six (6) months after a petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district is filed with the city clerk, the city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district in the form specified in section 20-21. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-21. - Same—Contents. 
Proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district shall be instituted by the adoption of a resolution of intention to establish the district, which shall do all of the following: 
(a)  State that a community facilities district is proposed to be established under the terms of this code and describe the boundaries of the territory proposed for inclusion in the district, which may be accomplished by reference to a map on file in the office of the city clerk, showing the proposed community facilities district. 
(b)  State the name proposed for the district in substantially the following form: "Community Facilities District No. _______ of the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Generally state the type or types of facilities and/or services proposed to be financed by the district pursuant to this code. If the purchase of completed facilities or the incurring of incidental expenses is proposed, the resolution may identify those facilities or expenses. 
(d)  State that, except where funds are otherwise available, a special tax sufficient to pay for all facilities and/or services, secured by recordation of a continuing lien against all nonexempt real property in the district, will be annually levied within the area of the district. The resolution shall specify the rate and method of apportionment and manner of collection of the special tax in sufficient detail to allow each landowner or resident within the proposed district to estimate the maximum amount that he or she will have to pay. 
(e)  Fix a time and place for a public hearing on the establishment of the district, which shall not be less than ten (10) or more than sixty (60) days after the adoption of the resolution, and direct the giving of notice as provided in sections 20-23 and, if desired, 20-24 hereof. 
(f)  Direct the preparation and filing of the report under section 20-22 hereof. 
(g)  Contain a description of the proposed voting procedure. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-22. - Reports, estimates of costs by responsible officers; part of hearing record. 
At the time of the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district, the city council shall direct the finance director or another appropriate officer to file or caused to be prepared and filed at or before the time of the hearing a report with the city clerk containing a brief description of the facilities and services proposed to be financed by type and an estimate of the cost of providing those facilities and services, together with an estimate of the costs of any bond issuance and the city's administration of the district. If the purchase of completed facilities or the payment of incidental expenses is proposed, the report shall contain an estimate of the cost of those facilities or incidental expenses. The report shall be made a part of the record of the hearing on the resolution of intention to establish the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-23. - Required notice of hearing. 
(a)  The city clerk shall publish a notice of the hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation circulated in the proposed district. Publication shall be complete at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  The notice shall contain all of the following information: 
(1)  The text of the resolution of intention to establish the district. 
(2)  The time and place of the hearing on the establishment of the district. 
(3)  A statement that at the hearing the testimony of all interested persons or taxpayers for or against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district or the furnishing of specified types of facilities and/or services will be heard. The notice shall also describe; in summary; the effect of protests made by registered voters or landowners against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district, the furnishing of a specified type of facilities or services, or a specified special tax, as provided in section 20-25. 
(4)  A description of the proposed voting procedure. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-24. - Optional notice of hearing. 
The city council may also direct the city clerk to give notice of the hearing by first class mail to each registered voter and to each landowner within the proposed district. This notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing and shall contain the same information as is required to be contained in the notice published pursuant to section 20-23, except that the entire text of the resolution of intention may be omitted if the date, number and fact of its adoption are shown and the proposed facilities and/or services are briefly described and the proposed amounts and methods of apportionment of the special tax are shown. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-25. - Protests; interested persons or taxpayer. 
At the hearing, protests against the establishment of the district, the extent of the district, or the furnishing of specified types of facilities or services within the district may be made orally or in writing by any interest persons or taxpayers. Any protests pertaining to the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings shall be in writing and shall clearly set forth the alleged irregularities and defects. To be counted under section 20-26 any written protest shall be filed with the city clerk on or before the time fixed for the hearing. The city council may waive any irregularities in the form or content of any written protest and at the hearing may correct minor defects in the proceedings. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing at any time before the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-26. - Written protest; further proceedings to create district; elimination of special tax or types of facilities or services from resolution of formation. 
If fifty (50) per cent or more of the registered voters or six (6) registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the territory proposed to be included in the district, or the owners of one-half or more of the area of the land in the territory proposed to be included in the district and not exempt from the special tax, file written protests against the establishment of the district, and protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the value of the protests to less than a majority, no further proceeding to create the specified community facilities district or to levy the specified special tax shall be taken for a period of six (6) months from the date of the decision of the city council. 
If the majority protests are only against the furnishing of a specified type or types of facilities or services within the proposed district or against levying a specified special tax, those types of facilities or services or the specified special tax shall be eliminated from the resolution of formation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-27. - Hearing; continuances; time limitation; exception; modification of resolution of intention; determination to abandon or proceed with establishment of district. 
The hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice under section 20-23 or 20-24 but shall be completed within six (6) months of the original hearing date. The city council may modify the resolution of intention by eliminating proposed facilities or services, or by changing the rate or method of apportionment of the proposed special tax so as to reduce the maximum special tax to be levied on all or a portion of the property within the proposed district, or by removing territory from the proposed district. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may abandon the proposed establishment of the community facilities district or may, after passing upon all protests, determine to proceed with establishing the district, except as provided in section 20-26 hereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-28. - Adoption of resolution of formation establishing district; contents; finding concerning validity and conformity of prior proceedings. 
If the city council determines to establish the district, it shall adopt a resolution of formation establishing the district. The resolution of formation shall incorporate by reference all of the information required to be included in the resolution of intention to establish the district specified in section 20-21. If a special tax is proposed to be levied in the district to pay for any facilities and/or services and the special tax has not been eliminated by majority protest pursuant to section 20-26, the resolution shall state that fact and all of the following: 
(1)  Determine whether all proceedings were valid and in conformity with the requirements of this code, which finding shall be final and conclusive. 
(2)  State that the proposed special tax to be levied within the district has not been precluded by majority protest pursuant to section 20-26. 
(3)  Identify any facilities and/or services, as may be changed under section 20-26 or 20-27 hereof, proposed to be funded with the proceeds of the special tax. 
(4)  Set forth the proposed rate and method of apportionment of the special tax. 
(5)  Set forth the name, address and telephone number of the office, department or bureau of the city which will be responsible for preparing annually a current roll of special tax levy obligations by assessor's parcel number and which will be responsible for estimating future special tax levies pursuant to section 20-25. 
(6)  State that, upon recordation of a notice of special tax lien pursuant to Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code, a continuing lien to secure each levy of the special tax shall attach to all nonexempt real property in the district, and this lien shall continue in force and effect until the special tax obligation is prepaid and permanently satisfied and the lien canceled in accordance with law or until collection of the tax by the city council ceases. 
(7)  Set forth the county of recordation and the book and page in the Book of Maps of Assessments and Community Facilities Districts in the county recorder's office where the boundary map of the proposed community facilities district has been recorded pursuant to Sections 3111 and 3113 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(8)  Provide for the conduct of the election required under section 20-33 hereof. 
(9)  At the option of the city council, provide for the establishment of or change in the appropriations limit under section 20-32 hereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-29. - Special tax; basis for apportionment. 
A tax imposed pursuant to this code is a special tax and not a special assessment, and there is no requirement that the tax be apportioned on the basis of benefit to any property. However, a special tax levied pursuant to this code may be on or based on benefit received by parcels of real property, the cost of providing facilities and/or services available to each parcel, or any other reasonable basis as determined by the city council. A special tax apportioned on any of these bases shall not be construed to be on or based upon the ownership of real property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-30. - Noncontiguous areas; alteration of boundaries. 
(a)  A community facilities district may include areas of territory that are not contiguous. 
(b)  In establishing the boundaries of the district, the city council may alter the exterior boundaries of the district to include less territory than that described in the recorded boundary map, but it may not include any territory not described in that map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-31. - Boundaries of district; inclusion of lands devoted to agricultural, timber or livestock uses. 
Land devoted primarily to agricultural, timber or livestock uses and being used for the commercial production of agricultural, timber or livestock products may be included in a community facilities district only if such land is contiguous to other land which is included within the described exterior boundaries of the community facilities district and only if the legislative body finds that the land will be benefited by any of the types of public facilities and services proposed to be provided within the district. The land may, however, be included in the community facilities district if the owner requests its inclusion. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-32. - Establishing or changing appropriations limit; election on propositions, adjustment. 
The city council may submit a proposition to establish or change the appropriations limit, as defined by subdivision (h) of Section 8 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution, of a community facilities district to the qualified electors of a proposed or established district. The proposition establishing or changing the appropriations limit shall become effective if approved by the qualified electors voting on the proposition and shall be adjusted for changes in the cost of living and changes in population, as defined by subdivisions (b) and (c) of Section 7901, except that the change in population may be estimated by the legislative body in the absence of an estimate by the State of California Department of Finance, and in accordance with Section 1 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution. For purposes of adjusting for changes in population, the population of the district shall be deemed to be at least one (1) person during each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-33. - Special tax levy; election; voter qualifications; ballots. 
(a)  By resolution, the city council shall submit the levy of any special taxes to the qualified electors of the proposed community facilities district in the next general election or in a special election to be held, notwithstanding any other requirement, including any requirement that elections be held on specified dates, contained in the California Elections code, at least five (5) days but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, following the adoption of the resolution of formation. The legislative body shall provide to the official conducting the election the resolution of formation, a certified map of sufficient scale and clarity to show the boundaries of the district, and a sufficient description to allow the election official to determine the boundaries of the district after the adoption of the resolution of formation, if requested by the official conducting the election. Assessor's parcel numbers for the land within the district shall be included if it is a landowner election or the district does not conform to an existing district's boundaries, if requested by the official conducting the election. If the election is to be held less than one hundred twenty-five (125) days following the adoption of the resolution of formation and the election official is other than the city clerk, the concurrence of the election official conducting the election shall be required. However, any time limits specified by this section or requirement pertaining to the conduct of the election may be waived with the unanimous consent of the qualified electors of the proposed district and the concurrence of the election official conducting the election. In the event of such unanimous waiver, the election official shall be the city clerk. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), if at least twelve (12) persons, who need not necessarily be the same twelve (12) persons, have been registered to vote within the territory of the proposed community facilities district for each of the ninety (90) days preceding the date of the protest hearing, the vote shall be by the registered voters of the proposed district, with each voter having one (1) vote. Otherwise, the vote shall be by the landowners of the proposed district, and each landowner who is the owner of record at the close of the protest hearing, or the authorized representative thereof, shall have one (1) vote for each acre or portion of an acre of land that he or she owns within the proposed community facilities district. The number of votes to be voted by a particular landowner shall be specified on the ballot provided to that landowner. 
(c)  If the proposed special tax will not be apportioned in any tax year on any portion of property in the district in residential use in that tax year, as determined by the legislative body, the legislative body may provide that the vote shall be by the landowners of the proposed district whose property would be subject to the tax if it were levied at the time of the election. Each of these landowners shall have one (1) vote for each acre or portion thereof that the landowner owns within the proposed district which would be subject to the proposed tax if it were levied at the time of the election. 
(d)  Ballots for the special election authorized by subsection (a) may be distributed to qualified electors by mail with return postage prepaid or by personal service by the election official. The election official may provide a certificate of the proper mailing or delivery of ballots, which certificate shall constitute conclusive proof of mailing or delivery in the absence of fraud. The voted ballots shall be returned to the election officer conducting the election not later than the time specified in the resolution calling the election. However, if all the qualified voters have voted, the election shall be closed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-34. - Elections; law governing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this code, the provisions of law regulating elections of the city, insofar as they may be applicable, shall govern all elections conducted pursuant to this code. Except as provided in subsection (b), there shall be prepared and included in the ballot material provided to each voter an impartial analysis, and arguments and rebuttals, if any. 
(b)  Analysis and arguments may be waived with the unanimous consent of all the qualified electors. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-35. - Ballot materials. 
(a)  If the election is to be conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the election official conducting the election shall provide ballots and election materials pursuant to subsection (d) of section 20-33 and section 20-34, together with all supplies and instructions necessary for the use and return of the ballot. 
(b)  The identification envelope for return of ballots used in landowner elections shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the landowner. 
(2)  The address of the landowner. 
(3)  A declaration, under penalty of perjury, stating that the voter is the owner of record or the authorized representative of the landowner entitled to vote and is the person whose name appears on the identification envelope. 
(4)  The date of signing and place of execution of the declaration described in subsection (b)(3) above. 
(5)  The printed name and signature of the voter. 
(6)  The address of the voter. 
(7)  A notice that the envelope contains an official ballot and is to be opened only by the election official. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-36. - Special tax levy; effect of voter approval or disapproval. 
(a)  After the canvass of returns of any election pursuant to section 20-33, the city council may levy any special tax as specified in the resolution of formation adopted pursuant to section 20-28 within the territory of the district, if two-thirds of the votes cast upon the question of levying the tax are in favor of levying that tax. 
(b)  After the canvass of returns of any election conducted pursuant to section 20-33, the city council shall take no further action with respect to levying the specified special tax within the community facilities district for six (6) months from the date of the election, if the question of levying that specified special tax fails to receive approval by two-thirds of the votes cast upon the question. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-37. - Application of California Streets and Highways Code with respect to special taxes; filings. 
(a)  Upon a determination by the city council that the requisite two-thirds of votes cast in an election held pursuant to section 20-33 are in favor of levying the special tax, the city clerk shall record or cause to be recorded the notice of special tax lien provided for in Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code, whereupon the lien of the special tax shall attach as provided in Section 3115.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code. The notice of special tax lien shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder in each county in which any portion of the district is located. 
(b)  Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 3100) of the California Streets and Highways Code applies with respect to any special tax levied pursuant to this code. This code is a "principal act" as that term is defined in Section 3100 of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-38. - Special tax; levy and apportionment. 
Upon approval of a special tax pursuant to section 20-36(a), the special tax may be levied only at the rate and may be apportioned only in the manner specified in the resolution of formation, except as provided in Article III and except that the legislative body may levy the special tax at a rate lower than that specified in the resolution of formation. In addition, the special tax may be levied only so long as it is needed to pay the principal and interest on debt incurred in order to construct facilities under authority of this code, or so long as it is needed to pay the costs and incidental expenses of services or of the construction of facilities authorized by this code. 
When the city council determines that the special tax shall cease to be levied, the city council shall direct the city clerk to record a notice of cessation of special tax, which shall state that the obligation to pay the special tax has ceased and that the lien imposed by the notice of special tax lien is extinguished. The notice of cessation of special tax shall identify the book and page of the Book of Maps of Assessment and Community Facilities Districts where in the map of the boundaries of the district is recorded and where the notice of special tax lien is recorded. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
ARTICLE III. - CHANGES IN TYPES OF AUTHORIZED FACILITIES, SERVICES AND SPECIAL TAXES 
 
Sec. 20-39. - Types of facilities and services provided. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city council may, at any time, after conducting a public hearing, eliminate one (1) or more of the types of facilities and services specified in the resolution of formation to establish the existing district but may not finance any types of facilities and services that were not specified in the resolution of formation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-40. - Resolution of consideration—Change in facilities, services and taxes. 
The city council shall not adopt a resolution of consideration to reduce the rate of any special tax or terminate the levy of any special tax, if the proceeds of that tax are being utilized to retire any debt incurred pursuant to this code, unless the city council determines that the reduction or termination of that tax would not interfere with the timely retirement of that debt. Otherwise, the city council may adopt a resolution of consideration when: 
(a)  If the city council determines that the public convenience and necessity require any change in the types of authorized facilities or services which should be financed by an established community facilities district, that the rate or method of apportionment of a special tax should be changed, or that a new special tax should be proposed, the city council may adopt a resolution of consideration to alter the types of facilities or services to be financed by the district, to levy a new special tax or special taxes, or, except as provided in subsection (b), to alter the rate or method of apportionment of the special tax; or 
(b)  If a petition signed by fifty (50) per cent or more of the registered voters residing in the district or by the owners of fifty (50) per cent or more of the territory within the district is filed with the city clerk requesting that proceedings be commenced to change the types of facilities or services financed by the district or that the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax be changed or that a new special tax be levied, the city council shall within ninety (90) days thereafter adopt a resolution of consideration in the form specified in section 20-41 to make those changes within the community facilities. Any petition filed by landowners shall be accompanied by the payment of such fee as the finance director determines is sufficient to compensate the city for all costs incurred in conducting pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-41. - Same—Form. 
The resolution of consideration shall do all of the following: 
(a)  State the name of the existing district and refer to the resolution of formation for further particulars. 
(b)  Generally describe the territory included in the district or make reference to the recorded boundary map thereof. 
(c)  Specify the changes in facilities and/or services which the district is authorized to finance. 
(d)  Specify any new special taxes which would be levied to pay for new or existing facilities and services and any proposed alteration to the rate of method or apportionment of an existing special tax. 
(e)  Fix a time and place for a hearing upon the resolution of consideration which shall not be less than ten (10) or more than sixty (60) days after the adoption of the resolution of consideration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-42. - Notice of hearing. 
The city clerk shall give or cause to be given notice of the hearing in the same manner, containing the same information, as applicable, and within the same time as provided for the giving of notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district under section 20-23 hereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-43. - Protests; elimination from resolution; continuation, hearing. 
The provisions of sections 20-25 through 20-38 shall apply to the proceedings for changes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-44. - Dissolution of districts. 
The legislative body may, by code, dissolve any existing district which it has created upon making all of the following determinations: 
(a)  That the district is not obligated to pay any outstanding debt; and 
(b)  That the district has no authorization to levy any special tax. 
Upon dissolving a district, the city council shall cause an addendum to be recorded to the notice of special tax lien recorded pursuant to Section 3114.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code which shall state that the community facilities district and all associated liens, if any, have been dissolved. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
ARTICLE IV. - ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY 
 
Sec. 20-45. - Authorization. 
The city council may annex territory to an existing community facilities district as provided in this article. The annexed territory need not be contiguous to territory included in the existing community facilities district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-46. - Resolution of intention—Adoption. 
If the city council determines that public convenience and necessity require that territory be added to an existing community facilities district, or if one (1) or more of the voters residing within certain territory or landowners request the city council to include territory within the district, the city council may adopt a resolution of intention to annex the territory. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-47. - Same—Contents. 
The resolution of intention to annex the territory shall do all of the following: 
(a)  State the name of the existing community facilities district. 
(b)  Generally describe the territory included in the existing district and the territory proposed to be annexed. 
(c)  Specify the types of facilities and/or services provided pursuant to this code in the existing district and the types of facilities and/or services to be provided in the territory proposed to be annexed; and include a plan for sharing facilities and providing services that will be provided in common within the existing district and the territory proposed to be annexed. 
(d)  Specify any special taxes which would be levied within the territory proposed to be annexed to pay for facilities and/or services provided pursuant to this code within that territory. A special tax proposed to pay for services to be supplied within the territory proposed to be annexed shall be equal to any special tax levied to pay for the same services in the existing district, except that a higher or lower tax may be levied within the territory proposed to be annexed to the extent that the actual cost of providing the services in that territory is higher or lower than the cost of providing the services in that territory is higher or lower than the cost of providing those services in the existing district. A special tax proposed to pay for facilities financed with bonds secured by the existing community facilities district shall be the same as the tax levied in the existing district for that purpose, except that a higher special tax may be levied for that purpose within the territory proposed to be annexed to compensate for the interest and principal previously paid by the existing community facilities district, less any depreciation allocable to the facility as determined by the city council in its sole discretion. 
(e)  Specify any alteration in the special tax rate levied within the existing community facilities district as a result of the proposed annexation. The maximum tax rate in the existing community facilities district may not be increased as a result of proceedings pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Fix a time and place for a hearing upon the resolution which shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than sixty (60) days after the adoption by the city council of the resolution of intention to annex territory pursuant to section 20-47. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-48. - Notice of hearing. 
The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing in the same manner and within the same time as provided for the giving of notice of a hearing on a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district, as required by section 20-47. 
The notice shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Contain the text of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 20-47. 
(b)  State the time and place for the hearing. 
(c)  State that at the hearing the testimony of all interested persons for or against the annexation of territory to the community facilities district or the levying of special taxes within the territory proposed to be annexed will be heard. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-49. - Protests. 
At the hearing, protests against the proposals described in the resolution of intention may be made orally by any interested person. Any protests pertaining to the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings shall be in writing and shall clearly set forth the irregularities or defects to which objection is made. All written protests shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the time fixed for the hearing. The city council may waive any irregularities in the form or content of any written protest and at the hearing may correct minor defects in the proceedings. Written protests may be withdrawn in writing at any time before the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-50. - Abandonment of proposal; required number of written protests. 
If fifty (50) per cent or more of the registered voters or six (6) registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the existing community facilities district, or if fifty (50) per cent or more of the registered voters or six (6) registered voters, whichever is more, residing within the territory proposed for annexation, or if the owners of one-half or more of the area of land in the territory proposed to be annexed, file written protests against the proposed additions of territory to the existing community facilities district, and protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the protests to less than a majority, no further proceedings shall be undertaken for a period of six (6) months from the date of decision of the city council on the issues discussed at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-51. - Continuance and duration of hearing; abandonment of proceedings; submission of special tax question to electors. 
The hearing may be continued from time to time but shall be completed within six (6) months. At the conclusion of the hearing, the legislative body may abandon the proceedings or may, after passing upon all protests, submit the question of levying a special tax within the area proposed to be annexed to the existing community facilities district to the qualified electors of the area proposed to be annexed, in the manner specified for elections in Article II. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-52. - Addition of territory will full legal effect; special tax levy. 
After the canvass of returns of any election conducted in accordance with section 20-51, the city council shall determine that the area proposed to be annexed is added to and part of the existing community facilities district with full legal effect, and the city council may levy any special tax within the annexed territory, as specified in the resolution of intention to annex adopted pursuant to section 20-46, if two-thirds of the votes cast on the proposition are in favor of levying the special tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-53. - Failure to receive approval of two-thirds of voters; prohibition of further action. 
After the canvass of returns of any election conducted in accordance with section 20-51, the city council shall take no further action on annexing the territory proposed to be annexed to the community facilities district for a period of six (6) months from the date of the election if less than two-thirds of the votes cast on the proposition are in favor of levying the special tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURES FOR LEVYING 
 
Sec. 20-54. - Ordinance; tax rate and apportionment; exemption of governmental properties and entities from special tax; use of tax proceeds; tax collection, penalties, etc. 
After a community facilities district has been created and authorized to levy specified special taxes pursuant to Article II, Article III or Article IV, the city council may, by Code, levy the special taxes at the rate and apportion them in the manner specified in the resolution of formation or consideration, as applicable, adopted pursuant to Article II, Article III or Article IV. Any such code, after adoption, shall remain in effect until repealed by a later code. The city council may, by resolution, clarify any aspect of the levy of the special tax as provided by the code. 
Properties or entities of the state, federal or other local governments shall, except as otherwise provided in sections 20-15, 20-16 or 20-17, be exempt from the special tax. No other properties or entities are exempt from the special tax unless the properties or entities are expressly exempted in the resolution of formation to establish a district adopted pursuant to section 20-28 or in a resolution of consideration to levy a new special tax or special taxes or to alter the rate or method of apportionment of an existing special tax as provided in section 20-41. 
The proceeds of any special tax may only be used to pay, in whole or part, the cost of providing facilities, services and incidental expenses of the city or the district pursuant to this code. The special tax shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures, sale and lien priority in case of delinquency as is provided for ad valorem taxes, unless another procedure has been authorized in the resolution of formation establishing the district and adopted by the city council. The tax collector may collect the special tax at intervals as specified in the resolution of formation, including intervals different from the intervals at which the ordinary ad valorem property taxes are collected. The tax collector may deduct the reasonable administrative costs incurred in collecting the special tax. 
All special taxes levied by a community facilities district shall be secured by the lien imposed pursuant to Section 3115.5 of the California Streets and Highways Code. This lien shall be a continuing lien and shall secure each levy of special taxes. The lien of the special tax shall continue in force and effect until the special tax obligation is prepaid, permanently satisfied and canceled, or until the special tax ceases to be levied by the city council in the manner provided in section 20-37. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-55. - Designation of office for special tax computation. 
The city council shall designate an office, department or bureau of the city which shall be responsible for annually preparing the current roll of special tax levy obligations by assessor's parcel number on nonexempt property within the district and which will be responsible for estimating future special tax levies. The designated office, department or bureau shall establish procedures to promptly respond to inquiries concerning current and future estimated tax liability. Neither the designated office, department or bureau nor the city council shall be liable if any estimate of future tax liability is inaccurate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-56. - Actions or proceedings to attack, review, set aside, void or annul levy of special tax or increase in special tax; time for commencement; time for perfection of appeal from final judgment. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the levy of a special tax or an increase in a special tax pursuant to this code, or bonded indebtedness authorized to be incurred pursuant to this code shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after the special tax or the bonded indebtedness, as applicable, is approved by the voters. Any appeal from a final judgment in that action or proceeding shall be perfected within thirty (30) days after the entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-57. - Disclosure of the special tax. 
(a)  If a lot, parcel or unit of a subdivision is subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this code for which a public report is not required pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 11010) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 4 of the California Business and Professions Code, the subdivider, his or her agent or representative shall not sell, or lease for a term exceeding five (5) years, the lot, parcel or unit or cause it to be sold or leased for a term exceeding five (5) years, until the prospective purchaser or lessee of the lot, parcel or unit has been furnished with and has signed a written notice as provided in this section. The notice shall contain the heading "NOTICE OF SPECIAL TAX" in type no smaller than eight-point type and shall state the following in clear and simple language: 
(1)  That the property being purchased is or will be subject to a special tax. 
(2)  The maximum annual amount of the special tax and the number of years for which it will be levied. 
(3)  The types of facilities or services to be paid for with the proceeds of the special tax. 
(b)  "Subdivision," as used in subsection (a), means improved or unimproved land that is divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, into two (2) or more lots, parcels or units for residential use and includes a condominium project, as defined by Section 1350, a community apartment project, a stock cooperative, and a limited-equity housing cooperative, as defined in Sections 11004, 11003.2 and 11003.4, respectively, of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(c)  If any disclosure required to be made by this section is delivered after the execution of an agreement to purchase, the buyer shall have three (3) days after delivery in person or five (5) days after delivery by deposit in the mail to terminate his or her agreement by delivery of written notice of that termination to the owner, subdivider or agent. Any disclosure delivered after the execution of an agreement to purchase shall contain a statement describing the buyer's right, method and time to rescind as prescribed by this subsection. 
(d)  The failure of the buyer or lessee to sign the notice shall not invalidate any grant, conveyance, lease or encumbrance. 
(e)  Any person or entity who willfully violates the provisions of this section shall be liable to the purchaser of a lot or unit which is subject to the provisions of this section for actual damages and, in addition thereto, shall be guilty of a public offense punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). In an action to enforce such liability or fine, the prevailing party shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-58. - Manner of fixing and collecting charges. 
For any community facilities district or zone thereof, the city council may fix and collect charges in the same manner as for miscellaneous extended services in county service areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-59. - Use of charges for authorized facilities and services. 
Any charges collected pursuant to this code may only to be used for facilities and services authorized by this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-60. - Notice of cancellation of special tax. 
In the event that the special tax is permanently satisfied as to a particular parcel of land, the city clerk shall prepare and record in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the parcel of land is located, and the county recorder shall accept for recordation, a notice of cancellation of special tax authorization as to that parcel. The notice of cancellation of special tax authorization shall identify with particularity the special tax being canceled, shall contain the legal description and assessor's parcel number of the particular parcel of land subject to the tax, and shall contain the name of the owner of record of the parcel. The city clerk shall mail the original notice of cancellation of special tax authorization to the owner of the property after recording the document. The city clerk may specify a charge for the preparation and recordation of this notice. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
ARTICLE VI. - BONDS 
 
Sec. 20-61. - Resolution to incur bonded indebtedness. 
Whenever the city council deems it necessary for an existing or proposed community facilities district to incur bonded indebtedness, it shall, by resolution, set forth all of the following: 
(a)  A declaration of the necessity for the indebtedness. 
(b)  The purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred. 
(c)  The amount of the proposed debt. 
(d)  The time and place for a hearing by the city council on the proposed debt issue. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-62. - Inclusion of certain costs and estimated costs in proposed bonded indebtedness. 
The amount of the proposed bonded indebtedness may include all costs and estimated costs incidental to or connected with the accomplishment of the purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred including, but not limited to, the estimated costs of construction or acquisition of buildings, or both; acquisition of land, rights-of-way, water, sewer or other capacity or connection fees; lease payment for school facilities that are relocated; satisfaction of contractual obligations issued pursuant to this code; architectural, engineering, inspection, legal, fiscal and financial consultant fee; environmental review and monitoring costs; bond and other reserve funds; discount fees; interest on any bonds of the district due and payable prior to the expiration of one (1) year from the date of completion of all of the facilities, not to exceed five (5) years; election costs; administrative expenses of the city in administering the district or the levy and collection of the special taxes; and all costs of issuance of the bonds including, but not limited to, fees for bond counsel, costs of obtaining credit rating, bond insurance premiums, fees for letters of credit and other credit enhancement costs, and printing costs. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-63. - Notice of hearing on resolution. 
The city clerk shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the district. The notice shall state: 
(a)  The time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  At that time and place any person interested, including all persons owning property in the district, will be heard upon the proposed debt issue. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-64. - Hearing. 
At the time and place fixed for the hearing on the resolution declaring the necessity for incurring the bonded indebtedness or at any time and place to which the hearing is adjourned, the city council shall proceed with the hearing. Said hearing may be consolidated with the hearing referred to in section 20-23 on the formation of the district. 
At the hearing, any person interested, including persons owning property within the district, may appear and present any matters material to the questions set forth in the resolution declaring the necessity for incurring the bonded indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-65. - Improvement area; resolution designating; application of proceedings. 
For purpose of financing of, or contributing to the financing of, specified facilities, the city council may by resolution designate a portion or portions of the district as one (1) or more improvement areas. An area shall be known as "Improvement Area No. _______ of Community Facilities District _______ of the City of Santa Ana." After the designation of an improvement area, all proceedings for purposes of a bond election and for the purpose of levying special taxes for payment of the bonds shall apply only to the improvement area for those specified facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-66. - Resolution; bonded indebtedness. 
After the city council has held the hearing pursuant to section 20-61(d), if it deems it necessary to incur the bonded indebtedness, it shall by resolution state all of the following: 
(a)  That it deems it necessary to incur the bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  The purpose for which the bonded indebtedness will be incurred. 
(c)  Either of the following in accordance with its previous determination: 
(1)  That the whole of the district will pay for the bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  That a portion of the district will pay for the bonded indebtedness, which portion shall be described in the resolution of the city council made pursuant to section 20-65. 
(d)  The principal amount of debt to be incurred. 
(e)  The maximum terms of the bonds to be issued, which terms shall not exceed fifty (50) years. 
(f)  The maximum annual rate of interest to be paid, payable annually or semiannually, or in part annually and in part semiannually, or in such other manner as shall be provided by the city council. 
(g)  That the proposition will be submitted to the voters. 
(h)  The date of the special community facilities district election (which may be consolidated with a general or special district election, including an election to levy a special tax), at which time the proposition shall be submitted to the voters. 
(i)  If the election is not conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the hours between which the polls shall be open. 
(j)  If the election is conducted by mail or hand-delivered ballot, the hour when the ballots are required to be received in the office of the election officer conducting the election, and that if all qualified electors have voted, the election shall be closed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-67. - Resolution to incur bonded indebtedness; notice of election; publication. 
The resolution provided for in section 20-66 shall constitute the notice of such special bond election, and such resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation circulating within the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-68. - Elections pursuant to this article; laws and rules applicable. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of the California Elections Code relating to the qualifications of electors, the manner of voting, the duties of election officers, the canvassing of returns, and all other particulars in respect to the management of elections insofar as they may be applicable shall govern all elections pursuant to this article, except that voting shall be conducted in the manner specified in section 20-33 of this code. 
Propositions relating to the levy of a special tax, incurring of bonded indebtedness, or to establish or change an appropriation limit, or any combination thereof, under this code may be combined into one (1) ballot proposition as determination by the city council. 
If the area designated in the resolution adopted pursuant to section 20-66 does not include the entire community facilities district, a separate ballot shall be prepared for the vote upon the proposition to authorize bonds and to levy a special tax for payment of such bonds, and only the voters entitled thereto shall be given such ballots. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-69. - Resolution relating to form, execution and issuance of bonds. 
If more than two-thirds of the votes cast at the election are in favor of incurring the indebtedness, the legislative body may, by resolution, at the time or times it deems proper provide for the following: 
(a)  The form of the bonds. 
(b)  The execution of the bonds. 
(c)  The issuance of any part of the bonds. 
(d)  The appointment of one (1) or more banks or trust companies within or without the state having the necessary trust powers as trustee, fiscal agent, paying agent or bond registrar. 
(e)  The execution of a fiscal agent agreement, trust agreement or indenture securing the bonds. 
(f)  The pledge or assignment of any revenues of the community facilities district to the repayment of the bonds. 
(g)  The investment of any bond proceeds and other revenues, including special tax revenues, by the trustee or fiscal agent in any securities or obligations described in the resolution, fiscal agent agreement, indenture, trust agreement or other instrument providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(h)  The date or dates to be borne by the bonds and the time or times of maturity of the bonds and the place or places and time or times that the bonds shall be payable. 
(i)  The interest, fixed or variable, to be borne by the bonds. 
(j)  The denominations, form and registration privileges of the bonds. 
(k)  Any other terms and conditions determined to be necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-70. - Action to foreclose liens; cumulative remedy; resolution to diligently pursue foreclosure action. 
(a)  As a cumulative remedy, if bonds are outstanding, the city council may, not later than four (4) years after the due date of the last installment of principal thereof, order that any delinquent special taxes levied in whole or in part for payment of the bonds, together with any penalties, interest and costs, be collected by an action brought in the superior court to foreclose the lien of special tax. 
(b)  The city council may covenant for the benefit of bondowners to commence and diligently pursue to completion any foreclosure action regarding delinquent installments of any amount levied as a special tax for the payment of interest or principal of any bonds that are issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-71. - Credits for delinquent taxes. 
(a)  When any foreclosure actions are ordered, the tax collector shall be credited upon the current tax roll with the amount charged on account of the delinquent special taxes to be sued on, including applicable penalties, interest and costs, and the tax collector shall be relieved of further duty in regard thereto. Any amounts not the subject of a foreclosure action shall remain collectible by the tax collector. 
(b)  The tax collector may charge the actual cost incurred in removing these sums from the tax roll. This charge shall be added to the costs to be recovered in the foreclosure action. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-72. - Delinquent taxes; procedures. 
At any time after the tax collector has been relieved of his or her duty to collect sums under section 20-71 and before judgment in a foreclosure action, the city council shall dismiss the action upon payment of all of the following: 
(a)  The amount of any delinquent special taxes, together with any penalties, interest and costs accrued thereon to date of complete payment hereunder. 
(b)  Costs of suit including, but not limited to, litigation guarantees provided by title companies with respect to all claims of ownership or interest in the subject property. 
(c)  Attorney's fees authorized by the local agency. 
(d)  The tax collector's costs authorized by subsection (b) of section 20-71.  
Sec. 20-73. - Foreclosures. 
The foreclosure action shall be brought in the name of the city and may be brought within the time specified in section 20-70. The complaint may be brief and need only include the following allegations: 
(a)  That on a stated date, a certain sum of special taxes levied against the subject property (describing it) pursuant to this code became delinquent. 
(b)  On that date, bonds issued pursuant to this code, payable in whole or in part by the subject special taxes, were outstanding (if applicable). 
(c)  That the city council has ordered the foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-74. - Judgments. 
Any judgment shall decree the amount of the continuing lien against each parcel to be foreclosed and shall order the parcel to be sold on execution as in other cases of the sale of the real property by process of the court. The judgment amount shall include reasonable attorneys' fees to be fixed by the court, together with interest, penalties and other authorized charges and costs (all calculated up to date of judgment). The foreclosure action shall be governed and regulated by the provisions of this code and also, where not in conflict with this code, by other provisions of law generally applicable to foreclosure actions. 
Property sold hereunder may not be sold for less than the amount of the judgment plus postjudgment interest and authorized costs without the consent of the owners of fifty-one (51) per cent by principal amount of the outstanding bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-75. - Errors. 
No special tax installment, interest or penalties thereon or deed shall be held invalid for any error in computation, if the error is found to be comparatively negligible or is found to be in favor of the owner of the real property affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-76. - Signatures on bonds or coupons; place bonds are payable. 
The bonds shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city clerk. All signatures on the bonds may be printed, lithographed or engraved. If any officer whose signature appears on the bonds ceases to be that officer before the delivery of the bonds, his or her signature is as effective as if he or she had remained in office. All bonds shall be payable at the office of the city treasurer or at the office of any agent designated by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-77. - Special tax or charge for outstanding bonded debt. 
When the city council fixes and levies special taxes and charges for the community facilities district, it shall also fix and levy that amount of special taxes and charges within the community facilities district which is required for the payment of the principal of and interest on any outstanding bonded debt of the community facilities district, including any necessary replenishment or expenditure of bond reserve funds or accumulation of funds for future bond payments. The special tax or charge shall be levied and collected by the same officers and at the same time and in the same manner that all other special taxes and charges are levied and collected for the community facilities district or in any other manner specified by the city council. The special taxes and charges shall not exceed the authority granted by Article II, Article III or Article IV hereof. All of the collections for payment of principal and interest on bonds shall be paid into the community facilities district bond or similar fund and reserve or other fund for the particular community facilities district and shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of and interest on the outstanding bonds of the community facilities district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-78. - Action to determine validity of bonds or special tax levy. 
An action to determine the validity of bonds issued pursuant to this code or the validity of any special taxes levied pursuant to this code may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure but shall, notwithstanding the time limits specified in Section 860 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, be commenced within thirty (30) days after the voters approve the issuance of the bonds or the special tax if the action is brought by an interested person pursuant to Section 863 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Any appeal from a judgment in that action or proceeding shall be commenced within (30) days after entry of judgment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-79. - Sale of bonds. 
The city may sell the bonds so authorized at public or private sale, at the times and in the manner the city council deems appropriate. However, all bonds sold at public sale shall be sold on sealed proposals after advertising for bids by publication of notice of sale, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of sale, in a newspaper of general circulation circulating in the city. If no bids are received or the bids received are not satisfactory as to price or responsibility of the bidders, the city council or its designee may reject all bids received, if any, and either readvertise or sell the bonds at private sale. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-80. - Force, value and use of bonds; exemption from state taxation. 
Any bonds issued by a district organized under the provisions of this code are hereby given the same force, value and use as bonds issued by any municipality and shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-81. - Refunding bonds—Authority. 
The city council may, by resolution, authorize the issuance of new bonds to refund any or all of the district bonds outstanding or improvement area bonds outstanding that have been issued pursuant to this article. 
The city council may issue refunding bonds without repeating any of the procedures required for the approval of the original bond issue, if the city council determines that the total net interest cost to maturity on the refunding bonds plus the principal amount of the refunding bonds does not exceed the total net interest cost to maturity on the bonds to be refunded plus the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. Subject to such limitations, the principal amount of the refunding bonds may be more than, less than or the same as the principal amount of the bonds to be refunded. 
The total authorized amount of the bonded indebtedness of a district or an improvement area therein, as approved by the qualified voters thereof, shall not be reduced by the principal amount of any refunding bonds issued to refund any or all outstanding bonds of the district or improvement area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-82. - Same—Resolution for issuance. 
If the city council determines to issue refunding bonds pursuant to this article, it shall adopt a resolution providing for their issuance. The resolution shall: 
(a)  Describe the bonds being refunded and state the date on which it is anticipated that the refunding will occur. 
(b)  Fix the date of the refunding bonds. 
(c)  Designate the denomination or denominations of the refunding bonds. 
(d)  Fix the minimum rate or rates of interest to be paid on the refunding bonds. 
(e)  Fix the maturity dates of the refunding bonds, which may exceed the latest maturity date of the bonds being refunded, provided that the latest maturity date of the refunding bond shall not be in excess of fifty (50) years from the date of issuance of the bonds to be refunded. 
(f)  Designate the place or places of payment of principal and interest on the refunding bonds and on the bonds to be refunded. 
(g)  Describe the form of the refunding bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-83. - Same—Sale thereof. 
The city council may sell the refunding bonds at public or private sale. The proceeds of any sale of refunding bonds for cash shall be applied only as permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-84. - Same—Amount of proceeds and investments in funding fund. 
The proceeds of the refunding bonds and the earnings thereon shall be in an amount sufficient to meet either the requirements of paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) at the time of issuance of the refunding bonds, as certified by a certified public accountant licensed to practice in this state. 
(a)  The proceeds (including any amounts in any reserve fund established for the bonds to be refunded not needed for purposes of the refunding bonds) and investments, together with any interest or other gain to be derived from any such investment, shall be in an amount sufficient to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums, if any, on the refunded bonds as they become due or at designated dates prior to maturity and the costs of issuance of the refunding bonds. 
(b)  The proceeds (including any amounts in any reserve fund established for the bonds to be refunded not needed for purposes of the refunding bonds) and investments, together with any interest or other gain to be derived from any such investment, shall be in an amount sufficient to pay the principal, interest and redemption premiums, if any, on the refunding bonds prior to the maturity of the bonds to be refunded or prior to a designated date or dates before the maturity of the bonds to be refunded, the principal and any redemption premiums due on the refunded bonds at maturity or upon that designated date or dates, and the costs of issuance of the refunding bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-85. - Same—Use of savings; reduction of tax levy. 
Any savings achieved through the issuance of refunding bonds shall be used to reduce the special taxes which were levied to retire the bonds being refunded. At the time the city council makes a determination to issue the refunding bonds, it shall determine and cause to be made any reductions in the annual tax in the district, which reduction shall be made on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 20-86. - Callable bonds. 
Any bonds issued may be made callable in the document providing their terms. When bonds are made callable, a statement to that effect shall be set forth on the face of the bonds. Callable bonds may be redeemed on any interest payment date prior to their fixed maturity in the amounts, manner and prices prescribed in the document providing their terms. 
(Ord. No. NS-2033, § 2, 11-20-89) 
Chapter 21 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1922, adopted July 20, 1987, amended Ch. 21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly Ch. 21, consisted of §§ 21-1—21-10, 21-21—21-27, 21-39—21-57, 21-69—21-72, 21-72a—21-72d, 21-72f—21-72h, 21-72j, 21-72k, 21-72p, 21-72r—21-72t, 21-72w, 21-73, and 21-74, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1952 Code §§ 4118, 6100, 6110, 6110.1, 6110.2, 6111, 6113-6116, 6116.1, 6116.2, 6116.4, 6116.5, 6117, 6120, 6120.1-6120.4, 6121, 6122, 6122.2, 6123, 6124, 6124.2-6124.4, 6125, 6125.1—6125.3, 6126, 6130, 6131, 6350, 6351.1, 6358.1—6358.3, 6358.5, 6358.6, and 6390.7, and the following: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	Ord.No. 	Section 	Date 
NS-118 		 7-18-55 	NS-1237 	13 	 5-12-75 
NS-545 		 1-16-61 	NS-1239 	1 	12- 9-74 
NS-718 	1 	 2-17-64 	NS-1401 	1, 2 	 1- 3-78 
NS-766 	1 	12-21-74 	NS-1690 	1—16 	 7- 5-83 
NS-815 	1 	 8-16-65 	NS-1754 	1, 2 	12-17-84 
NS-1176 	2—4 	11-19-73 	NS-1823 	1 	12-16-85 
NS-1235 	3 	12- 9-74 	NS-1850 	1 	 7- 7-86 
 
Cross reference— Firearms sales, § 10-500 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Short title; purpose—Defined. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Business License Tax Code." It is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions—General. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this Chapter are not defined herein but are defined elsewhere in this Code, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply to such words and phrases used in this Chapter unless the content clearly indicates a different intent. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-3. - Definitions—Specific. 
As used in this Chapter, the following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter set forth: 
Annualization shall mean an estimation, extended for a twelve (12) month period, based on reported gross receipts for a prior period of less than twelve (12) months. 
Applicant shall mean any person who applies for a license or a license renewal under the provisions of this Chapter. 
Automobile dismantler shall mean any person who has an established place of business and is engaged in the business of buying, selling, or dealing in vehicles of a type required to be registered pursuant to Section 220 of the California Vehicle Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, for the purpose of dismantling the same, who buys or sells the integral parts and component materials thereof, in whole or in part, or deals in used motor vehicle parts. This section does not apply to the occasional and incidental dismantling of vehicles by dealers who have secured dealers' plates from the California Department of Motor Vehicles and whose principle business is buying and selling new and used vehicles, or by owners who desire to dismantle not more than three (3) personal vehicles within any twelve (12) month period. 
Builder-owner shall mean any person employing subcontractors, specialty contractors, general engineering contractors, or workers under his or her supervision and direction by the hour or day, for the purpose of constructing improvements on real property owned by him or her within the city; such person shall be taxed herein the same as a contractor unless his or her only building activity is constructing on his or her property a single family dwelling unit or addition thereto which will be used in whole or in part for the purpose of his or her own occupancy for a period of not less than one year. Proof of the sale or offering for sale of any such structure by the builder-owner within one year after completion of same is presumptive evidence that such structure was undertaken for purpose of sale. Provided, however, that any person holding a state contractor's license pursuant to Sections 7056, 7057, and 7058 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, shall be considered a contractor. 
Building and loan shall mean any person who for a fee engages in the loan of money upon personal security, automobile, or any personal property, evidences of debt, or purchases automobile contracts, commercial paper, assignments of salary, salary warranty, salary demands, time checks, or other evidences of salary due or to become due, or automobile paper. The term building and loan as used in this Chapter includes savings and loans, but does not include pawnbrokers or the holder of a bond brokers license, or any person conducting a banking business under the laws of the state or any person subject to the state corporate income tax as a financial corporation. 
Building-tradesman shall mean any person engaged within the city as an independent contractor in any trade, art, calling, avocation or occupation of the building trades and not licensed as a contractor by the state. 
Business shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the city, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, including rental of residential or commercial real estate, and every other kind of activity whether or not carried on for gain or profit, and whether or not engaged in as a principal or as an independent contractor, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his employer. 
Business license receipt shall mean the receipt required to be posted or displayed as evidence of a business' payment of the tax required by the provisions of this Chapter and shall herein be referred "license receipt" or "license" except as otherwise specified. 
Business license tax shall mean the privilege tax paid as required by the provisions of this Chapter and shall herein be referred to as "business or license tax" or "fee" except as otherwise specified. 
Charge shall mean any fee fixed herein which is intended solely to cover the reasonable administrative cost incurred in performing any specified act on behalf of any person or at any person's request for which said person shall be liable except as otherwise specified hereinafter. 
Coin-operated machine or device shall mean any machine or device that dispenses a product, or provides a service, or utility or amusement; resulting from insertion or use of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device, or money, or thing of value. 
Collector shall mean the finance director or other city officer charged with the administration of this Chapter. 
Commission agent, broker or merchant shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling of goods, wares, or merchandise for the owner or consignee thereof for a fee or commission, whether or not the operation of such business customarily includes the actual possession, custody or control of goods, wares or merchandise to the extent that such person (1) does not engage in the business of manufacturing, refining, fabricating, milling, treating or other processing of the goods, wares or merchandise bought and sold, and does not cause said goods, wares or merchandise to be manufactured, refined, fabricated, milled, treated or otherwise processed; (2) does not obtain or retain title to said goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases; and (3) does not store or warehouse such goods, wares or merchandise except during one or more of the following situations: while such goods, wares or merchandise are actually in transit, or for short periods of time before transportation commences or after it ceases. 
Contractor shall mean any person who is licensed as a contractor by the State of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or by others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith. The term contractor as used in this Chapter includes general engineering contractor, general building contractor, specialty contractor and subcontractor except as otherwise specified herein. 
Cost of doing business shall mean that amount which is equivalent to the volume of business performed, where the business of any local office, facility, agent, broker or employee is that of performing administrative or management related services in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere. Said amount shall be computed by determining the total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee. Said total cost of maintaining said local office, facility, agent, broker or employee shall include, but is not limited to, the wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, rent, and/or depreciation, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance of said office, facility, agent, broker or employee. 
Cost of said premises shall mean that amount which is equivalent to the cost directly related to maintaining any single-family residential rental property or other undivided single residential rental premises where said cost is shared between the owner or leaseholder and any other individual or individuals as co-residents or where said cost is borne by an immediate relative related by blood, adoption or marriage as resident. The term immediate relative as used herein shall be limited to the following classes of individuals: mothers and fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers, sons and daughters, grandsons and granddaughters, brothers and sisters, and husbands and wives. Said amount shall include, but is not limited to: mortgage costs, title and homeowner property insurance premiums, property taxes, homeowner or condominium association costs; other costs or expenses arising from contractual obligations relating to maintaining ownership or leasehold interest in said premises; and the cost of utilities, maintenance or other related services for which the owner or leaseholder is liable. 
Disabled veteran shall mean any honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the United States, who is physically unable to obtain his livelihood by means of manual labor and who is a qualified voter of the state. 
Employee shall mean all individuals who are engaged in the operation or conduct of any business and whose consideration for services rendered is in the form of a regular salary or wage. 
Engaged in business shall mean the transacting and carrying on, managing or operating of a business whether done as owner or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee or lessee. 
Fixed place of business shall mean the premises primarily occupied for the particular purpose of conducting the business thereat and regularly kept open for that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending to such business, except that an auto-car wash, auto-laundromat or similar self-service business shall be considered a "fixed place of business" whether or not anyone is in attendance, and a warehouse shall be considered a "fixed place of business" whether or not anyone is in attendance and whether or not the premises is regularly kept open. 
Flat rate or flat rate tax shall mean a fixed amount assessed per business location or, alternatively, a fixed amount assessed for the privilege of engaging and transacting in business activity within the city from place to place. 
General contractor shall include any general building contractor or general engineering contractor or any other person who is licensed pursuant to Sections 7056 and/or 7057 of the California Business and Professions Code as the same now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Gross receipts shall include the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. The following shall be included in "gross receipts": all receipts, rents, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
The following shall be excluded from "gross receipts": 
(a)  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
(b)  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; 
(c)  Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
(d)  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
(e)  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them, other than amounts received as commissions or fees earned, or charges of any character made or compensation of any character received for the performance of any service as agent or trustee; provided that any agent or trustee dealing in stocks or other similar written instruments evidencing a right to participate in the assets of any business, or dealing in bonds or other evidences of indebtedness, who also deals in such property as a principal, shall include in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured the amount of his or her trading profits resulting therefrom. No deduction from receipts attributable to trading as a principal shall be made unless such deduction is provided for in this section; 
(f)  The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller; 
(g)  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
(h)  As to alcoholic beverages, that portion of the receipts of a manufacturer, transporter, retailer or wholesale distributor generated or otherwise collected from the manufacture, transport, retail or wholesale of intoxicating liquors within the state pursuant to Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution; 
(i)  As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended; 
(j)  As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, if paid by the dealer or collected by him or her from the purchaser; 
(k)  Cash value of sales, trades, transfers or other transactions as made between separate departments, divisions or units of any single business entity; 
(l)  Sales for convenience where sales of new goods, wares or merchandise are made by a person engaged in selling such articles to another person engaged in selling like or similar articles: 
(1)  Where the primary purpose of the particular transaction of sale is to accommodate the purchaser rather than to make a sale in the ordinary course of business and the price paid is essentially the book value of the article; 
(2)  Where, in the particular kind of business involved, a similar manner of dealing is frequent or customary in the circumstances under which the particular sale is made; and 
(3)  Where goods, wares or merchandise of like or similar kind and of substantially equivalent value to that which was sold is received in consideration. 
As to general contractors and other similar businesses, "gross receipts" shall not include that portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors are licensed under this Chapter and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector upon request with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid to them. 
As to bail bond brokerages, commission agent brokerages, mortgage brokerages, real estate brokerages, securities brokerages, travel agencies, and other similar businesses employing agents, brokers and/or commissioned employees, "gross receipts" shall include the total gross commissions or other receipts attributable to the local office, agents, brokers and/or employees. 
As to accountants, architects, attorneys, chiropractors, doctors, dentists, optometrists, podiatrists, psychologists, veterinarians and other professionals, either practicing solely or in partnership or as a professional corporation, "gross receipts" shall include the total gross fees or other receipts attributable to services performed or otherwise rendered within the city. 
As to other persons having a fixed place of business within the city and providing a service or plying an occupation or trade or involved in similar businesses, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions or other receipts attributable to that local location and/or employees. 
As to a business established outside the city but maintaining a local office or establishment or facility, within the city through an agent, broker or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total sales or receipts attributable to the local office or establishment or facility, agent, broker or employee. 
As to a business established outside the city but transacting and carrying on business within the city, or otherwise performing or rendering services negotiated or contracted for within the city, whether or not by a principal or through an agent or employee, "gross receipts" shall include the total fees, commissions or other receipts attributable to the business activity conducted. 
As to any business, whether established within or established outside the city, in the event separate sales or receipt records are not maintained for a local office or establishment or facility, agent, broker or employee, or in the event any retailing, wholesaling, manufacturing or processing activity conducted thereat does not generate gross receipts as hereinabove defined, or in the event said local office or establishment or facility, agent, broker or employee is engaged in providing administrative or management related services, to include, but not limited to, record keeping, data processing, research and development, advertising, public relations, personnel administration or legal services, in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere, the business tax shall be based upon an amount which bears the same proportion to the total gross receipts of the business which cost of maintaining said local office, facility, local agent, broker or employee bears to the total cost of maintaining said business. Alternatively, at the election of an applicant or licensee, the business tax may be based on an amount equivalent to the cost of maintaining said business without reference to the total gross receipts of the business. As used herein the phrase "cost of maintaining said business" shall have the same meaning as "cost of doing business". 
Independent contractor shall mean any natural person other than a state licensed contractor, who is engaged to aid in the business of any other person, whether as a professional as defined hereinbelow or whether pursuant to any license, certificate or registration authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, or whether with regard to any other trade, skill or occupation, and who receives remuneration either through commission or pursuant to any contract of employment which excludes regular wages or salary, or in any other manner other than through regular wages, salary or a direct participation in the profits of the business. 
Insurance agent shall mean any person, including bailbond agents, directly authorized by and on behalf of an insurer to transact insurance and to bind the insurer in the execution of insurance policies. 
Insurance broker shall mean any person, including bailbond brokers, who, for compensation and on behalf of another person, transacts insurance other than life with, but not on behalf of, an insurer. 
Insurance solicitor shall mean a natural person employed to aid an insurance agent or insurance broker in transacting insurance other than life. 
Itinerant merchant shall mean any person who engages in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise or things or articles of value, with the intention of conducting such business in the city for a period of not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or structure for the exhibition or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or who associates temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or who conducts such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
Junk collection shall refer to the use of any vehicle by any person for the purpose of traveling from place to place or from street to street to purchase and collect any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
Junk dealer shall mean any person having a fixed place of business in the city engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, any rags, bottles, papers, cans, metals or other junk. 
Junk salvager, junk collector or junk recycler shall mean any person at a fixed place of business in the city engaged in the business of carrying on or collecting, buying or selling at either retail or wholesale or otherwise dealing in junk and/or rubbish, waste material, refuse and/or any rags, sacks, bottles, papers, cans, metals, rubber, cordage, tires and other like articles, whether the same can be sold or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of being treated, repaired or prepared so as to be used again in some other form. 
Junk yards, automobile wrecking yards, and salvage yards shall include any space of two hundred (200) square feet or more of area of any lot used for the storage, sale, keeping or abandonment of inoperable vehicles, junk or waste material, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof, other than an impound yard. 
Leaseholder or leasehold interest as applied to any real property shall mean any person who possesses or shares an estate in realty held under lease. As applied to any dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof located on such real property, the term "leaseholder" and/or "leasehold interest" shall mean any person who possesses or shares in a contract for exclusive possession or control of any such dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof for a limited time. 
Leaseholder-lessor as applied to commercial or residential real estate shall mean any person who, while in possession of a leasehold or leasehold interest in any commercial or residential real estate, acts as a lessor by engaging in the subleasing, subletting, providing, exchanging or trading of any such real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof without loss of leasehold. 
Licensee shall mean any person who holds a valid, current business license issued to that person under this Chapter. 
Life agent shall mean any insurance agent authorized, by and on behalf of a life, disability or life and disability insurer, to transact life, disability or life and disability insurance. 
Life and disability insurance analyst shall mean a person who, for a fee or compensation of any kind, paid by or derived from any person or source other than an insurer, advises, purports to advise, or offers advice to any person insured under, named as a beneficiary of, or having an interest in, a life or disability insurance contract, in any manner concerning that contract or his or her rights in respect thereto. 
Manufacture or process shall embrace all the activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied, by hand or machinery, to materials so that as a result thereof a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or substance of trade or commerce is produced and shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom made articles. 
Manufacturer shall mean any person who, directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use from his or her own materials or ingredients any articles, substances or commodities. 
Owner, ownership, or ownership interest as applied to any real property shall include the legal property owner of record as recorded by the office of the county assessor and in addition thereto shall include, whether recorded or unrecorded, any owner, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, copartnerships of the whole or of a part of such real property, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. As applied to any dwelling, building, structure or premises located on such real property the term "owner," "ownership," or "ownership interest" shall include the legal owner, and in addition thereto shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, copartnerships of the whole or of a part of such dwelling, building, structure or premises, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or former member, of the community. 
Owner-lessor as applied to commercial or residential real estate shall mean any person who, while an owner or while having an ownership interest in any commercial or residential real estate, acts as a lessor by engaging in the leasing, renting, providing, exchanging or trading of any such real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof without loss of ownership. 
Pawnbroker shall mean any person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money either for himself or herself or for any other person, upon any personal property, personal security, or purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such property to the vendor or other assignee at prices previously agreed upon. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the loaning of money on personal property or personal security by any bank authorized to do so under the laws of the state or of the United States. 
Peddler shall mean any person who sells and makes immediate delivery or offers for sale and immediate delivery any goods, wares, merchandise, service or thing in possession of the seller, at any place in the city other than at a fixed place of business, and shall include any person who sells or offers for sale any food or produce from a pushcart or other nonvehicular device but shall not include salespersons or agents for wholesale houses or firms who sell to retail dealers for resale or sell to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes or to bidders for public works or supplies. 
Person shall include, without limitation, all domestic and foreign corporations of any kind, all firms and companies (holding, joint stock, private, public, parent, pass-through, professional, operating, operating property, non-profit, subordinate and subsidiary), partnerships of every kind including but not limited to (general partnerships, limited partnerships, master limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited liability limited partnerships, professional partnerships, and publically traded partnerships), private trusts, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, real estate investment trusts, royalty trusts, estates, associations, syndicates, clubs, joint ventures, unincorporated business organizations, limited liability companies of every kind including but not limited to (sole member limited liability companies, multi member limited liability companies, non-profit limited liability companies, and series limited liability companies), cooperatives, all other types of business entities defined or authorized under federal and state laws, receivers, trustees, guardians or other representatives appointed by order of any court, and any natural individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee. 
Premises shall include all lands, buildings, accessory buildings or structures erected or modified, equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith, and any personal property affixed to or otherwise used for the purpose of transacting and carrying on any business on such premises. 
Processor shall mean any person engaging in the business of converting an article, substance or commodity into marketable form for the purpose of resale by changing its physical form or chemical composition. 
Professional shall mean any person, including any professional corporation, wherever located, engaged in or carrying on within the city any profession requiring satisfactory compliancy with written and/or oral examination standards adopted by a branch of the state or federal government and/or requiring a certain amount of tenure with such branch of government; such professions to include but not be limited to: architect (all types), attorney, accountant (all types), audiologist, chiropractor, clinical social worker, dentist, drugless practitioner, electrologist, engineer (all types), geologist, herbalist, marriage, family and child counselor, mortician, naturopath, optician, optometrist, osteopath, physician (all types), podiatrist, psychologist, registered nurse (as shareholder in a professional corporation), speech pathologist, surveyor, veterinarian. 
Professional corporation shall mean any corporation organized under the California General Corporation Law which is engaged in rendering professional services in a single profession, or as otherwise authorized pursuant to Section 13400 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as hereafter amended, and which in its practice or business designates itself as a professional or other corporation as may be required by statute. 
Property or real property as applied to commercial or residential real estate shall mean recorded assessor's property parcel, as identified by county assessor's parcel number. 
Real estate agent shall mean any person licensed as such by the state and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate. 
Real estate broker shall mean any person licensed as such by the state and engaged wholly or in part in transacting and carrying on the sale of real estate including soliciting or offering to buy, sell or lease real property for others; negotiating and collecting loans for borrowers or lenders; dealing in real property sales contracts and promissory notes; receiving advance fees for real estate listings; and dealing in real estate syndicate securities. 
Real estate developer shall mean any person conducting, managing or transacting and carrying on the business of acquiring, subdividing, improving, selling, renting and otherwise dealing in and disposing of or developing real property for commercial, industrial, residential or nonresidential purposes including, but not limited to, one who constructs improvements upon real property for commercial, industrial, residential or nonresidential purposes with the object of selling, renting or developing it for his or her own use. 
Recreational services shall mean any person engaged in the business of providing facilities for recreational use; such services to include, but not be limited to: amusement machine arcades, bowling alleys, driving ranges, golf courses (including miniature), motion picture theaters (including drive-in), pool halls (including billiards and snooker), riding stables, skating rinks, social clubs, sports clubs (including spas, health clubs and conditioning gyms), swimming pools and tennis and racket clubs. 
Rental of commercial real estate shall include every person, whether as an owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor, engaged in the business of leasing, renting, subleasing, subletting, providing, exchanging or trading without loss of ownership or leasehold any real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof for industrial, commercial, office, warehouse or other entrepreneurial uses or purposes other than for the immediate use or purpose of dwelling, sleeping, lodging or general residency. Provided, however, that the leasing, renting, subleasing, subletting, providing, exchanging or trading without loss of ownership or leasehold of any real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof to another for the purpose of their independent commercial operation of an apartment building, apartment house, boarding house, guest house, mobile home park, nursing home, residential care facility, rooming house, or hotel or motel thereat shall be deemed to constitute a rental of commercial real estate. 
The license tax for the rental of commercial real estate shall be assessed per property, and liability for said tax shall be determined by owner's-lessor's ownership of, or leaseholder's-lessor's leasehold interest in, said property. Independent property management agents acting for property owners-lessors or property leaseholder-lessors are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable and, in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
Provided, however, that where any one dwelling, building, structure or premises is comprised of one (1) or more contiguous properties, then the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owning or controlling said building, structure or premises may, upon submission of acceptable documentary proof thereof, obtain a single consolidated business license tax assessment. Further provided that where an owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owns or controls two (2) or more separate buildings, structures or premises located on the same property, or two (2) or more buildings, structures or premises located on separate but contiguous properties, then the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owning or controlling said buildings, structures or premises may, upon submission of acceptable documentary proof thereof, obtain a single consolidated business license tax assessment. 
Rental of residential real estate shall include every person, whether as an owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor, engaged in the business of leasing, renting, subleasing, subletting, providing, exchanging or trading without loss of ownership or leasehold any real property, dwelling, building, structure, premises or portion thereof, except for any hotel or motel, for the immediate purpose of dwelling, sleeping, lodging, boarding or other such occupancy, accommodation or general residency. 
The license tax for the rental of residential real estate shall be assessed per property, and liability for said tax shall be determined by owner's-lessor's ownership of, or leaseholder's-lessors's leasehold interest in, said property. Independent property management agents acting for property owner-lessors or property leaseholder-lessors are responsible for payment of the license tax on the rental of such property, if the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor of said property has not paid the tax when due and payable and, in addition, are subject to the license tax as a separate business. 
Provided, however, that where any one dwelling, building, structure or premises is comprised of one (1) or more contiguous properties, then the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owning or controlling said building, structure or premises may, upon submission of acceptable documentary proof thereof, obtain a single consolidated business license tax assessment. Further provided that, where an owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owns or controls two (2) or more separate buildings, structures or premises located on the same property, then the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor owning or controlling said dwellings, structures or premises may, upon submission of acceptable documentary proof thereof, obtain a single consolidated business license tax assessment. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the payment of a business license tax where any owner or leaseholder resides in a single-family residence or other undivided single residential rental premises and participates with one (1) or more other co-residents in the shared cost of said premises. Neither shall this section be construed to require the payment of a business license tax for the rental of a single-family residence or other undivided single residential rental premises as between an owner or leaseholder and any individual immediately related by blood, adoption or marriage to said owner or leaseholder, where the remuneration rendered to said owner or leaseholder does not exceed the cost of said premises. 
Eligibility for the business license fee exemption herein provided is restricted to owners or leaseholders who are natural persons and whose ownership of or leasehold interest in said residential rental property is undivided. An owner or leaseholder claiming a license fee exemption hereunder shall have the burden of furnishing to the collector such information as the collector may require to support the claim of eligibility for exemption. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person who is eligible for or claims to be eligible for exemption from payment of any required residential rental property business license fee from the requirement to obtain said business license in the same manner and at the same time as is required under the terms of this Chapter of all other persons applying for a business license, and such person shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and for penalties as provided herein. 
Rental unit shall mean the smallest accommodation for which a fee is charged or received. 
Retailer shall mean any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares or other merchandise to consumers or end-users thereof. 
Revenue officer shall mean the duly authorized agent of the collector charged with assisting the collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder. 
Sale shall include the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law. 
Sale at retail and retail sale shall mean every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated or imprinted) other than sale to one who (1) purchases for the purpose of resale as tangible personal property in the regular course of business, or (2) purchases for the purpose of consuming the property purchased in producing for sale a new article of tangible personal property or substance, of which such property becomes an ingredient or component, or as a chemical used in processing, when the primary purpose of such chemical is to create a chemical reaction directly through contact with an ingredient of a new article being produced for sale. 
Sale at wholesale and wholesale sale shall mean any sale of tangible personal property which is not a "sale at retail." Sales otherwise classified hereinabove as "retail sales" may, nevertheless, be classified as "wholesale sales" under this section, if the vendor can establish to the satisfaction of the collector that the sale was made to a government agency, public utility, manufacturer, processor or contractor who consumed the articles in the course of his or her own operations and did not offer the articles for resale to the general public except as an integral part of manufacturing, construction or service. 
Service fee shall mean a fixed fee, specified by resolution of the city council, which is intended solely to cover the reasonable administrative costs incurred in redeeming dishonored or stopped payments, in performing audits, collections, inspections, investigations, and the administrative enforcement of this Chapter and adjudication thereof. 
Services shall mean the business of providing, maintaining or performing labor for the benefit of another within the city; of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the city which does not produce a tangible commodity; or furnishing of services and all activities in which any person for any other person performs any personal service and all services in which any real or personal property, stocks or bonds, or other financial instruments or evidences of debt, or contracts of insurance or any money or credits are exchanged, leased, transferred or loaned; as well as every business of maintaining, storing, cleaning, improving or repairing tangible commodities within the city whether or not such business is conducted from a premises, vehicle or mobile location within or outside the city. Services include recreation services but do not include theatrical performances, exhibitions or temporary amusements, nor do they include professional services or telephone services within the terms of this Chapter. 
Solicitor shall mean any person who engages in the business of going from house to house, place to place, on or along the streets, within the city and/or by telephone, soliciting any opinions, preferences, endorsements or other information, or selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares or merchandise or other things of value for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future. 
Stock broker and bond broker shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying or selling federal, state, county or municipal stocks or bonds, or stocks and bonds of partnerships or other incorporated entities, or evidences of indebtedness of private persons, partnerships or of incorporated entities, for a fee or commission. 
Sworn statement shall mean an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration, certification, or verified affidavit made under penalty of perjury. 
Telephone services shall mean any person engaged in the business of providing telephone services as a "telephone company" pursuant to Article XIII, Section 19 of the State Constitution. 
Transact and carry on means to repeat, or intend to repeat, or to continue and includes: 
(a)  The maintaining, operating, managing or being in control of, or right to make use of directly or remotely, any office, store, warehouse, factory, establishment, premises, location or place: 
(1)  Having one (1) or more telephones listed for any business activity in any classified telephone directory or in the classified Section of any consolidated telephone directory, or in any combined online directory or internet/web based listing service, 
(2)  Having computers or other computing devices used to maintain one (1) or more internet websites or webpages or maintaining internet/web based advertising, 
(3)  Having in use in connection with any business one (1) or more counters, desks, chairs, tables, filing cabinets, typewriters, adding or calculating machines, computers, servers, printers, scanners, fax machines or other articles of office equipment, 
(4)  At, from, or in which any processing, manufacturing, supervising, administration, management, research, sales or sales promotion, peddling, solicitation, warehousing, distributing, routing, delivery, mail or package receipt, recycling, dispatching, billing, collection, accounting, computing, product development, software development, testing, storage, record-keeping or other activity is conducted in connection with any business, 
(5)  In or at which one (1) or more persons may, for any valuable consideration intended to result, or that results, in any livelihood, financial profit or commercial gain to any person, receive any instruction, advice, treatment or examination, or any service upon their person, or any repair, refinishing, renewing, cleaning, or other improvement to, or of, any personal property, 
(6)  In which any letter, announcement, advertisement, circular, handbill, newspaper, agreement, contract, instruction, legal instrument, government required registration, permit or license, tax filing statement, financial statement, statement of account, financial record, or any other instrument or record is written, printed, reproduced, published, prepared or kept in connection with any business, 
(7)  From which any circular, handbill, newspaper, announcement, statement of account, card or letter is sent or distributed, in writing, or any contract is made, in person or by telephone, in connection with any business, 
(8)  Upon any exterior side, wall, window, door, roof or other portion, or in the proximity of which, there is maintained any sign, lettering, announcement or advertisement indicating that such office or place is one (1) in, at or from which any article exists, or any act is performed in connection with any business; 
(b)  The repeated or continuous offering, or contracting, orally or in writing, in connection with any business: 
(1)  To sell or rent one (1) or more articles, or one (1) or more rooms, apartments, portions or parcels of any real or personal property, or 
(2)  To transport any person or personal property, or 
(3)  To perform any service; 
(c)  In connection with any business, the repeated or continuous: 
(1)  Sale or renting of one (1) or more articles or parcels of real or personal property, or 
(2)  The transporting of any person or property, or 
(3)  The performance of any service; 
(d)  The repeated parking, servicing, replenishing or maintaining of any delivery vehicle, catering truck, junk collection vehicle, pushcart or wagon within the city, whether or not on the premises of another, when done in connection with the permanent painting or inscribing or affixing of said address on the surface of said pushcart, vehicle or wagon; 
(e)  The performance, in connection with any business, of any single act, with intent to repeat or continue the performance of such act. 
Variable flat rate or variable flat rate tax shall mean a fixed scale of amounts whose sum is variable depending on the number or other factor furnishing the basis for determination of the license tax. The term variable flat rate or variable flat rate tax as used in this Chapter includes any tax based on the number of persons engaged or employed in a business. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Vending operations means any business conducted or carried on by any person engaged in the business of operating coin-operated machines or devices on the premises of another or in the business of owning, renting, leasing, lending, or otherwise distributing or supplying coin-operated machines or devices while retaining title thereto. Such machines include, but are not limited to, vending, amusement, service and telephone machines. 
Wholesaler shall mean any person engaging in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products for the purpose of resale and not to consumers or users thereof. 
Utility and public utility mean any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, heat or power, subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2000, § 1, 3-6-89; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 1, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2841, §§ 3, 4, 2-4-13)  
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-4. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a revenue for the general operation of the city by the levy of a license tax on all business transactions or activities carried on or occurring within the city and is not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-5. - License required. 
There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this Chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or for any other person, or for body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. 
Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter but shall not be subject to any penal provisions of this Code for such nonpayment. Said tax shall be collected in a civil action. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-6. - Violation defined. 
The engaging in, transacting and carrying on of any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so, or without complying with any and all provisions of this Chapter, constitutes a distinct and separate violation of this Chapter for each and every day that such business is so carried on. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-7. - Branch establishments; multiple places of business; more than one type of business. 
A separate business license fee must be paid and a separate business license obtained for each branch establishment or separate property location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location and in the manner designated in such license. Provided, however, that warehouse or distribution facilities located upon the same premises or upon contiguous premises and used in connection with or incidental to a business licensed thereat under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to be separate types of business or separate branch establishments. Further provided that no separate business transactions or administrative or management related activities shall be carried on in such incidental or supplemental warehouses or distribution facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2000, § 2, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 21-8. - Two or more allied businesses. 
(a)  Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more correlated businesses, or is carrying on two (2) or more allied activities at the same location and under the same ownership and management and the said businesses are on a gross receipts basis, then in that event the gross receipts shall be reported together, and the appropriate applicable rate or rates prescribed will be used for the compilation of the combined annual license fee, to which amount the basic tax rate amount and business license processing charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. 
Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two (2) or more business license taxes, when required, where two (2) or more separate businesses are conducted in the same location by the same owner and management and such businesses are not construed by the collector to be correlated or allied with each other. An appropriate business license tax as set forth in this Chapter shall be paid for each business. 
(b)  Whenever any person is engaged in any activity pursuant to a state contractor's license and at the same time is engaged in one (1) or more other correlated businesses, or is carrying on one (1) or more allied activities at the same location and under the same ownership and management, which business or businesses are on a gross receipts basis, then in that event such person may elect to report all the gross receipts together, including all the gross receipts attributable to any services rendered as a state-licensed contractor, which shall be at the rate of a service business, and the applicable rate or rates prescribed will be used for the compilation of the combined annual license fee, to which amount the basic tax rate amount and business license processing charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. 
Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two (2) or more business license taxes, when required, where two (2) or more separate businesses are conducted in the same location by the same owner and management and such businesses are not construed by the collector to be correlated or allied with each other. An appropriate business license tax as set forth in this Chapter shall be paid for each business. 
(c)  Whenever any person is engaged in transacting and carrying on any business at any fixed place of business within the city, and for whom flat rates or variable flat rates are made the basis for fixing the amount of such license, and who at the same time, and at that same location, and under the same ownership and management, is engaged in the commercial rental of any portion of said premises as owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor, then in that event such person may elect to report all the gross receipts attributable to the rental of commercial real estate thereat, which gross receipts shall be subject to a separate license fee at the rate established for the rental of commercial real estate, but to which amount the basic tax rate amount and business license processing charge shall be excluded. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 2, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-9. - Combined businesses. 
Whenever any person is engaged in a combined business conducted at the same location and by the same owner and management carrying on manufacturing and selling at wholesale and also at retail, or selling at wholesale and also at retail but not manufacturing, and where such combined business is not otherwise specifically licensed on the flat rate basis, then in that event a single combined statement separately showing the amount of manufacturing and wholesale and retail business engaged in respectively shall be filed and the combined tax shall be separately calculated according to the respective rates appropriate for each category of business activity, to which amount the minimum tax fee and business license processing charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. 
In the event that such a combined statement is not filed, or in the event sufficient records have not been kept which will enable the manufacturing and wholesale portion and the retail portion of such business to be ascertained, then in that event all business done by any such person, whether manufacturing and wholesale or whether retail, shall for the purposes of this section be considered as retail business and the rate prescribed for retail business shall be applied to calculate the amount of business tax due, to which amount the minimum tax fee and business license processing charge shall be applied once only, and for which amount a single combined license shall be issued. 
Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve the payment of two (2) or more business license taxes, when required, where two (2) or more separate business activities are conducted in the same location by the same owner under the same management and such business activities are not construed by the collector to constitute a combined business. An appropriate business license tax as set forth in this Chapter shall be paid for each business. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-10. - Single location; multiple businesses; separate owners. 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to relieve the obligation to obtain a separate license and to pay the appropriate license tax required for each business owned or conducted by a separate owner within an individual establishment or location whether under the same management or not. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-11. - Concessions; separate license required. 
Any person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under the provisions of this Chapter, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to this Chapter except as may be otherwise specified hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-12. - Association with local business or governmental agency; disclosure of associated businesses and independent contractors. 
Any person who shall associate with any local business or governmental agency, whether or not on a temporary basis, shall not be relieved from the provisions of this Chapter and shall be required to pay the appropriate business license tax as specified in this Chapter. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to relieve any such person from the provisions of this Chapter by virtue of any exemption provided to any local business pursuant to this Chapter or any exemption or exclusion applicable to any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision of the state or of the United States, or any exemption or exclusion otherwise arising out of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  The phrase "local business" as used in this section shall be defined as including all persons transacting and carrying on business from any fixed place of business within the city other than as an employee. In addition, the phrase "local business" shall include all leaseholder-lessors and owner-lessors of commercial or residential real estate within the city. 
(2)  The phrase "governmental agency" as used in this section shall be defined as including every agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision of the state or of the United States. 
(3)  The phrase "associate with" as used in this section shall be defined to mean the transacting and carrying on, by any other person, of business on the premises owned, controlled, or managed by said local business or governmental agency, whether as a tenant of, in connection with, or as an affiliate of, or as an adjunct to, or in the name of said local business or governmental agency, or whether as a building management agent, or property management agent, or independent general operating agent or manager for said local business or governmental agency, or whether as an outside business or an independent contractor performing services for said local business or governmental agency. 
(b)  Application. In the case of a local business which is a partnership or joint venture, the phrase "associate with" shall not include the business transacted and carried on by a general partner in connection with the general partnership or by a joint venturer in connection with the joint venture. In the case of a local business which is a corporation, the phrase "associate with" shall include any business transacted and carried on by a subordinate or subsidiary corporation or holding company, pass-through entity or trust. For all local businesses, the phrase "associate with" shall include the maintaining on the premises of the local business of any principle executive or other business office as required in connection with the registration of any business entity address with the California Secretary of State for any actively registered corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, or limited liability partnership under the California Corporations Code as the same now exists or as may be hereafter amended from time-to-time. 
In the case of a local business which is a leaseholder-lessor or owner-lessor of commercial or residential real estate within the city, the phrase "associate with" shall include any business transacted and carried on by an independent resident property manager, independent building manager, independent property agent or independent building agent, whether or not such independent manager or agent is also a tenant of said property. Such independent manager or agent shall be required to obtain a separate business license. In the case of a local business which is a tenant of a commercial premises and a party to a lease-back agreement or other similar agreement involving said commercial real estate in which the ownership identities of both parties to the agreement are identical, but the legal entities are distinct, the phrase "associate with" shall include any such business transacted by the owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor of said commercial real estate. Such owner-lessor or leaseholder-lessor shall be required to obtain a separate business license and shall be subject to all the requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  Disclosure. 
(1)  Every local business, and any person acting as their agent, shall upon request by the collector, provide the names and addresses of all persons who lease, rent or maintain space, mailboxes, coin-operated machines or devices, or in any other manner transact and carry-on business, or occupy or maintain a business presence on the premises owned, controlled, or managed by said local business. In addition, every local business, and any person acting as their agent, shall upon request by the collector, provide the names and addresses of all persons, whether or not located within the city, who are contracted to perform, or who regularly do perform services on the premises owned, controlled, or managed by said local business. 
(2)  Every person engaged in the rental of residential real estate within the city, every condominium or homeowner association within the city, and all property management services acting as their agents, shall upon request by the collector, provide the names and addresses of all persons who have been granted permission to engage in business activity on the premises owned, controlled, or managed by them. In addition thereto, all condominium or homeowner associations within the city and all property management services acting as their agents, shall upon request by the collector, provide the names, property addresses, and mailing addresses of all owners engaged in the rental of any residential real estate, under their control or management. 
(3)  Every person engaged in the rental of commercial real estate within the city, and all property management services acting as their agents, shall, at the time the license required by this Chapter is applied for and thereafter annually at the time of the renewal of their license for the rental of commercial real estate, or at such other time as the collector in his or discretion may set, provide to the collector a list of (i) the names and addresses of all tenants (including subtenants) occupying the commercial real estate property licensed; and (ii) the names and addresses of all persons, whether or not located within the city, who are contracted to perform, or who regularly do perform services on the licensed premises owned, controlled, or managed by said commercial real estate rental licensee or commercial real estate management agent. 
(d)  Disclosure requirements—Authority to vary. To effectively implement the intent of the disclosure provisions of this section, the collector may vary the strict requirements of subsection (c) above to accommodate the regular record keeping and business practices of persons subject to the disclosure requirement and also to facilitate ease of administration by the collector. 
(e)  Confidentiality. All information received by the collector pursuant to this section shall remain confidential and shall be used solely for the purposes of administering the city's business license tax and shall not be maintained by the city as part of the public record. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-13. - Partnerships. 
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the city is organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled license fee need be paid only by the partnership or joint venture and not by any such individual partner or joint venturer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-14. - Corporations; in general. 
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the city is organized as a general law corporation, pursuant to the California General Corporation Law, the scheduled license fee need be paid only by the corporation and not by any such individual shareholder thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-15. - Professional corporations. 
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the city is organized as a professional corporation, the scheduled license fee need be paid only by the corporation and not by any such individual shareholder thereof 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-16. - Evidence of doing business. 
(a)  When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, business letterhead, telephone books, newspapers, billboards, trade publications, electronic telephone or business directories, internet advertisement, or websites, advertise, holdout, or represent that such person is in business in the city; or when any person has registered and published a fictitious name statement registered to an address in the city, or holds or has been issued an active state board of equalization permit, or holds any other active licenses, permits, certificates or registrations issued by a governmental agency (including but not limited to: federal or state employer identification numbers, or registration with the California Secretary of State as a corporation, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability company) indicating that such person is in business within the city, or maintains a post office box under a business name registered to any address within the city, or when any person files federal income tax or state franchise tax statements reporting business income within the city or claiming business office deductions or business expense deductions for a commercially located or home-based business in the city, or gives other evidence of transacting and carrying on business as may be defined elsewhere under the terms of this Chapter and such person fails to deny in a sworn statement given to the collector that such person is "engaged in business" within the city, or fails to assert and document that such person is "exempted" or otherwise "excluded" from the requirement to pay a business license tax, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. 
(b)  When any municipal utility records indicate that the occupant of any commercial real estate within the city is a person other than the person indicated by county assessor or county recorder records to be the owner of such property, or when any utility records indicate that the occupant of any residential real estate within the city is a person other than the person indicated by county assessor or county recorder records to be the owner of such property, or when the county assessor or county recorder records indicate that any person owning residential real estate within the city does not claim a homeowner's exemption for said property and receives their property tax notification for said property at another residence location, and such person fails to deny in a sworn statement given to the collector that such person is engaged in the "rental of residential real estate" within the city, or fails to assert and document that such person is "exempted" or otherwise "excluded" from the requirement to pay a business license tax, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-17. - Effect of chapter on other ordinances. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting or carrying on any business under this Chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other provisions of this Code and shall remain subject to all regulatory provisions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-18. - No required permits waived. 
The business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter constitutes a receipt for the license fee paid and shall have no other legal effect. A business license is a requirement, not a permit, to transact and carry on any business activity within the city. The business license tax receipt is evidence only of the fact that such tax has been paid. Neither the payment of the tax nor the possession of the business tax receipt authorizes, permits or allows the doing of any act which the person paying or holding the same would not otherwise be entitled to do; and any permit, license, variance or other instrument of approval or evidence that any conditions exist as required by any other Section of this Code or by any statute or code provisions of the state must first be obtained or complied with before the doing of any act or thing for which it is required. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-19. - Severability. 
If any article, Section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each article, Section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the articles, Sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-20. - Decisions on amounts imposed. 
If any license tax imposed by this Chapter is for any reason held to be discriminatory or invalid in amount, by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of a lesser amount imposed by the collector. The city council hereby declares that it would have imposed a license tax of some amount on the business, occupation, calling, trade, vocation or other enterprise in question, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the license taxes imposed herein may be declared discriminatory or invalid in amount. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-21. - Saving clause. 
Neither the adoption of this Chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other chapter shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any chapter or ordinance prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posed, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-22. - Unexpired licenses heretofore issued. 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any business license tax ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for such business by this Chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-23. - Unpaid taxes; tax plus penalties. 
No business license for any succeeding, current or unexpired tax period shall knowingly be issued to any person, who at the time of application, is indebted to the city for any unpaid tax. The total indebtedness shall include the total tax due plus penalties for failure to pay the tax when due. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-24. - License tax a debt; civil action. 
The amount of any business license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax, penalties, and administrative costs incurred in connection therewith, including attorneys fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-25. - Original delinquency penalty; conducting a business without first having procured a license; effect—Voluntary compliance; effect—Abatement of penalty; application—Violation; misdemeanor. 
(a)  Any person who shall commence, engage, transact and carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business within the city without first having procured the required business license from the city to do so, shall be assessed a penalty of fifty (50) per cent of the amount of the license tax owing, which amount shall be separately calculated for each successive license period beginning with the calendar month in which the commencement of business activity within the city began, and ending with the expiration of the current annual licensing period. Provided, however, that the start of such period shall not exceed three (3) years prior to the date of notification of violation. Such penalty to be collected, and the amount thereof to be enforced, in the same manner as all other business license taxes are collected and the payment thereof enforced. 
(b)  Where any person is in arrears for business license taxes under subsection (a) above, owed for the rental of residential or commercial real estate within the city, or owed for a business which is conducted solely from a home residence within the city, the penalties imposed under subsection (a) shall be abated in accordance with subsection (f) below if the tax is paid by the last day of the calendar month following the month in which such person was given notice of the requirement to obtain a city business license; otherwise penalties shall accrue as in the case of any other business. 
(c)  Where any person occupying a commercial premises as a tenant or subtenant is in arrears for business license taxes under subsection (a) above, and has been reported to the collector pursuant to Section 21-12, the penalties imposed under subsection (a) shall be abated in accordance with subsection (f) below if the tax is paid by the last day of the calendar month following the month in which such person was given notice of the requirement to obtain a city business license; otherwise penalties shall accrue as in the case of any other business. 
(d)  Where any person, whether or not located within the city, is contracted to perform, or regularly does perform services on the premises owned, controlled, or managed by a local business as defined in Section 21-12 and is in arrears for business license taxes under subsection (a) above, and has been reported to the collector pursuant to Section 21-12, the penalties imposed under subsection (a) shall be abated in accordance with subsection (f) below if the tax is paid by the last day of the calendar month following the month in which such person was given notice of the requirement to obtain a city business license; otherwise penalties shall accrue as in the case of any other business. 
(e)  Where any person is otherwise in arrears for business license taxes under subsection (a) above, the penalties imposed under subsection (a) shall be abated in accordance with subsection (f) below if such person voluntarily applies for the required business license and pays the business license tax owing in arrears; otherwise penalties shall accrue as in the case of any other business. 
(f)  In all cases where the provisions of this section provide for the abatement of penalties imposed under subsection (a), the amount owing in arrears and the amount of the accrued penalties shall be abated until the combined amount of tax and penalty due is equalized to an amount equivalent to the amount of current and prior years' taxes owing as computed or determined based upon the business license tax rates in effect for the most current tax year. 
(g)  In determining the amount of penalty due for any person for whom an initial license period gross receipts in lieu deposit is required in accordance with Sections 21-117, 21-118 or 21-118.1 the collector shall compute and apply the penalty due at the time that such person's initial period gross receipts report is filed and computed in accordance with Section 21-117(c). 
(h)  However, no abatement of penalties or interest shall be permitted under this section in any case where such person concurrently holds or has previously held a city business license or previously been given notice of said requirement with regard to any business activity engaged in or conducted within the city. 
(i)  When any person is determined to be liable for delinquent business license taxes and such person fails to properly procure the correct business license after being given notice to do so, the collector shall determine the amount of delinquent business license taxes owed in accordance with Section 21-41. Penalties thereon shall be accrued as applicable in accordance with this section. In determining the amount of tax due for any business for whom the gross receipts of such business is made the basis for fixing the amount of such business license the collector may base such determination upon an average of the reported gross receipts of like businesses, similarly classified. 
(j)  Any person required to obtain a city business license under the terms of this Chapter having been given notice of the requirement to obtain a city business license under the terms of this section, whether by personal service, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises of such person's business, or by notice given through the United States mail, who has not paid said business license tax or otherwise obtained a valid business license, or applied for exemption therefrom and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to Section 21-41 or Chapter 3 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor violation. For the misdemeanor violation provision of this section to apply, notice, when given by United States mail shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the notice may be sent by first class mail. If the notice is sent by certified mail and the return receipt is returned unsigned or refused, then service of notice shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the notice sent by first class mail is not returned. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-26. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a criminal infraction except where said violation is specifically deemed a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Every violation of the provisions of this Chapter determined to be a criminal infraction shall upon conviction thereof be punishable by (1) a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year; (3) a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. Each day any such violation of any said provision of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Every violation of the provisions of this Chapter deemed to be a misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided for in Section 1-8 of this Code. Each day any violation of any said provision of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-27. - Misrepresentation—Penalty. 
Any person knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in applying for or paying for the business license herein provided for shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-28. - Remedies cumulative. 
The conviction and fine or imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the business tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any business tax prevent a civil action or criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-29. - Cancellation; right of licensee to request. 
The collector shall cancel a valid unexpired license issued or granted to the licensee pursuant to this Chapter at the request of the licensee provided: 
(a)  The licensee so endorses, signs and surrenders the business license receipt along with any applicable decal, metalcal, sticker or tag, and 
(b)  All business activity pursuant to licensee's license has ceased. 
Liability for any further business taxes shall cease only if the licensee's account is vacated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-30. - Requirement to obtain and furnish sales tax number; requirement to report gross sales to the state; requirement to collect sales and use tax; requirement to pay collected sales and use tax; requirement to report same separately to the city. 
Any person who contracts, sells or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in the city for which sales or use tax is payable and who is required to report and pay such sales and use tax to the state shall obtain an appropriate California State Board of Equalization permit and furnish the collector with his sales tax number and shall report separately in his return to the state the amount of receipts from sales in the city and/or the receipts from sales for use in the city and shall pay the required sales or use tax on such receipts. Any such person who fails to do so shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTOR 
 
Sec. 21-31. - Collector; establishment of position. 
There is hereby established the position of collector which shall include any position heretofore referred to in this Chapter or any other chapter of this code as "license collector," "business tax collector," "business fee collector," or any other term used to describe the office of the collector of business license taxes. Provided further that to the extent that any other provision of this Code or any other city ordinance refers to the director of finance as the collector of business license taxes, such provisions shall be construed to require the execution of such duties by the collector. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-32. - Collector; ex officio collector of business license taxes. 
The collector shall be ex officio business license tax collector. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-33. - Collector; duty to enforce. 
It shall be the duty of the collector to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter, and the chief of police, the chief building official, the chief fire official, and the city attorney shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector. Each department or division of the city which issues permits or entitlements of use shall require the production of a valid unexpired business license receipt or business license exemption receipt prior to the issuance of such a permit. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to obtain a license to do business within the city as a prerequisite for the issuance of a city permit or entitlement of use if such requirement conflicts with any applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-34. - Collector; duty to certify general contractor's statement. 
Every person acting as a general contractor, whether building for their own occupancy or not, shall file with the collector a full, true and complete written statement, signed by such person, under penalty of perjury, listing all subcontractors who have performed or shall perform any service whatsoever for such person within the city for which a license is required under the provisions of this Chapter. Any builder-owner, general engineering contractor, specialty contractor, or subcontractor, subcontracting any work shall be deemed a general contractor for the purpose of this section. Said statement shall include the name, address, telephone number, state license number and specialty classification of each person required to be licensed. 
It shall be the duty of the collector or his or her designated representative to ascertain and certify that all business tax liability of the general contractor and all subcontractors employed by the general contractor has been duly satisfied. 
Pursuant to Section 8-2 of this Code, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued, or final inspection provided until the collector or his designated agent certifies that there has been complete compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-35. - Collector; duty to keep records. 
The collector shall keep full, adequate and accurate records pertaining to the issuance of licenses under this Chapter and the collection of all fees, penalties and other moneys in connection herewith. The collector shall keep in his or her office a public ledger in which he or she shall keep the accounts of all licenses currently issued by him or her and remaining in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-36. - Collector; administration of oaths. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the collector, as chief revenue officer, and each and every duly authorized revenue officer or authorized agent, is authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-37. - Collector; deposit of fees, charges and penalties. 
All fees, penalties, charges and other moneys received by the collector pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city upon the business day next following the receipt of the same. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-38. - Collector; printing of blank licenses, applications, reporting forms, notices and other form correspondence. 
The collector shall prepare printed blank licenses for all business conducted in the city for the term of twelve (12) months, and for shorter terms authorized by this Chapter to be issued. The collector shall also prepare all necessary printed applications, reporting forms and notices and other form correspondence. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-39. - Collector; duty to determine business type or class. 
The determination of which business or type or class of business a licensee or applicant is engaged in or about to engage in shall be an administrative function of the collector. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-40. - Collector; classification of businesses into categories. 
The collector is authorized to establish a list of specific businesses that are included within each of the categories set forth in general terms by this Chapter. This list shall be reviewed and updated periodically so as to be all-inclusive as possible. The list shall be kept on file in the offices of the collector and the clerk of the council and shall be available for use by the general public. The classification of any business into a general category shall be at the determination of the collector. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the collector shall have the right to a hearing pursuant to Section 21-41 and/or the right to an appeal to the city council for a final decision pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-41. - Collector; assessment of tax, penalties, interest, charges (including service fees), determination of classification; notification of violation; right to hearing; hearing service fee deposit. 
(a)  The collector shall determine the amount of license tax due, together with any penalties, interest, charges (including service fees) that may be due and payable and/or the proper classification for a business by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain in the event: 
(1)  Any person fails to properly procure the correct business license prior to doing business in the city; or 
(2)  Any person engaged in transacting and carrying on business within the city fails to renew any business license; or 
(3)  Any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed; or 
(4)  If, after demand therefor has been made by the collector, any person fails to file a corrected statement within fifteen (15) days after notification to do so; or 
(5)  It appears to the satisfaction of the collector that a statement filed does not set forth the facts of the business for which a license is required; or 
(6)  If a licensee or an applicant for a license believes that the business is not assigned to the proper classification because of circumstances peculiar to it. 
(b)  In the case where such determination is made, the collector shall give notice of the amount so assessed, or classification found to be appropriate in the following manner: 
(1)  By serving it personally, or causing it to be served personally by a duly authorized agent; or 
(2)  By depositing it in the United States Mail, postage prepaid addressed to the person so assessed at their address of record. 
(c)  Any person receiving a determination made by the collector pursuant to this section regarding the amount of tax owed, or classification found to be appropriate, may, within fifteen (15) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the collector for an administrative hearing, hereinafter ("hearing") by completing and filing a "request for hearing" form with the collector. Request for hearing forms shall be made available in the office of the director of finance and clerk of the city council. A failure to file a timely "request for hearing" form shall be deemed a waiver of the right of appeal. Provided, further that any person seeking a hearing under this section shall first deposit with the collector a hearing service fee to be specified by resolution of the city council to cover the city's cost in providing an administrative hearing officer, hereinafter ("hearing officer"). 
(d)  All hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be heard by the same hearing officer who has been appointed by the Santa Ana city manager pursuant to Section 1-28.8 of this Code. 
(e)  Hearing procedures for hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  No hearing to contest a determination of the collector before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a timely "request for hearing" form has been completed and filed with the collector, and 
(2)  After receipt of the "request for hearing" form and deposit of the hearing service fee, a hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the "request for hearing" is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The failure of any person to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the administrative hearing service fee deposit and shall be a bar to judicial review of the hearing officer decision based upon failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(3)  At such hearing the person may appear and offer evidence why the collector's specified tax amount should not be fixed as the license tax amount or why such classification prescribed by the collector as the applicable tax classification should not be fixed. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(4)  Upon request, the person requesting the hearing shall be provided with reports and other documents relied upon by the collector in making his or her determination. In addition, if the collector, duly authorized revenue officer, or other individual appearing at the hearing as the agent of the collector submits any additional written reports to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of said documentation shall also be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing. 
(5)  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the collector prior to issuing a written decision. 
(6)  After such hearing, the hearing officer shall determine the proper tax to be charged or classification prescribed and shall forthwith give written notice to the person requesting the hearing in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax. 
(f)  Hearing officer's decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may immediately issue a verbal decision or may issue a written decision within fifteen (15) days of the hearing. The decision shall include the reasons for the decision and such decision shall be final. 
(g)  If the hearing officer fixes the amount of the tax, penalty, interest, charges, service fees or the tax classification in accordance with the original written determination of the collector, then the amount as finally determined shall be immediately due and payable and/or the classification shall be immediately applicable, and the hearing service fee shall be forfeit. If the hearing officer determines the amount of the tax, penalty, interest, charges, service fees or the tax classification to be applicable in accordance with the original statement of the person requesting the hearing then the amount due and payable and/or the classification applicable shall be as set forth in such person's original statement and the collector shall refund the hearing service fee deposit. If the hearing officer fixes the amount of the tax, penalty, interest, charges, service fees and/or the tax classification to be applied in some other manner the hearing officer shall also make a written determination as to fixing the amount of tax, penalty, interest, charges, service fees and/or the tax classification applicable and shall indicate the disposition of the hearing service fee deposit. 
(h)  Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may obtain judicial review of such decision in the manner provided under Section 1-21.9 of this Code. 
(i)  In the event no application for a hearing is filed within the time prescribed, the decision of the collector shall become final and conclusive on expiration of the time herein fixed for hearing and shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall further act as a waiver against future action. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this Chapter or any other provision contained in this code to the contrary, any person voluntarily tendering payment of any license tax, interest, or penalties to the city pursuant to any provision of this Chapter shall for all purposes thereafter be precluded and barred from appealing, contesting or otherwise challenging the validity or amount of any such tax, interest or penalties pursuant to any otherwise available procedure set forth in this Chapter, or otherwise available by law, unless said payment is made under written protest to the city. Said written protest shall be deemed made for the purposes of this Chapter only by one (1) of the following methods: (1) a written notation set forth on the check, draft, money order, or other negotiable instrument by which payment is tendered, indicating that such payment is made under protest; or (2) a written notice addressed and delivered to the collector at the time of payment indicating that such payment is made under protest. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not bar a request for refunds authorized pursuant to Section 21-87 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-42. - Collector; necessary rules and regulations. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her the collector shall have the power to make rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-43. - Collector; extension of time for filing—Compromise of claims; waiver of claims. 
(a)  The collector shall have the power to extend the time for filing any required application, affidavit, statement or report and remitting of any taxes or other monies owing for a period of up to six (6) months. In connection with that authority the collector shall also have the power to extend the time for giving notification of tax renewal and to extend the time that any previously issued license shall remain valid. The collector may in his or her discretion exercise this authority on a case-by-case basis in connection with any individual applicant or licensee, or other individual person subject to the requirements of this Chapter. The collector may also exercise this authority on a class-by-class basis in connection with any category, class or subclass of assessment or any category, class or subclass of applicants, licensees, or other persons subject to the requirements of this Chapter, or any persons subject to any applicable business license tax surcharge or surtax or other business license related assessment or fee required or authorized under the general laws of the state. 
(b)  The collector shall have the further power, for good cause shown, to compromise any claim, or class of claims, as to the amount demanded or owing. 
(c)  The collector, shall have the further authority to settle, discontinue, or waive the collection of any claim, or class of claims, for good cause shown, or if it appears that further proceedings would be without merit, or if the administrative or legal cost therefor would be excessive, or if the amount of the claim in question is de minimus. A claim, or class of claims, shall be deemed to be de minimus whenever the total amount of the claim is determined by the collector to be equal to or less than the total anticipated administrative costs associated with collecting said amount. The collector may in his or her discretion determine this amount on a case-by-case basis or on a class-by-class basis. In accordance with Section 21-42 the collector may adopt administrative rules, regulations, and guidelines, relating to the settlement, discontinuance, or waiver of claims arising pursuant to this Chapter. 
(d)  In connection with the exercise of the power and authority hereinabove provided to the collector, he or she in their discretion, shall have the right to allow the payment of any taxes or other monies owed to the city by installment without penalty, interest or other administrative charge on a case-by-case basis or class-by-class basis. In accordance with Section 21-42 the collector may adopt administrative rules, regulations, and guidelines, relating to the acceptance of installment payments. 
(e)  Moreover, to effectively implement the intent of the general provisions of this Chapter the collector in his or her discretion may vary the strict procedural, enforcement, deposit, or other administrative requirements of this Chapter on a case-by-case or class-by-class basis in any manner. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-44. - Collector; additional power. 
In addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to waive or reduce any penalty or late interest imposed, or deposit, or charge, or service fee demanded. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-45. - Collector; authority to suspend and revoke licenses. 
The collector shall have the authority and duty to suspend or revoke any license granted or issued under the provisions of this Chapter at any time for any of the following: 
(a)  A material false statement contained in the application for a new license or in the application for a renewal license granted or issued under the provisions of this Chapter, or in any affidavit or statement required to be filed under the provisions of this Chapter, or 
(b)  Upon the determination that the licensee has not paid the tax required to be paid as a condition for the issuance of the license, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 21-86. 
Any person transacting and carrying on any business during any period of license suspension shall be deemed to be doing so under an invalid license. Any person transacting and carrying on business during any period of license revocation shall be deemed to be doing so without a license. Provided further, that any person transacting and carrying on business during any period of license revocation or suspension shall be refused any permits or entitlements of use the issuance of which requires the production of a valid unexpired business license. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-46. - Collector; authority to issue citations. 
The collector, as chief revenue officer, and each and every duly authorized revenue officer of the city have the duty to enforce this Chapter and are authorized to arrest persons without a warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of said provisions in their presence. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, said officer making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear as prescribed by Chapter 5C Title III of Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California (commencing with Section 853.6). 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE IV. - EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 21-47. - Conflicts with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting or carrying on any business exempt from business license taxes by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-48. - Business licensing—Specified exemptions. 
(a)  A business license shall not be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects whenever the receipts of any such activity are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the city. 
(b)  A business license shall not be required for any person under eighteen (18) years of age, who is a citizen of the city, and who is enrolled in an institution of secondary education; provided, however, such person has no employee or employees working for him or her. 
(c)  A business license shall not be required for any attorney whose only business done in the city is in the courts operated in this city, nor for any doctor whose only business done in the city is surgery and/or consultation in a regularly established hospital in the city. 
(d)  A business license shall not be required for any other licensed person providing professional services not having a fixed place of business within the city and not engaged in other than the occasional furnishing of professional services wholly negotiated and contracted for outside the city. 
(e)  A business license shall not be required for any business done in the city where the business conducted is only occasional and incidental to a regularly established business conducted elsewhere. 
(f)  A business license shall not be required for any commercial traveler whose business is limited to goods, wares, and merchandise sold or dealt in at wholesale in this state, or for any salesman or agents representing vendors which have, do, or would normally supply goods for resale to licensees of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-49. - Business licensing—Specified exclusions. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter, the terms hereof shall not be deemed to apply or construed to require the payment of a license tax by any of the following persons: 
(1)  Any public utility making franchise payments to the city, except to the extent said public utility engages in retail sales or services within the city not covered or otherwise authorized by such franchise, 
(2)  Banks, including national banking associations, federal credit unions, and financial corporations, to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 27 of the State Constitution. 
(3)  Insurance companies or associations engaged in the sale and servicing of insurance and their direct agents, including bailbond agents and life agents, but not including brokers or bailbond brokers or life and disability insurance analysts or insurance solicitors to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section 28 of the State Constitution. 
(4)  Any governmental agency or subdivision and the employees thereof, to the extent they are engaged in the business of such governmental agencies or subdivisions. 
(5)  Any state alcoholic beverage licensee engaged in the manufacture, sale, purchase, possession, or transportation of alcoholic beverages within the state to the extent that a city may not levy a license tax upon them under provisions of Article XX, Section 22 of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
ARTICLE V. - FEE-EXEMPT 
 
Sec. 21-50. - Disabled veterans. 
Every person who has been honorably discharged from military service of the United States and who is exempted from the payment of business license taxes by statute of the state may distribute circulars and hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of this license tax; subject however to the restrictions, limitations, regulations and conditions hereinafter set forth. 
(1)  Every applicant must furnish a certificate of physical disability executed by a qualified physician or submit equivalent evidence of disability. 
(2)  Every applicant must submit to being photographed by the city police department. One copy of said photo shall be permanently affixed to the license issued to said applicant and another copy shall be transmitted to the collector for attachment to the portion of the license application retained by him. The applicant must also sign both the application and the license at the time of the issuance thereof. 
(3)  A license, when issued, is subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  Said license shall not be defaced, mutilated, disfigured or otherwise altered subsequent to its issuance; and failure to comply herewith is grounds for revocation of said license and for refusing its renewal or the issuance of a new license thereafter. 
(ii)  It is nontransferable and for the exclusive use of the licensee named. 
(iii)  Should a license be found in the possession of one other than the licensee named, it shall be surrendered to the collector and revoked and neither the licensee named nor the holder thereof shall thereafter be entitled to hold a license under the provisions of this section. 
(iv)  The licensee named must identify himself by his signature whenever required to do so by any city police officer, or any authorized agent of the collector. 
(v)  Every license issued under the provisions of this section shall expire on the 31st day of December of the current year; provided however that a license newly issued on or after November 1st of the current year shall expire on the 31st day of December of the next year. 
(vi)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee named to use or have in his possession any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(vii)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or transfer any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section or for any person to transfer or convey the certificates mentioned in this section to any other person for the purpose of securing a license as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-51. - Nonprofit organizations. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct any business, occupation or activity or require the payment of any license fee from any institution or organization which currently has or is eligible for an exemption from the payment of federal income taxes under Section 501 of the Federal Internal Revenue Code as amended from time to time and/or exemption from the payment of state income taxes under Section 23701 et seq. of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as amended from time to time. An institution or organization claiming a license fee exemption under this section has the burden of furnishing to the collector such information as the collector may require to support the claim of eligibility for exemption. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve an institution or organization which is eligible for or claims to be eligible for exemption from payment of a business license fee from the requirement to obtain a business license as provided in Section 21-52 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-52. - Same—Business license required; exceptions. 
Any person, institution or organization claiming exemption from the payment of a business license fee under Section 21-50 shall, nevertheless, apply to the collector for a business license in the same manner, and at the same time as is required in this Chapter of all other persons applying for a business license and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and to the same penalties as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-53. - Minimum gross receipts—Gratuitous license charge. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any person doing business in the city on a continuing but part-time basis whose gross receipts therefrom do not exceed one thousand and two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per year. Any person claiming exemption under this section shall be required, however, to provide information to the collector or his authorized agent of such nature and in such manner, and at such time as is required in this Chapter of persons applying for a business license and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and for penalties as are provided herein. Provided, further that an annual charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be due and payable for the issuance of a gratuitous license receipt. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-54. - Hobby—Gratuitous license charge. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any person engaged in hobby activity in the city. Any person claiming exemption under this section shall be required, however, to provide information to the collector or his authorized agent of such nature and in such manner, and at such times as is required in this Chapter of persons applying for a business license and shall be subject to the same procedures for enforcement and for penalties as are provided herein. Provided further, that an annual charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be due and payable for the issuance of a gratuitous license receipt. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-55. - Fee-exempt licenses—Limitations. 
(a)  Every license issued without payment of the usual fee shall be stamped "Fee-Exempt" upon its face. 
(b)  Any license issued as fee-exempt shall be subject to suspension and revocation by the collector in the event that it is determined by the collector that the applicant is not entitled to exemption. All such suspensions and revocations shall be made after notice and right to a hearing pursuant to Section 21-41. 
(c)  Any license issued as fee-exempt shall be void and shall afford no defense in any civil or criminal prosecution if any material statement contained in the application, statement of facts or any other document or representation made to the collector in claiming the exemption is false or fraudulent. 
(d)  No fee-exempt license may be transferred or loaned. 
(e)  Upon uncertainty, for lack of information or otherwise, as to the entitlement of any organization or activity to a fee-exempt license, the collector may require the filing of a verified report of all funds received and disbursed by any licensee. Upon demand such licensee shall file said report in the form and detail as required by the collector within fifteen (15) days after demand. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE VI. - APPORTIONMENT 
 
Sec. 21-56. - Constitutional apportionment. 
None of the business taxes provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied so as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the constitutions of the United States and/or the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-57. - Apportionment; necessary rules and regulations. 
When, by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California, the business tax imposed by the provisions of this Chapter cannot be enforced as to any single class or set of classes of business or business activity without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city, or in the State of California, as the case may be, the collector, having first obtained the approval of the city attorney shall make such rules and regulations for the apportionment of the tax as are necessary or otherwise desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-58. - Burden on interstate commerce; petition for adjustment. 
In any case where a license tax is claimed by a licensee, or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, or be violative of the constitutions of the United States and/or the State of California, he or she may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall by affidavit and supporting testimony show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue burden on such commerce. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, having first obtained the approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the license tax has already been paid, he or she shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector may base the license tax upon a percentage of the gross receipts of any other measure which will assure that the license tax levied shall be uniform with that levied on businesses of like nature so long as the amount levied does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this Chapter. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each twelve (12) month period, a verified affidavit of the gross receipts and payment of the amount of license tax therefor; provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this Chapter. 
The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the verified affidavit, cause the issuance of a license to such person showing partial exemption under this section with a license tax based upon the approved reduced gross receipts. 
The collector after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, shall revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-59. - Undue burden on intercity commerce; petition for adjustment. 
None of the license taxes provided for in this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon any business done in the city, where the business conducted is related to a regularly established business conducted elsewhere. In any case where a license tax is claimed by any licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall by affidavit and supporting testimony show his or her method of conducting business, the gross volume of business inside the city, and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue burden of such commerce. The collector shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory. If the license tax has already been paid, he or she shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector may base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts from business conducted inside the city or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax as prescribed by this Chapter. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of business tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each twelve (12) month period, a verified affidavit of the gross receipts and payment of the amount of license tax therefor; provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this Chapter. 
The collector shall, upon proper showing contained in the verified affidavit, cause the issuance of a license to such person showing partial exemption under this section with a license tax based upon the approved reduced gross receipts. 
The collector after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to licensee, shall revoke any license granted pursuant to this section upon information that the person is not entitled to the adjustment as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 21-60. - Application; auto registration—Service fee. 
Before any license is issued, the applicant shall make a written application to the collector, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The exact nature or kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise for which the license is requested; 
(2)  The place where such business, profession, show, exhibition, or enterprise is to be carried on; and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the same; 
(3)  The address where the applicant shall consent to receive mail concerning the license applied for; 
(4)  Where any person contracts, sells or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in the city for which sales or use tax is payable, the application shall set for the appropriate California State Board of Equalization permit number; 
(5)  Where any person employs others in the course of such business the application shall set forth the appropriate federal and/or state employer identification number; 
(6)  Where any person conducting any business is self-employed, or is conducting business as a spouse or joint-owner or in any other capacity not requiring a federal and/or state employer identification number the application shall set forth the social security number of the applicant(s). Where any such applicant is not in possession of a social security number the collector in his or her discretion may accept another form of personal identification sufficient to properly identify such applicant; 
(7)  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business or enterprise; 
(8)  In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business as a state licensed contractor, the application shall set forth the applicant's state contractor's license number and specialty classification; 
(9)  In all cases where the amount of tax to be paid is based upon the number of persons employed, or upon the number of vehicles used, or upon the number of rental units in any building or structure, or upon the seating capacity of any auditorium, stadium or enclosure, or upon the number of coin-operated machines or devices, or upon any amount or number which furnishes the basis for determination of the license tax for the particular business referred to in the application, such items must be stated on the application; provided that a newly established business shall make a true estimate or statement of such information and the business tax shall be based upon said estimation and shall be paid at the time such license is issued; 
(10)  Any further information which the collector may require to enable him or her to issue the type of license applied for; 
(11)  Any further information which the state may require, or any further information which the collector may deem necessary to properly identify the applicant; 
(12)  A signed statement made under penalty of perjury that the statements therein are true and correct, which statement shall be required to be filed with the collector upon submission of any original license application, annual renewal statement, miscellaneous supplementary statement, or other return or filing. Each such declaration of truth of application or statement shall have included therein, or attached thereto, a certification or declaration, which shall be substantially in the following form: 
I declare, under penalty of perjury; that this application, return or statement (including any accompanying schedules, statements, and supporting data) has been examined by me, and, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, is a full true and correct application, return, or statement and I accordingly so represent. 
___________ 	________ 
(Signature of Owner, or Partner, or Officer of Corporation, or Other Authorized Agent or Representative of any of the above said same) 		(Date) 
 
(13)  In the case of applications submitted via email, the collector in his or her discretion may accept a facsimile copy of the applicant's signature; 
(14)  In the case of applications submitted via other electronic means, the collector in his or her discretion may accept a digital signature or other unique personal identification number (PIN) verification. 
All information specified to be set forth on any application form prescribed by the collector shall be submitted completely and accurately and the license shall be deemed based upon the information submitted and represented. The collector shall not be required to receive or consider, any application, return or statement unless the above quoted declaration, in substantially the form hereinabove set forth, is contained therein or attached thereto and properly executed by the applicant or the authorized agent or representative of the applicant, and it is unlawful and shall be deemed a misdemeanor in any such application, return or statement for such applicant or authorized agent or representative of the applicant to make any statement which is false or which is contrary to the declaration or representation made in the above quoted form. 
Any license shall be deemed based upon the application on file, and if the information is incomplete or inaccurate, the license shall be deemed invalid. If information submitted in an application subsequently becomes incomplete or inaccurate by reason of a change in circumstances, the license shall thereafter be deemed invalid. Upon the collector's learning of any inaccuracy or incompleteness, notice shall be given forthwith to the licensee, at the address shown on the license where the licensee consented to receive information concerning his or her license, that the license is invalid and requesting the licensee to reapply for a re-validated license within thirty (30) days. 
Upon the licensee's successful application for a re-validated license within the period hereinabove set the collector shall apply pro rata to the re-validated license the remainder of the sum originally paid by the licensee. 
Upon the licensee's failure to make successful application for a re-validated license within the period hereinabove set the collector shall give notice forthwith pursuant to Section 21-86 that the licensee's license is hereby suspended. Thereafter, upon denial of licensee's appeal it shall be revoked whereupon the licensee's original payment shall be forfeit. 
Any person refusing or failing to make application or to provide information required shall be assessed an amount pursuant to Section 21-41, and shall be in violation of this Chapter. The collector, upon making an assessment pursuant to Section 21-41, may in his or her discretion autoregister a license account in the name of any such person for purposes of assessing business license taxes, penalties, interest, charges, and service fees as applicable. Whenever the collector shall cause a license account to be registered an autoregistration service fee shall be applicable in the amount as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-61. - Application processing charge. 
A minimum charge is required for the processing of any initial or renewal license application. This charge shall be in addition to the business license tax and shall not be prorated. The charge shall not be refunded if the application is rejected. However, if after receipt of applicant's written notification of cancellation, no required inspection or investigation has taken place pursuant to any applicable provision of this Code, and no business activity has been transacted or carried on, then in that event a refund request for all inspection or investigation fees paid exceeding fifteen dollars ($15.00) may be made pursuant to Section 21-87 subsection (d). In no event, however, shall the application processing charge be made refundable, other than as part of a refund made pursuant to Section 21-87 subsection (b). Provided further, that the collector may waive the processing charge in the case of a bonafide nonprofit, charitable, or otherwise fee-exempt licensee. 
The provisions of this Chapter notwithstanding, the following application categories shall pay an application processing charge in the amount specified: 
(a)  Initial period application processing charge ..... $15.00 
(b)  Renewal application processing charge ..... 15.00 
(c)  Re-validation application processing charge ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-62. - Contents of license. 
All licenses, unless otherwise provided in this Code, shall be prepared and issued by the collector upon the payment to the city of the sum required to be paid hereunder, or upon filing of proof satisfactory to the collector of eligibility for exemption from such payment. Each license so issued shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
(1)  The license number of the license. 
(2)  The date of expiration of such license. 
(3)  The persons to whom the same is issued, or where the said persons are doing business under a fictitious name; both the actual and fictitious names to whom the same is issued. 
(4)  The kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise licensed and the location of the same. 
(5)  Where said business involves the contracting, sale, or delivery of any goods, wares or merchandise in the city for which sales or use tax is payable to the state the state sales tax number issued to same. 
(6)  A statement that the holder thereof has paid a license fee or a statement that the holder thereof is exempt from such payment; and said license when issued, shall be deemed the receipt for said payment received by the city. 
(7)  A statement that this license is issued without verification that the licensee is subject to or exempt from licensing by the State of California. 
(8)  Any additional statement the collector may deem necessary or which the state may require. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-63. - Statement of fee; mistake not conclusive. 
(a)  No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any license tax other than provided for in this Chapter. In no case shall any mistake of the collector in stating the amount of a license tax, or of penalties, or interest accrued thereon prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what should actually be due from any person carrying on a business subject to a license tax under this Chapter. No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. 
(b)  Where a mistake is made in the issuance of any license with regard to the classification under which said license was issued, then a new license shall be issued in the proper classification in lieu thereof, under the date of the original license, and the licensee shall pay an additional amount required by such a change. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-64. - How and when payable; effect of dishonored instrument; return payment service fee. 
All business license taxes or deposits in lieu thereof due hereunder shall be paid in advance, in lawful money of the United States, or by check, draft or other instrument in the discretion of the collector, at the office of the collector in the finance department of the city. No business license shall be issued or renewed until the amount due and payable has been paid in full. Any license, the fee for which has been paid by an instrument such as a check, or draft which is dishonored upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from its inception. The collector, may, in his or her discretion, withhold the effect of this provision if the fee is paid within fifteen (15) days. Payment of license fees following a dishonor of such instrument upon presentation for payment shall thereafter be made only by cashier's check, money order or cash, which fee shall include any applicable penalty, as well as a return payment service fee in the amount as specified by resolution of the city council for such dishonored instrument. The collector shall be authorized to reject payment other than by cash, cashier's check or money order from such licensee for a period of two (2) years following any such dishonor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-65. - Same—Method of computation. 
In computing the amount of tax to be paid under this Chapter, the amount shall be rounded off to the nearest dollar as follows: If the remaining fraction of a dollar is forty-nine cents ($0.49) or less, such fraction shall be waived; if the remaining fraction of a dollar is fifty cents ($0.50) or more, the next highest full dollar shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-66. - Same—Application of money towards delinquent fees. 
Money received during the current year for a license shall first be applied to the payment of delinquent fees, sums and penalties due during any preceding calendar year, any balance remaining thereafter shall be applied to the payment of the current license fees and penalties. A license issued during any prior year to the same owner, tenant or occupant for the same place of business shall be prima facie evidence in any court or administrative proceeding that the business was continuously operated by the same person or firm from said prior year to the current year. 
(Ord. No. NS1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-67. - Nontransferable, change of name or location. 
(a)  No license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable or assignable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and upon paying a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) have the license amended to authorize the conducting of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(b)  Provided that where a person holding a license issued under the provisions of this Chapter changes the name of the business, such person shall upon changing the name make an application to the collector and pay a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) to have said license amended to reflect the change in name. 
(c)  Provided further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-68. - Use of license by unlicensed person. 
No person holding a license required by this Chapter shall permit any unlicensed independent contractor, itinerant merchant, or other person to use the license, the licensed premises or the licensee's name for the purpose of evading payment of any license tax or of evading any other provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-69. - Duplicates. 
A duplicate license may be issued to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and, at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate license charge of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-70. - Posting; public display; keeping on person. 
(1)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city which is open to the public shall keep the license prominently posted in a conspicuous and public place upon the premises where such business is carried on. Provided further that any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city which is closed to the public shall nevertheless keep the license posted in a conspicuous and accessible place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
(2)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city without an agent or employee on the premises shall post in a conspicuous place the name, address and telephone number of the person or persons to be contacted to verify the possession of a proper and valid license. 
(3)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license within his or her possession at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(4)  Whenever the city shall provide a special tag or plate for the identification of a vehicle for which a business license tax has been paid, such tag or plate shall be affixed to the vehicle in accordance with the pertinent regulations of the collector. 
(5)  Whenever the city shall provide a special decal, metal-cal or label for the identification of a coin-operated machine or device for which a business license tax has been paid, such decal, metal-cal or label shall be affixed to the machine or device in accordance with the pertinent regulations of the collector. 
(6)  Any person having a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall produce and exhibit same whenever required to do so by any revenue officer or police officer, or by any other officer or official or employee authorized to inspect licenses or by any person being solicited. 
(7)  No person shall exhibit a revoked business license. 
(8)  No person shall reproduce, duplicate, copy or alter an original business license for the purpose of circumventing the requirement of this section by giving a false or misleading impression that any duplication of an original city business license is valid and that the appropriate fee therefor has been paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-71. - Term of license; renewal; annual and quarterly. 
All annual license renewals shall be for the period of twelve (12) months as specified hereinafter. 
(a)  All annual license renewals based upon a flat rate shall be for the twelve-month period beginning January first of the current year and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the current year. 
(b)  All annual license renewals based upon a variable flat rate shall be for the twelve-month period beginning July first of the current year and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
(c)  All annual license renewals based upon gross receipts shall be for the twelve-month period beginning on April first of the current year and shall expire on the thirty-first day of March of the following year. 
(d)  All quarterly licenses shall be for the period of three (3) months beginning on the first day of January and ending on the thirty-first day of March; on the first day of April and ending on the thirtieth day of June; on the first day of July and ending on the thirtieth day of September; on the first day of October and ending on the thirty-first day of December. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-72. - Term of license; new; annual and quarterly. 
(a)  All new annual licenses issued and based upon a flat rate shall be for the period of time remaining in the twelve-month period beginning January first of the current year and shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the current year; provided, however, that all new annual licenses issued between December first of the current year and December thirty-first of the current year shall be for the period of the month of December of the current year as well as the entire period of the following twelve (12) months ending on December thirty-first. 
(b)  All new annual licenses issued and based upon a variable flat rate shall be for the period of time remaining in the twelve-month period beginning July first of the current year and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of the following year; provided, however, that all new annual licenses issued between May first of the current year and May thirty-first of the current year shall be for the period of the month of May of the current year as well as the entire period of the following twelve (12) months ending June thirtieth. 
(c)  All new annual licenses issued and based upon gross receipts shall be for the period of time remaining in the twelve-month period beginning April first of the current year and shall expire on the thirty-first day of March of the following year; provided, however, that all new annual licenses issued between March first of the current year and March thirty-first of the current year shall be for the period of time in the month of March of the current year as well as the entire period of the following twelve (12) months ending March thirty-first. 
(d)  All new quarterly licenses issued shall be for the time remaining in the individual quarter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 3, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 2, 6-15-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2161, § 2, adopted June 15, 1992, renumbered former § 21-73 as § 21-72 and amended the same to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 21-73. - Renewal due dates. 
(a)  The flat rate license taxes required to be paid by the provisions of this Chapter, if paid annually, shall become due and payable on the first day of December and shall become delinquent on the first day of January of each year or, if paid quarterly, shall become due and payable on the first day of December, March, June and September and shall become delinquent on the first day of January, April, July and October, respectively. 
(b)  The variable flat rate license taxes required to be paid by the provisions of this Chapter, if paid annually, shall become due and payable on the first day of June and shall become delinquent on the first day of July of each year or, if paid quarterly, shall become due and payable on the first day of June, September, December and March and shall become delinquent on the first day of July, October, January and April, respectively. 
(c)  The gross receipts license taxes required to be paid by the provisions of this Chapter, if paid annually, shall become due and payable on the first day of March and shall become delinquent on the first day of April of each year or, if paid quarterly, shall become due and payable on the first day of March, June, September and December and shall become delinquent on the first day of April, July, September and January, respectively. 
(d)  The gross receipts license tax and the variable flat rate license tax for the current year shall each be based respectively on the filed gross receipts statement and the filed variable flat rate assessment statement. The flat rate license tax for the current year shall be based on the schedule of flat rate taxes as specified by the provisions of this Chapter. 
(e)  Any business holding a currently valid annual city business license tax receipt and desiring to pay tax quarterly may elect upon renewal to do so by making application and paying a quarterly fee equal to twenty-five (25) per cent of the annual rate. 
(f)  All daily or monthly license taxes shall be paid in advance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 3, 6-15-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2161, § 3, adopted June 15, 1992, renumbered former § 21-72 as § 21-73 and amended the same to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 21-74. - Renewal license; affidavit. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement, upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-75. - Notification of flat rate tax due. 
Notification of business license tax due, when said taxes are based upon flat rates, will be given by first class United States mail no later than the fifteenth day of December, provided that failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 4, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-76. - Renewal statement; variable flat rate; submission and filing; notification of variable flat rate tax renewal. 
(a)  Where the license is based on a variable flat rate, the applicant shall submit to the collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the nature, location, intended duration and ownership of applicant's business as well as any additional information required by the collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The filing dates for the submission of renewal statements and the payment of business license tax due shall be during the period from the first day of June to the thirtieth day of June of each calendar year. In the case of a variable flat tax based upon the number of persons engaged or employed, the statement shall be for the preceding twelve-month period beginning April first of the preceding year and ending March thirty-first of the current year. 
(b)  Where a category or class of variable flat rate licenses is based on a variable flat rate applied to a fixed amount or number which then thereafter does not vary, then, at the discretion of the collector, the variable flat rate assessment statement may be omitted and a notification of business license tax due may be given at the same time and in the same manner as is applied in the case of flat rate business license. Said business license tax shall then be due and payable and shall become delinquent in the same manner as flat rate business licenses. 
(c)  Notification of business license tax renewal, when such taxes are based upon variable flat rates, will be given by first class United States mail no later than the fifteenth day of May, provided that failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 4, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 5, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-77. - Renewal statement; gross receipts; submission and filing; notification of gross receipts tax renewal. 
(a)  In all cases where the license is based on gross receipts, the applicant shall submit to the collector, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided by the collector, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the nature, location, intended duration, and ownership of applicant's business as well as applicant's gross receipts during the preceding calendar year as may be required by the collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. The filing dates for the submission of gross receipts statements and the payment of business license tax due shall be during the period from the first day of March to the thirty-first day of March. 
(b)  Notification of business license tax renewal, when said taxes are based upon gross receipts, will be given by first class United States mail no later than the fifteenth day of February, provided that failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 6, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-78. - Miscalculation of tax, application of deposit or credit amount; effect. 
(a)  Where the applicant has submitted a timely renewal statement and remitted the tax owed as required pursuant to Sections 21-76 and 21-77, no penalty or interest shall accrue for thirty (30) days on any amount ascertained to be deficient, where said deficiency is determined to be the result of the applicant's miscalculation of the amount of the business license tax owed. 
(b)  Where a deposit or credit amount exists and the applicant has submitted a timely renewal statement, no penalty or interest shall accrue for thirty (30) days on any amount ascertained to be deficient. 
(c)  Notification of deficient business license tax due will be given by first class United States mail no later than the fifteenth day of the first month following the due dates for the submission of renewal statements as set forth in Sections 21-76 and 21-77. 
(d)  Failure to receive such notifications shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 7, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-79. - Same—Failure to file or correct-Notice of assessment. 
If any person fails to file any renewal statement within the prescribed time or if after demand therefor he or she fails to file a corrected statement, the collector shall determine the amount of license tax due by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain. In determining the amount of license tax due for any business for whom the gross receipts of such business is made the basis for fixing the amount of such license the collector may in his or her discretion base such determination upon an average of the reported gross receipts of like businesses, similarly classified. Upon making a determination, the collector shall give a notice of the amount due by personal service or by depositing it in the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his or her last known address. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-80. - Same—Not conclusive; audit of books. 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, his or her revenue officers, or authorized agents of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall keep complete records of business transactions, including rent collected, sales, sales tax collected and paid to the state, receipts, purchases, and other expenditures, including the number of persons employed and otherwise engaged in the business, and shall retain all such records for examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3) complete calendar years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the collector to examine said records at reasonable times and places. Any person who willfully refuses to allow said examination on demand and at a reasonable time and place as herein provided shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-80.1. - Same—Audit deficiency; application of penalty and interest; voluntary compliance; effect—Abatement of penalty and interest; application. 
In the event that the collector or his or her designated agents, whether through an audit or otherwise, determine that any person has misstated their gross receipts amount or other criteria upon which their current or prior years' business license tax has been calculated resulting in an underpayment of the tax amount owed, the collector shall separately calculate the deficiency for each distinct license period affected and issue a statement of tax deficiency and add delinquency penalties as applicable to the amount of the tax deficiency in accordance with Section 21-25, subsection (a) and Section 21-83, subsection (a), together with interest as provided under Sections 21-84 and 21-85, as applicable, until such time as the tax deficiency together with the accrued penalties and interest, are satisfied. 
Provided, however, that where any person voluntarily reports a tax deficiency such person's penalty and interest assessment on said deficiency shall be abated until the combined amount of tax, penalty and interest due is equalized to an amount equivalent to the amount of current and prior years' taxes owing as computed or determined based upon the business license tax rates and charges in effect for the most current tax year. In computing the abatement of accrued penalties and interest to arrive at a combined amount of tax, penalty and interest equivalent to the amount of the current or prior years' taxes owing as computed or determined based upon the business license tax rates in effect for the most current tax year the collector in his or her discretion may retain a sufficient amount of accrued penalty alone, or a sufficient amount of accrued interest alone, or any sufficient combination of accrued penalty amount and accrued interest amount necessary. 
Whenever the result of any audit performed pursuant to this Chapter determines that any licensee has, exclusive of penalties and interest, underpaid the amount of their business license tax by ten (10) per cent or more of the total amount due, but not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), then an audit service fee in an amount as specified by resolution of the city council shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-81. - Confidentiality. 
It shall be unlawful for the collector or any person having administrative duty under the provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. NS-1922] to make known in any manner whatsoever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof to be seen or examined by any person. All gross receipts statements or estimates required by this Chapter shall be confidential and are hereby declared not to be public records. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer, agent or employee of the city shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Code in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this Chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
(2)  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
(3)  The disclosure of information and result of examination of records of particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city; 
(4)  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself or herself, or to his or her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any tax paid, any unpaid tax or amounts required to be collected, interest and penalties; 
(5)  The disclosure of the names and business addresses of persons to whom licenses are currently issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
(6)  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files an appeals claim for fee-exemption, license reinstatement, refund of forfeited fees or bonds, compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
(7)  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-82. - Payments, statements, etc., made by mail; effect. 
When the last day of the month in which the business tax is due falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or state or national holiday, payment of the business license tax may be made without penalty on the first working day of the succeeding month. For the purpose of this article, postmarks shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting envelope contains a post office cancellation indicating not later than the date due, or in the case of a weekend or holiday, not later than the first following working day. 
Whenever any other payment, statement, application, report or other communication received by the collector is received after the time prescribed by this Chapter for the receipt thereof, and whenever the collector is furnished sufficient proof that the payment, statement, application, report, request or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for the receipt thereof, the tax collector shall regard such payment, statement, report, request or other communication as having been timely received. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-83. - Penalties for past due delinquency; application—Minor errors in payments; acceptance. 
(a)  For failure to fully pay any business license renewal tax amount when due, the collector shall add the following penalties: 
(1)  Ten dollars ($10.00) or ten (10) per cent of the unpaid balance of said amount, whichever is greater, on the past due date thereof, 
(2)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) or fifteen (15) per cent of the unpaid balance of said amount, whichever is greater, on the first day of the second month after the due date thereof; 
(3)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or twenty-five (25) per cent of the unpaid balance of said amount, whichever is greater, on the first day of the third month after the due date thereof; and 
(4)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty (50) per cent of the unpaid balance of said amount, whichever is greater, on the first day of the fourth month after the due date thereof; provided that the maximum amount shall not exceed an amount equal to one hundred (100) per cent of the amount of the business license tax due. Notification of delinquent business license taxes will be given by first class United States mail no later than the fifteenth day of each month, until the maximum penalty is imposed; provided that failure to receive such notification shall not exempt the licensee from all requirements under this Chapter. 
(b)  In the event a minor discrepancy exists between the amount paid and the amount due under this Chapter, arising from a miscalculation on the part of an applicant or licensee, and resulting in an underpayment of the business license tax in an amount not to exceed such amount as is specified by resolution of the city council, the collector may accept and record the underpayment as payment in full without notification to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-83.1. - Partial payment; not construed as meeting requirements of chapter—Installment payments and/or deferral; permitted—Written agreement to satisfy indebtedness; effect. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 21-83, subsection (b), acceptance of any partial payment of business license tax or penalty or interest owing that is less than the amount required under the terms of this Chapter shall not be construed as meeting the requirements of this Chapter. No license or sticker, decal, tag, plate or symbol shall be issued, nor shall one (1) which has been suspended or revoked be reinstated or reissued, to any person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the city for any delinquent business tax, unless such person, enters into an acceptable binding written agreement with the city to satisfy said delinquency within one (1) year. With the consent of the collector such agreements may be deferred or extended for a period exceeding one (1) year. 
(b)  The execution of any agreement to satisfy delinquent business license taxes by means of installment payments and/or deferral shall not prevent the accrual of penalties and interest as applicable on the unpaid balance as provided under the terms of this Chapter. However, such additional penalties as may accrue and the interest on such penalties shall not be applied after the execution of such agreement and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. Upon the timely payment of the final installment of the agreement such additional penalties and the interest thereon as may have accrued shall be waived. In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed the city and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid, principal together with accrued penalties and interest thereon, shall become immediately due and payable. In the event such person fails within a period of thirty (30) days thereafter to render payment in full, such person's current business license may be revoked by the collector. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including attorney fees. The execution of such an agreement shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall constitute a waiver against future action. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-84. - Same—Added to tax. 
Any penalties assessed hereunder, exclusive of interest, upon attaining a combined amount equal to one hundred (100) per cent of the amount of the business license tax due shall become merged with the tax payable hereunder and shall be considered as a part thereof for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-85. - Same—Interest. 
In addition to the past due delinquency penalties imposed in Section 21-83, any business that fails to remit the tax due shall pay interest at the rate of one (1) per cent per month, or portion thereof, exclusive of penalties, on the amount of the unpaid tax, from the date on which remittance first became delinquent until paid-in-full or otherwise satisfied. Provided however, that pursuant to Section 21-84 penalties upon attaining a combined amount equal to one hundred (100) per cent of the amount of the business license tax due are merged with the tax payable hereunder and any additional interest charged from such date on shall be charged the combined amount delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-86. - Same—Suspension and revocation of license. 
The collector shall suspend and/or revoke any license issued or granted pursuant to this Chapter only upon those grounds set forth in Sections 21-45, 21-50, 21-55, 21-58, 21-59, 21-60 or upon conditions set forth in any written agreement executed pursuant to Section 21-83. 
Provided further, that unless revocation is made upon conditions set forth in a written agreement executed pursuant to Section 21-83, no licensee's license shall be suspended and/or revoked for failure to pay the license tax or any other amount due pursuant to this Chapter until the penalties accruing for such failure to pay, exclusive of interest, equal one hundred (100) per cent of the business license tax due for such license. Whereupon, the collector shall give a notice of suspension, which notice shall specify the grounds for suspension, and which notice shall be given by personal service or by depositing it in the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the address listed on the application of the licensee where he or she consented to receive mail concerning his or her license, to obtain a license or to pay any license tax due. 
In the event said licensee fails, within a period of thirty (30) days notice, to pay the license tax due or any other amount due pursuant to this Chapter, or to request a hearing the procedure for which shall be as provided in Section 21-41, then and in that event the collector shall give a notice of revocation. The licensee shall be given at least ten (10) days notice, which notice shall specify the grounds for revocation, and which notice shall be given pursuant to the hereinabove set forth procedure for giving notice. 
In the event said licensee fails within the allotted ten (10) day period to request a hearing to show cause why his or her license should not be revoked, then and in that event the collector shall revoke said person's license and give notice thereof to said person pursuant to the hereinabove set forth procedure for giving notice. 
In the event said licensee fails to file within ten (10) days thereafter, an appeal pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code, then the collector's action in revoking said person's license shall be conclusive as to all matters involved, and the transacting and carrying on by any person of any business pursuant to said license shall thereafter be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-87. - Refunds authorized. 
Any business tax, or penalties or interest thereon, or portion thereof, may be refunded, if they were: 
(a)  Paid more than once; 
(b)  Erroneously or illegally collected; 
(c)  Paid in excess of the correct amount due; 
(d)  Issued for a business which subsequently, does not operate in the city, due to applicant's inability to obtain additional permits required under any provision of this Code. In such case, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the business tax paid. Where applicant cancels his license prior to any inspection or investigation taking place, then in that event, applicant shall be entitled to a refund of all tax, inspection or investigation fees paid, less the fifteen dollar ($15.00) application processing charge, without further deduction to cover the administrative cost therefor; 
(e)  Issued for a business which subsequently becomes prohibited or illegal under any law of the state. In such case, the amount refunded shall be prorated on the basis of the proportion which the number of months remaining in the period for which the business tax was paid bears to the number of months in the whole period. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-88. - Application for refund. 
No refund of monies howsoever paid or collected shall be allowed in whole or in part unless an application therefor is filed with the collector within a period of one (1) year from the expiration of the license period for which a refund is sought, and all such claims for refund must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him or her in the manner prescribed by him or her. Such application may be made only by the person who made the payment, his or her guardian, executor, administrator or heir. Refunds shall not be made to an assignee of the applicant. Upon the filing of such a claim, and when he or she determines that a refund is warranted, the collector shall refund the amount warranted, less fifteen dollars ($15.00), to cover the administrative cost of the refund. Provided, however, that in the case of a refund made pursuant to Section 21-87 subsection (b), and where applicable, subsection (d), no deduction shall be made on account of the administrative cost therefor. The failure to file such application within the time prescribed herein shall bar any future right of recovery. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-89. - Same—No refund in instance of other delinquency. 
Where the collector has determined pursuant to Section 21-88 that a refund is due upon a particular business license, but where the applicant or licensee is at the same time determined to be delinquent or otherwise liable for a business license tax upon a separate business license, or for a separate unlicensed business; then in that event, the collector shall apply said refund amount to the balance owing and delinquent for said business license or for said unlicensed business. The collector shall then refund any amount remaining. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-90. - Same—Fraud bar to refund. 
No refund shall be made where the business license was issued under a misrepresentation of fact by the applicant and or such applicant actually engaged in the conduct of the business for which the license was granted prior to the date stated in applicant's original application. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-91. - Same—Proof of payment prerequisite to refund. 
In all cases proof of payment shall be a prerequisite to any refund. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-92. - Same—No refund upon termination of business. 
The business license taxes under the terms of this Chapter are not refundable upon termination of a business or for any unused portion or term of a license period. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 21-93. - Enforcement; duty to examine all places of business. 
It shall be the duty of the collector or his or her designated agents to enforce all of the provisions of this Chapter and the chief of police, the chief building official, the chief fire official, and the city attorney shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required by the collector. The collector in the exercise of the duties imposed hereunder and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-93.1. - Enforcement; inspection/collection service fee—Application. 
(a)  Whenever any person charged with the duty of enforcing this Chapter shall have cause to re-examine, re-inspect, re-investigate, or re-visit a place of business for purposes of enforcing any portion of the business license tax code or to collect any sum owed pursuant to this Chapter, a separate inspection/ collection service fee shall be applicable in the amount as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  In the case of a re-examination, re-inspection, re-investigation, or re-visitation of any local place of business pursuant to a violation of this Chapter or noncompliance with the business license tax code, a reasonable period of time shall be given to the responsible party to correct the violation or to come into satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. If the violation or noncompliance necessitating the re-examination, re-inspection, re-investigation, or re-visitation of any local place of business is remedied prior to the expiration of the correction period no inspection/collection service fee shall be imposed. 
(c)  Whenever the collection of the unpaid balance of any business license tax or other amount subject to the enforcement and collection requirements of this Chapter is sought by transfer to a collection agency, or any other method of assignment not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter, a transfer service fee in the amount as specified by resolution of the city council shall also apply. 
(d)  The collector and his or her authorized agents charged with the duty of enforcing this Chapter, may waive the application of the inspection/collection service fee or any other service fee elsewhere established pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, in connection with any satisfactory agreement entered into in accordance with Section 21-83.1, or any compromise of claim, or any agreement or settlement entered into pursuant to a court approved stipulation, or for other good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-94. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
The collector and all of his or her duly authorized assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter during business hours, free of any charge, and at such other times as may be reasonable following due process of law, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand a display of the required business license tax receipt. Failure to exhibit said license receipt upon demand therefor shall be punishable as specified hereinafter: 
(a)  Any person not having such license tax receipt theretofore issued on the display in a conspicuous place on the premises pursuant to Section 21-70 shall be deemed guilty of a criminal infraction. 
(b)  Any licensee whose license is delinquent and unissued and/or any licensee who has been placed on notice of a suspended license by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to Sections 21-41 or 21-86 of this Chapter or Chapter 3 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a criminal infraction. 
(c)  Any person having been previously placed on notice of violation by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not paid said business license tax or applied for exemption therefrom and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to Sections 21-41 or 21-86 of this Chapter or Chapter 3 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a criminal infraction. 
(d)  Any person having been previously placed on notice of revocation by personal service, or served notice through the United States mail, or by a notice conspicuously posted upon the premises, and who has not applied for, or who is not undergoing the process of a hearing or appeal pursuant to Section 21-41 or 21-86 of this Chapter or Chapter 3 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any person having such license tax receipt theretofore issued in his or her possession or under his or her control, who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand as provided for herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-95. - Enforcement; duty to enforce civil and penal penalties against delinquent licensees. 
It shall be the duty of the collector to maintain a list of all delinquent business taxes that are payable under this Chapter, and upon the same having attained the maximum penalty permitted under this Chapter of one hundred (100) per cent of the license tax due and upon the same coming to his or her knowledge, he or she shall give notice to the licensee of suspension and thereafter act to collect the same in his or her discretion, by suit or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-96. - Enforcement; duty to serve notice of violation; duty to file complaint or issue citation upon continued violation. 
It shall be the duty of the collector to cause a notice of violation to be served on any person found to be in violation of this Chapter and thereafter to cause a complaint to be filed and/or a citation issued to any person found to be in continuing violation of any provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 21-97. - Swap meets. 
Swap meet exhibitors and swap meet operators shall pay business license tax according to the provisions of this section. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words, terms, or phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  "Swap meet" shall mean any event where the place or location at which the event is held has been advertised by any means whatsoever as a place or location to which members of the public at large, during a specified period of time, may bring identifiable, tangible property and exhibit the same for sale or exchange. 
(2)  "Swap meet exhibitor" shall mean any person exhibiting, displaying, selling, exchanging, offering for sale or exchange any property at a swap meet. 
(3)  "Swap meet operator" shall mean any person or organization conducting or operating the business of a swap meet on any premises in the city excluding, however, swap meet exhibitors. 
(b)  Fees. 
(1)  Every swap meet operator shall pay an annual business license fee according to Section 21-119(1) of this Chapter. 
(2)  Each swap meet exhibitor participating in a swap meet shall pay a fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per swap meet stall per day. Where two (2) or more swap meet exhibitors share a single stall, each such exhibitor shall pay a separate daily stall fee. Such fee shall constitute a debt owed by the swap meet exhibitor to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the swap meet operator. The swap meet exhibitor shall pay the fee to the swap meet operator at the time and on each day the swap meet exhibitor participates in the swap meet. Any unpaid fee shall be paid upon the termination of the swap meet exhibitor's participation in the specific swap meet. Each swap meet operator shall collect the fee imposed by the provisions of this section to the same extent and at the same time as any other fees are collected from every swap meet exhibitor. The amount of the fee shall be separately stated from any other monies collected by the swap meet operator. The fee shall be in addition to any other fee required by the city. 
(3)  On or before the tenth day following each swap meet, each swap meet operator shall file a return with the collector showing the total amount of fees collected under this section and such other information as may be required by the collector. At the time the return is filed, the swap meet operator shall remit the full amount of the fees collected to the collector. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business by the swap meet operator for any reason. 
(4)  Every swap meet operator shall hold all fees collected under this section in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the collector. Any swap meet operator who fails to remit the fees within the time specified shall pay a penalty of ten (10) per cent for each month said payment is overdue. 
(c)  Records. Each swap meet operator shall keep full and accurate records of gross receipts and stall rentals to vendors in connection with the operation of the swap meet. The city, by and through its authorized officers shall have the right to examine and audit such records, including records of any bank accounts, at any reasonable time, and swap meet operators shall cooperate fully with inspection of them. Such records shall include, but are not limited to, the total amount of gross receipts from each day, as well as whatever records are necessary in order to provide the city any required information pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-98. - Coin-operated machines or devices; license tax imposed; amount of tax; applicability of tax where devices are operated as secondary business. 
(a)  For every person whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing, maintaining or letting the use of any coin-operated machine or device, or otherwise engaging in vending operations, or in operating any coin-operated machine or device at any location or fixed place of business owned or otherwise under the control of another, the annual license tax on business done exclusively within the city, for every device so rented, leased, let, maintained or operated, shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per each ten cent ($0.10) device and over or ten dollars ($10.00) for the first five cent ($0.05) device and under and thereafter five dollars ($5.00) for each such additional device five cents ($0.05) and under. 
(b)  Any person whose primary business is not limited exclusively to coin-operated machines or devices, and for which he or she pays a license tax based on gross receipts, but who owns, leases, or rents for operation at his or her fixed place of business any coin-operated machine or device or who receives rent for the operation of any coin-operated machine or device thereat, or who otherwise participates in the gross receipts derived from the operation of such machines thereat; such person may elect to combine the gross receipts of both activities and pay a license tax based upon the total receipts thereof which will be assessed at the same rate as is applied to his or her primary business according to Section 21-119 of this Chapter. Such election shall be made in writing at the time of applicant's original application for a business license or may be made once annually thereafter at the time of licensee's application for a renewal license. 
(c)  Where any licensee engages in the operation of any coin-operated machine or device at his or her fixed place of business subsequent to the commencement and licensing of licensee's primary business, the initial license tax due shall be identical to the tax established in subsection (a) above. However, upon the expiration of the initial licensing period, licensee may elect to pay the tax as provided pursuant to subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-99. - Same—Applicability of tax where coin-operated machines or devices are operated as primary business. 
For every person whose primary business is limited exclusively to the operation of coin-operated machines or devices upon premises owned or controlled by such person, the annual license tax on business done shall be based upon the total gross receipts thereof according to Section 21-119(1) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-100. - Additional required information. 
At the time the license required under Section 21-98 is applied for, and thereafter annually at the time of the renewal of such license, or at such other time as the collector may set, the applicant or licensee shall provide to the collector a list giving the kind or character of machine or device, local business name and street address, and number of machines or devices at each proposed or existing location. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-101. - Sealing of nonidentified or unlicensed machines. 
The collector, as chief revenue officer, and each and every duly authorized revenue officer of the city shall seal the coin openings or slots in a manner which will render inoperative the coin devices on any machine or device not otherwise exempted by the provisions of the chapter which is found available to the public for operation and which does not have stamped or affixed thereon the required identification or for which the proper license tax has not been paid in full; in lieu thereof, he or she may seize and hold any such machine for the payment of such license tax pursuant to Section 21-102. A service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid in advance to the collector, or his or her authorized agent by the owner or operator of any such machine or device so sealed for the removal of such seals. No person shall operate any machine or device so sealed without first submitting evidence to the collector or his or her duly authorized agent that payment of the required license tax and service charge prescribed in this section has been made and until the required identification has been stamped upon or affixed to the machine or device and the collector or his or her agent has removed such seals. It is unlawful for any person other than the collector or his or her duly authorized agents to break any such seals. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon receipt of evidence of payment in full of the tax and service charge and, when applicable, evidence of other required compliance by the owner or operator of any machine or device so sealed, the collector or his or her duly authorized agent shall break and remove such seals. In the event of seizure, any such machines shall be disposed of upon nonpayment of such tax as provided by the laws relative thereto, pursuant to Section 21-102. Such machines may be reclaimed by the owners, prior to disposal, upon payment of taxes and all costs involved in the seizure, storage and handling thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-102. - Enforcement; seizure of devices. 
In the event that any person engages in, conducts, transacts and carries on or manages the business of maintaining any coin-operated machines or devices and operates any such devices upon premises not belonging to, nor under the control of said person without obtaining a license therefor, or upon revocation of the same the collector shall seize such coin-operated machines or devices and hold them as security for the payment of the license fee or any other amount due and owing pursuant to this Chapter and shall not surrender same until a license is obtained or renewed. In the event the person owning or having control of the device fails, within a period of thirty (30) days after notice to said licensee served to the address listed on the application of the licensee where he or she consented to receive mail concerning his coin-operated machines or devices, to pay any license tax and any other amount due pursuant to this Chapter, then and in that event the device shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided in this section. Where the person owning or having control of the device has failed to obtain a license for said device prior to the seizure of said same then notice shall be served through United States mail to the person owning or having control of the device to the address affixed to the device listing the owner's name and address. Where no address is so affixed a notice shall be conspicuously posted upon the premises where the device is being operated. In the event said person fails, within a period of thirty (30) days after the serving or posting of said notice, to obtain a business license, then in that event the device shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided in this section. 
The device or devices or so many thereof shall be sold to satisfy the amount of license fee or any other amount due to the city pursuant to this Chapter and any device or devices not sold shall be surrendered to the owner thereof; provided further that in the event the device or devices are sold for a sum less than the amount of the license fee or any other amount due and owing to the city pursuant to this Chapter, the owner of the devices shall, nevertheless, remain liable for the balance of such license fees due and payable. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-103. - Owner of business responsible. 
The owner of the business wherein the machine or device indicated herein is located shall be held responsible for the full amount of the tax if the owner of the machines or devices has not paid the tax when due and payable. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-104. - Decal, metal-cal or labels to be attached to machine; information to be shown. 
(a)  No person shall maintain any coin-operated machine or device within the city without having posted thereon, in a conspicuous place, a decal or label for identification purposes, on which is written the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner or operator thereof. 
(b)  No person shall maintain any coin-operated machine or device within the city without having posted thereon, in a conspicuous place, a decal, metal-cal or label, which shall be issued and supplied by the collector upon payment of the required tax, which decal, metal-cal or label shall indicate that the license tax has been paid for the current period. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-104.1. - Exemptions. 
No business license tax or identification shall be required for the maintenance or operation of: 
(1)  Any U.S. postage stamp machine; 
(2)  Any change machine; 
(3)  Any machine dispensing sanitary or hygienic articles, or drinking cups, towels or medicine, which machine or device is entirely owned by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and is maintained solely for the convenience of the employees, visitors or customers; 
(4)  Any machine or device dispensing newspapers or magazines; provided, that the distributor owning and or the independently contracted agent servicing each such machine or device has paid a business tax for the current license year pursuant to Article X of this Chapter. In the event a business license tax has not been paid, the collector or his or her duly authorized agent shall take action pursuant to Sections 21-101 and 21-102 by sealing the coin openings or seizing any such machines or devices that are found available to the public for operation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-105. - Discontinuing maintenance of machines or devices; substitution of other machines or devices. 
In the event any person discontinues maintaining any machine or device duly licensed under this Chapter during a period when such machine or device is licensed under this Chapter, such licensee may substitute another like machine or device in its place, and may maintain such substituted machine or device without payment of an additional license tax for the unexpired period of the license carried on such discontinued machine or device; provided, that such person shall surrender the city-provided identifying decal, metal-cal or label, whichever the case may be, to the collector or his or her duly authorized agent and obtain a new identifying decal, metal-cal or label for such unexpired period for such substituted machine or device. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20,87)  
Sec. 21-106. - Applicability of chapter; operation of illegal machines or devices. 
Nothing contained in this Chapter nor any action of the collector or any duly authorized agent in issuing a license shall in any manner be considered as expressing any opinion or approval as to the legality of any machine or device and shall be no authority to operate any machines or devices as set forth in this article which may be illegal or illegally operated under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-107. - Peddlers, solicitors and pushcarts. 
(a)  Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type conveyance from place to place or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, and offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to the purchasers or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise or other things of value for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, or canvassing any opinions, preferences, endorsements or other information from persons within the city, not otherwise licensed under the provisions of this Chapter or not having a regularly established place of business within the city, as said established place of business within the city shall be defined in this section, shall pay a license fee as follows: 
(1)  One hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, or ten dollars ($10.00) per day, unless the person, persons, firms or corporations for whom such persons peddling and/or soliciting have a principal's, peddler's or solicitor's license as hereinafter provided pursuant to Section 21-108. 
(2)  Thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per year, if the person, persons, firms or corporations for whom such person is peddling and/or soliciting have a principal's, peddler's or solicitor's license. 
(b)  The phrase "having a regularly established place of business within the city" as used hereinabove and hereinafter below shall be defined as any individual having a fixed place of business, within the city for a period of not less than ninety (90) days and having a state board of equalization permit number applicable to the aforementioned place of business so established in the city. 
(c)  Every person operating a pushcart vending business within the city shall pay a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for each such pushcart operated within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 5, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2133, § 3, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-108. - Principal's, peddler's or solicitor's license. 
Any person, firm or corporation, either employing one or more individuals, or contracting with one or more independent contractors to have such individuals solicit the retail sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or other things of value for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future, or to peddle or sell goods, wares and merchandise or to solicit any opinions, preferences, endorsements or other information from persons within the city, not otherwise licensed under the provisions of this Chapter or not having a regularly established place of business within the city, may obtain a principal's, peddler's or solicitor's license and pay a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) annually, plus thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per employee for each employee engaged in peddling or soliciting within the city, including independent contractors required to be separately licensed pursuant to Section 21-107, subsection (b). 
The collector shall not issue such license until the applicant files with the collector a list of all peddlers and/or solicitors employed by the applicant or with whom the applicant has contracted and a signed agreement that the applicant, within five (5) days thereafter, will notify the collector in writing of every change in personnel of those soliciting and/or peddling for him. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 6, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-109. - Same; requirements for license. 
No license to peddle or solicit shall be issued to any person unless and until such person furnishes the collector with his state board of equalization permit number and agrees to report separately in his sales tax return to the state the amount of receipts from sales in the city and agrees to pay the required sales or use tax on such receipts. This section shall apply only to those businesses subject to payment of a sales or use tax under the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-110. - Radio broadcasting, television broadcasting; soliciting advertising therefor. 
Any person engaged in transacting and carrying on activities related to the generation of electromagnetic waves within the city for the purpose of commercial broadcasting by radio transmission or television transmission shall pay an annual business license fee according to Section 21-119(1) of this Chapter. 
Any person engaged in transacting and carrying on activities related to the solicitation of advertising within the city for radio or television transmission in intrastate commercial broadcasting and not otherwise licensed under the provisions of this Chapter and not having a regularly established place of business within the city pursuant to Section 21-107 shall pay an annual business license fee according to Section 21-108 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-111. - Off-premises commercial advertising signs; erecting of, maintaining of, selling of advertising space therefor. 
Any person engaged in transacting and carrying on the business of erecting, maintaining and selling of advertising space on off-premises commercial advertising signs shall pay a license tax therefor per sign face located in the city. For sign faces with gross dimensions equal to or less than three hundred (300) square feet said tax shall be at the rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per sign face. For sign faces with gross dimensions in excess of three hundred (300) square feet said tax shall be at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sign face. 
(Ord. No. NS-1926, § 1, 10-19-87)  
Sec. 21-112. - Trucking and hauling; transportation of property; delivering or carrying of goods, wares or merchandise; occasional and incidental activity; exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Transportation of property. Every person whose business is that of operator of any vehicle used for the transportation of property for hire or compensation, and who in the course of that business uses the public streets and highways within the city to receive or discharge, pick up or deliver property within the city, shall pay a business tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for each such vehicle. 
(b)  Delivering or carrying of goods, wares or merchandise. Every person who uses any vehicle over the public streets and highways of the city to receive or discharge property, or for delivering or carrying goods, wares or merchandise sold, let or handled by him in the course of this business within the city, and who is not otherwise specifically taxed by other provisions of this Chapter, shall pay a business tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for each such vehicle. 
(c)  Occasional and incidental activity. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons operating such vehicles within the city on an occasional and incidental basis. For the purpose of this section, "occasional [and] incidental" is defined to be the doing or performing of not more than three (3) incidents or acts as specified in this section in any one-year period. 
(d)  Exemption and exceptions. The business tax imposed under the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who is subject to tax under the Highway Carrier's Uniform Business License Tax Act, commencing with Section 4301 of the California Public Utilities Code; nor shall the provisions of this section apply to the operation of any vehicle operated exclusively in interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-113. - Telephone services. 
Every person engaged in the business of providing telephone services shall pay an annual business fee according to Section 21-119(2) of this Chapter. For the purpose of this section, "gross receipts" shall have the same meaning as in Section 21-3, except that only those receipts derived from providing telephone services within the city shall be included, and further excepting that only receipts resulting from intrastate telephone services shall be included. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-114. - Professional services. 
Every person engaged in the business of providing professional services shall be taxed upon the basis of the number of persons engaged or employed in such business, in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  Each location in which professional services are rendered, whether by one (1) or more practicing principals or by one (1) or more professional independent contractors rendering professional services pursuant to a contract of employment, or whether by one (1) or more salaried professional employees engaged in rendering professional services—one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(b)  Each practicing professional principal, in excess of one (1), engaged in rendering professional services, whether as owner or as partner or officer or as professional shareholder—one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(c)  Each additional person engaged or employed, either as professional independent contractor rendering professional services pursuant to a contract of employment, or whether as salaried professional employee engaged in rendering professional services—fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(d)  Each additional person engaged or employed otherwise—ten dollars ($10.00). 
For the purpose of this section, the phrase "each practicing professional principal" shall be deemed and is declared to mean the maximum number of persons engaged in rendering professional services (other than salaried employees or independent contractors engaging their services pursuant to a contract of employment and not otherwise sharing in the profits of the business) and shall be computed based upon the maximum number of practicing principals engaged in rendering professional services for any one-day period during any part of the preceding business license period. 
For the purpose of this section, the phrase "each additional person engaged or employed" shall be deemed and is declared to mean the average number of persons, whether licensed practitioners employed or otherwise engaged in rendering professional services, and not otherwise sharing in the profits of the business, or whether any other category of person, directly or indirectly paid for their service and not otherwise sharing in the profits of the business. 
For the purpose of determining the average number of persons engaged or employed, the person subject to the tax shall ascertain separately the total number of hours of service performed by licensed practitioners engaged or employed during the preceding year, including paid leave, and the total number of hours of service performed by all other persons engaged or employed during the preceding year, including paid leave, in each case dividing the total number of hours of service by the fulltime equivalent (two thousand eighty (2,080) hours). In computing the average number of persons engaged or employed, fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with one-half (0.5) or greater being rounded up and less than one-half (0.5) being rounded down. 
In the case of an application for an original license, applicant shall state both the maximum number of practicing professionals engaged or intended to be engaged in rendering professional services and the average number of persons engaged or employed or intended to be engaged or employed to assist in the conduct of applicant's business. Thereafter, the license tax provided for herein shall be based solely upon the hereinabove set forth method of computation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 2, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-115. - Same—Keeping of records; applicability of audit. 
Section 21-80 shall apply to all statements provided to be filed under Section 21-114; provided however, that the inspection of books and records shall be limited specifically to books and records reflecting the employees and other persons engaged in the business activity. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13)  
ARTICLE X. - RATES AND SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 21-116. - Applicability of article. 
The tax for any license required by any Section of this Chapter shall be set forth in this article for the particular business involved. The tax and the duration of the license shall be annual, quarterly, monthly, and daily as indicated in this article. The letter "A" following the tax shall indicate an annual rate; the letter "Q" shall indicate a quarterly rate; the letter "M" shall indicate a monthly rate; the letter "D" shall indicate a daily rate. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-117. - New business license tax. 
(a)  A license tax for a new business shall be paid in advance or a deposit taken in lieu thereof prior to any new business activity being undertaken. 
(b)  All new businesses for whom flat fees are made the basis for fixing the amount of such license shall pay in advance an amount equal to one-quarter (¼) of the annual fee therefor for each quarter and fraction of a quarter remaining during the period for which the new license is issued, except as otherwise specified hereinafter. 
(c)  All new businesses for whom the gross receipts of such business are made the basis for fixing the amount of such license shall pay their annual fee based on actual gross receipts received during the period for which the new license is issued. For any business which is commenced subsequent to April first, the renewal fee shall be based upon an annualization of the actual gross receipts received during the period for which the new license is issued. In the event an applicant fails to submit a report of the actual gross receipts received pursuant to Section 21-77, the fee shall be based on the collector's estimate of the actual gross receipts received pursuant to Section 21-79. In lieu of payment in advance, each applicant shall post a deposit in the amount hereinafter indicated. 
(1)  All new businesses beginning business on or after April first of the current year but before April first of the following year shall post a deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  All new businesses beginning business on or after March first of the current year but before April first of current year shall post a deposit equivalent to one and one-twelfth (1 1/12 ) of the required deposit for all new businesses beginning April first. 
Where an applicant's fee is determined to be in excess of the amount of the specified deposit, said deficiency shall be added without interest or penalty to the amount of the applicant's renewal fee as calculated pursuant to Sections 21-77 or 21-79. Where an applicant ceases to transact and carry on the business licensed on or before the expiration of the period for which the new license is issued, and where the applicant's fee is determined to be in excess of the amount of the specified deposit, the applicant shall remain liable for said deficiency which shall be deemed due and collectible at the same time and in the same manner as all other annual gross receipts fees due and payable upon renewal. 
Where an applicant's fee is determined to be less than the amount of the specified deposit, said surplus shall be applied without interest as a credit against the amount of the applicant's renewal fee as calculated pursuant to Sections 21-77 or 21-79. Where an applicant ceases to transact and carry on the business licensed on or before the expiration of the period for which the new license is issued, and where the applicant's fee is determined to be less than the amount of the specified deposit, said surplus may be requested by applicant as a refund; provided, however, that such request must be made in writing and must be made within one (1) year of the expiration of the initial license period. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, unless an adjustment or exemption is obtained pursuant to this Chapter, the minimum tax pursuant to this section shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 3, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2161, § 8, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 21-118. - Same; nonresident businesses. 
(a)  All new businesses located elsewhere, excluding businesses engaged in the business of pushcart vending or in erecting, maintaining and selling of advertising space on off-premises commercial advertising signs in the city or engaged in the operation of coin-operated machines or devices, or engaged otherwise in vending operations, but transacting and carrying on business in the city, and for whom flat rates or variable flat rates are made the basis for fixing the amount of such license, shall have the option of paying the flat rate or variable flat rate amount or basing the amount of their tax upon their attributable gross receipts in accordance with Section 21-119(1), to which no basic tax rate amount shall be added, but for which a two-hundred-dollar-annual deposit shall be required to offset any tax due should applicant cease operation before the expiration of the license term. Provided further that all such businesses who so elect shall pay in advance an amount therefor as set forth in Section 21-117, subsection (c) above. Said deposit to be applied as a credit or to be taken as a refund in the same manner as is set forth in Section 21-117, subsection (c). 
(b)  All new businesses located elsewhere, but transacting and carrying on business in the city for whom gross receipts are made the basis for fixing the amount of such license, shall base their tax upon attributable gross receipts in a manner similar to that of all other similarly classified businesses for whom gross receipts are made the basis for fixing the amount of their license, to which no basic tax rate amount shall be added. Provided further that all such businesses shall pay in advance an amount therefor as set forth in Section 21-117, subsection (c) above. Said deposit to be applied as a credit, or to be taken as a refund in the same manner as is set forth in Section 21-117, subsection (c). 
(c)  Unless an adjustment of exemption is obtained pursuant to this Chapter, the minimum tax pursuant to this section shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 7, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 4A, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2133, § 4A, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-118.1. - In lieu deposits—Election of alternate in lieu deposit. 
Whenever an applicant for a new business license for whom the gross receipts of such business is made the basis for fixing the amount of such license is required under the terms of Sections 21-117 or 21-118 to post a deposit in lieu of payment in advance of their business license tax, said applicant may alternatively elect to post an adjusted deposit amount equal to the amount of their anticipated tax based on an acceptable good-faith estimation of their expected gross receipts. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-119. - Gross receipts tax rates. 
Gross receipts tax rates for the different classifications are as follows: 
(1)  Classification "A"—All businesses for which no tax is specified elsewhere in this article, including, but not limited to: retail businesses and sales at retail, services (including real estate brokers, real estate developers, insurance brokers, life and disability insurance analysts, stock and bond brokers, commission agents, brokers or merchants, building and loans, and recreational services), hotels, motels, theaters, and food establishments: 
For each separate place of business licensed, a basic rate of $60.00, plus: 
$0.50 per $1,000.00 to ..... $       100,000.00 
 0.30 per 1,000.00 to ..... 500,000.00 
 0.20 per 1,000.00 to ..... 1,000,000.00 
 0.15 per 1,000.00 over ..... 1,000,000.00 
(2)  Classification "B"—Manufacturing, processing, wholesale businesses and sales at wholesale, sales of gasoline and motor fuels, and telephone services: 
For each separate place of business licensed, a basic rate of $60.00, plus: 
$0.30 per $1,000.00 to ..... $       100,000.00 
 0.25 per 1,000.00 to ..... 300,000.00 
 0.20 per 1,000.00 to ..... 600,000.00 
 0.15 per 1,000.00 to ..... 1,000,000.00 
 0.10 per 1,000.00 over ..... 1,000,000.00 
(3)  Classification "C"—Rental of commercial real estate: 
For the first property location licensed, a basic rate of $60.00, plus: 
$0.50 per $1,000.00 to ..... $       100,000.00 
 0.30 per 1,000.00 to ..... $       500,000.00 
 0.20 per 1,000.00 to ..... 1,000,000.00 
 0.15 per 1,000.00 over ..... 1,000,000.00 
For each additional property location licensed, a basic rate of $10.00, plus: 
$0.50 per $1,000.00 to ..... $       100,000.00 
 0.30 per 1,000.00 to ..... $       500,000.00 
 0.20 per 1,000.00 to ..... 1,000,000.00 
 0.15 per 1,000.00 over ..... 1,000,000.00 
(4)  Classification "D"—Junk yards, automobile wrecking yards and salvage yards; junk dealers, junk collectors, automobile dismantlers, junk salvagers, and junk recyclers: 
For each separate place of business licensed, a basic rate of $100.00, plus: 
$0.50 per $1,000.00 to ..... $       100,000.00 
 0.30 per 1,000.00 to ..... 500,000.00 
 0.20 per 1,000.00 to ..... 1,000,000.00 
 0.15 per 1,000.00 over ..... 1,000,000.00 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2000, § 3, 3-6-89)  
Sec. 21-119.1. - Holding companies and pass-through entities—Basic rate amount only. 
Whenever a business entity or other person functions as a holding company or pass-through entity and does not directly generate gross receipts within the city, but otherwise transacts and carries on business within the city, or maintains a business presence in the city, or is registered as a business entity with the California Secretary of State pursuant to the California Corporations Code as the same now exists or as may be hereafter amended from time-to-time with a designated or registered business entity address located in the city, then the business license tax liability of such business entity or person under Section 21-119 shall be limited to the applicable basic rate amount only. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-119.2. - Home-based businesses—Alternate tax. 
(a)  Persons liable under the terms of this Chapter for gross receipts business license taxes for business conducted from a home residence within the city shall have the right to elect an alternate flat rate business license tax as set forth in Section 21-120h of this Chapter for home based businesses and home based occupations, in lieu of the gross receipts tax which would otherwise be applicable. Such election shall be made in writing at the time of applicant's original application for a business license or may be made once annually thereafter at the time of licensee's application for a renewal license. 
(b)  Home based businesses and home occupations eligible for election of an alternate flat rate tax assessment shall be deemed to be those businesses or occupations conducted from a home residence in the city whose business or occupational use of said residential premises meets the requirements for a home occupation permit as set forth in Sections 41-193.1 through 41-607 of this code as the same now exist or as they may be hereafter amended from time-to-time. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-119.3. - Election of an alternate tax assessment basis—Effect. 
In every case where a licensee exercises a right under this Chapter to elect an alternate tax assessment basis the effect of said election shall be as follows: 
(a)  In the event an existing licensee elects to convert their annual license assessment to an alternate tax assessment basis with an annual term beginning one (1) or more calendar quarters before the commencement of their pre-existing tax assessment basis and ending one (1) or more calendar quarters after the conclusion of their pre-existing tax assessment basis, then their initial alternate tax assessment shall be subject to a quarterly proration to account for the reduced number of calendar quarters remaining in the term of the newly elected tax assessment. 
(b)  In the event an existing licensee elects to convert their annual license assessment to an alternate tax assessment basis with an annual term beginning one (1) or more calendar quarters after the commencement of their pre-existing tax assessment basis and ending one (1) or more calendar quarters after the conclusion of their pre-existing tax assessment basis, then their pre-existing tax assessment shall be retroactively increased prorata by the number of quarters necessary to account for the quarterly periods remaining between the conclusion of their pre-existing licensing term and the commencement of their alternate tax assessment licensing term. 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-120. - Flat rate and variable flat rate tax schedules. 
Flat rate and variable flat rate taxes are as set forth in Section 21-120a through 21-120z of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 5, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-120a. - Advertising services, ambulance companies, amusement services. 
(1)  ADVERTISING SERVICE: 
(a)  Distributing samples or posting bills ..... $100.00 A 
(b)  Using vehicle containing loudspeakers ..... 100.00 A 
(c)  Using amplifier or loudspeakers to advertise user's own business only ..... 35.00 A 
(2)  AMBULANCE COMPANY: 
1 or 2 vehicles each ..... 100.00 A 
3 or more vehicles ..... 300.00 A 
(3)  AMUSEMENT SERVICES: 
(a)  Amusement center (a location where mechanical devices or animals are maintained for furnishing rides or entertainment and which may also include vending stands): 
(i)  Temporary amusement center (10 days or less), per ride/stand ..... $ 25.00 D 
(ii)  Other: 
Base rate ..... 250.00 M 
Plus, for each ride or vending stand in excess of 10 ..... 25.00 Q 
(b)  Sporting exhibitions ..... 50.00 D 
(c)  Carnival, circuses, concerts, tent shows and open air shows seating not more than 4,000 persons: 
First day ..... 100.00 D 
Each additional day ..... 50.00 D 
(d)  Carnival, circuses, concerts, tent shows and open air shows seating more than 4,000 persons: 
First day ..... 250.00 D 
Each additional day ..... 150.00 D 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 8, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-120b. - "Bankrupt," "closing out," "fire" or "wreck" sales; building tradesmen, bus, limousine and taxi companies. 
(1)  "BANKRUPT," "CLOSING OUT," "FIRE" OR "WRECK" "SALES: 
Any person who has a license issued under this Chapter continuously for one year prior to the sale, if the sale is conducted on the place of business covered by the license, and if the sale is limited to merchandise then on hand in said place of business and lasts no longer than thirty (30) days; provided such person so certifies to the collector prior to such sale there shall be no additional fee. 
Otherwise ..... $200.00 M 
(2)  BUILDING TRADESMEN, per individual ..... 35.00 A 
(3)  BUS, LIMOUSINE, or TAXI COMPANY: 
a.  BUS, LIMOUSINE, per vehicle ..... 100.00 A 
b.  TAXI COMPANY, per vehicle: 
1.  Prior to July 1, 1998 ..... 100.00 A 
2.  Effective July 1, 1998 ..... 30.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 9, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2349, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 21-120c. - Catering trucks, christmas tree and pumpkin lots, contractors. ;$; 
(1)  CATERING TRUCKS, per vehicle ..... $100.00 A 
(2)  CHRISTMAS TREE LOTS, per lot ..... 100.00 M 
(3)  PUMPKIN PATCH LOTS, per lot ..... 100.00 M 
(4)  CONTRACTOR—GENERAL CONTRACTOR, prorated quarterly per contractor ..... 120.00 A 
(5)  CONTRACTOR—SPECIALTY and SUBCONTRACTOR, prorated quarterly per contractor ..... 110.00 A ; 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 10, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-120d. - Dances, dance halls, day nurseries. ;$; 
(1)  DANCE HALL, PUBLIC ..... $200.00 A 
(2)  DANCING PLACE, PUBLIC ..... 100.00 A 
(3)  DANCE, PUBLIC, per dance ..... 25.00 D 
(4)  DAY NURSERY ..... 35.00 A ; 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-120e. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-120f. - Firework stand. ;$; 
FIREWORK STAND, per stand\$100.00 ;\$; 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-120g. - Gardeners or lawn maintenance workers. ;$; 
GARDENERS OR LAWN MAINTENANCE WORKER, per individual\$ 35.00 A ;\$; 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-120h. - Home-based businesses, home occupations. 
HOME-BASED BUSINESS/HOME OCCUPATION ..... $ 165.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-2841, § 6, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 21-120i. - Independent contractors, ice cream trucks, itinerant merchants, insurance solicitors. 
(1)  INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR, per individual ..... $ 35.00 A 
(2)  ITINERANT MERCHANT ..... 100.00 Q 
(3)  INSURANCE SOLICITOR, per solicitor ..... 35.00 A 
(4)  ICE CREAM TRUCKS ..... 100.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 11, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-120j. - Janitorial and building maintenance services, junk collection. 
(1)  JANITORS AND BUILDING MAINTENANCE WORKERS, per individual ..... $ 35.00 A 
(2)  JUNK COLLECTION, per vehicle ..... 100.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 12, 6-18-90)  
Secs. 21-120k—21-120n. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-120o. - Off-premises commercial advertising signs. 
OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGNS: 
(1)  Sign faces with gross dimensions equal to or less than three hundred (300) square feet, per sign face ..... $ 75.00 A 
(2)  Sign faces with gross dimensions in excess of three hundred (300) square feet, per sign face ..... 100.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1926, § 2, 10-19-87)  
Sec. 21-120p. - Pawnbrokers, peddlers, professional services, pushcarts. 
(1)  PAWNBROKER ..... $400.00 A 
(2)  PEDDLER, per peddler as principal ..... 100.00 A 
or ..... 10.00 D 
(3)  PEDDLER, per peddler as independent contractor ..... 35.00 A 
(4)  PRINCIPAL'S PEDDLER'S LICENSE ..... $200.00 A 
per each person engaged in peddling in the city ..... 35.00 A 
(5)  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: 
(a)  Per location, plus ..... $100.00 A 
(b)  Each practicing principal in excess of one ..... 100.00 A 
(c)  Each licensed associate ..... 50.00 A 
(d)  Each additional person ..... 10.00 A 
(6)  PUSHCARTS, per pushcart ..... 200.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 13, 6-18-90; Ord. No. NS-2131, § 6A, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2133, § 5A, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 21-120q. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-120r. - Real estate agents, rental of residential real estate: residential property rental; residential apartment rental; rooming house rental; residential mobile home property rental. 
(1)  REAL ESTATE AGENT, per agent ..... $ 35.00 A 
(2)  RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY RENTAL UNIT ..... 25.00 A 
Plus per each property rental unit ..... 5.00 A 
(3)  RESIDENTIAL APARTMENT RENTAL ..... 25.00 A 
Plus per each apartment rental unit ..... 5.00 A 
(4)  ROOMING HOUSE RENTAL ..... 25.00 A 
Plus per each room rental unit ..... 5.00 A 
(5)  RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOME PROPERTY RENTAL ..... 25.00 A 
Plus per each rental unit space ..... 5.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-120r.1. - Residential rental surcharge. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the business license tax for residential property rental and residential apartment rental shall consist of the amount set forth in subsections (2) and (3) of Section 21-120r plus an annual surcharge of nineteen dollars and fifty cents ($19.50) per each property rental unit or each apartment rental unit. The surcharge hereby established shall be due and payable and shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner that the amount due under Section 21-120r is due and payable. No business license shall be issued unless the surcharge is paid. Penalties and interest shall be assessed upon the total amount due and unpaid at the rate specified in this Chapter until such time as both the amount due under Section 21-120r and the surcharge due under this section are paid in full. All provisions for the enforcement, collection and recovery of unpaid business license taxes shall likewise apply to the enforcement, collection and recovery of any unpaid surcharge. This section shall expire on, and be of no further force or effect after December 31, 2015. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, establish a program whereby particular residential properties or residential apartments, licensed pursuant to this Chapter, may be certified as having met standards of excellence in property maintenance. In such event, the executive director of the planning and building agency shall be responsible for the implementation of that program. Owners of property certified pursuant to that program shall be exempt from the payment of the surcharge specified in subsection (a) of this section for the three (3) tax years next succeeding the time of such certification. The executive director of the planning and building agency shall provide the executive director of the finance and management services agency with listings of licensed properties certified under this program, which shall be periodically updated to reflect changes. The city council may provide for such financial limitations on the exemptions to be granted from the surcharge as the city council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2173, § 1, 8-17-92; Ord. No. NS-2223, § 1, 7-5-94; Ord. No. NS-2408, § 3, 11-1-99; Ord. No. NS-2527, § 3, 5-19-03; Ord. No. NS-2757, § 3, 9-4-07; Ord. No. NS-2811, § 3, 12-6-10; Ord. No. NS-2824, § 3, 9-19-11)  
Sec. 21-120s. - Sharpening services; shoeshine stands, solicitors. 
(1)  SHARPENING SERVICE, place to place ..... $ 35.00 A 
(2)  SHOESHINE STAND, per operator ..... 15.00 A 
(3)  SOLICITOR, per solicitor as principal ..... 100.00 A 
(4)  SOLICITOR, per solicitor as independent contractor ..... $ 35.00 A 
(5)  PRINCIPAL'S SOLICITOR'S LICENSE ..... 200.00 A 
Per each person engaged in soliciting in the city ..... $35.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7 20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 15, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-120t. - Theatrical performance; tow trucks, trucking and general delivery. 
(1)  THEATRICAL PERFORMANCE ..... $ 50.00 D 
(2)  TRUCKING AND GENERAL DELIVERY, per vehicle ..... 50.00 A 
(3)  TOW TRUCKS, per vehicle ..... 50.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2064, § 16, 6-18-90)  
Sec. 21-120u. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-120v. - Vending and coin-operated machines. 
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR DEVICES: 
(1)  Per $0.10 device and over ..... $ 20.00 A 
(2)  Per $0.05 device and under, 
First machine ..... 10.00 A 
Per additional device ..... 5.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-120w. - Warehouses, watchmen and private police. 
(1)  WAREHOUSE ..... $100.00 A 
(2)  WATCHMEN or PRIVATE POLICEMEN, per individual ..... 35.00 A 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 21-121. - Adjustment for inflation/deflation. 
Each tax, including each of its components, and any specified deposit amount required in lieu thereof, together with any other charges which are imposed pursuant to this chapter, shall be automatically adjusted on November 1, 1988, and on November 1 of each year thereafter, upward or downward, equivalent to the most recent change in the annual average of the consumer price index as published by the United States Department of Labor for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim metropolitan area. 
For purposes of calculating the annual inflator/deflator factor under this section the base year shall be that year ending with the quarter ending June 30, 1987. Rates shall first be adjusted on November 1, 1988, and thereafter, based on the annually calculated change from the base year. Said change shall be rounded off to the nearest whole percent per hundred as follows: If the remaining fraction of a percent is forty-nine one-hundredths of a percent or less such fraction shall be omitted. If the remaining fraction of a percent is fifty one-hundredths of a percent or more, the next highest percent shall be applied. A similar method of computation shall be used in the application of the annual inflator/deflator factor to the amount of each flat fee, deposit or other charge required pursuant to this chapter, which amount shall be rounded off to the nearest dollar. 
(Ord. No. NS-1922, § 1, 7-20-87)  
ARTICLE XI. - ASSESSMENT BY LIEN 
 
Sec. 21-122. - Nonpayment of tax; assessment by lien; recording and enforcement of liens; recording service fee. 
(a)  Recording of a certificate of lien. If any amount, including penalties, interest, and administrative charges required to be paid under this chapter is not paid when due, the collector or any duly authorized revenue officer acting as his or her designated agent, may record or cause to be recorded, in the office of the county recorder(s) of such counties as the collector may determine, a certificate which specifies the amount due, the name and address of the person liable for the same, a statement that the collector has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid, and a legal description of the real property owned by such person. From the time of the recording of the certificate, the amount required to be paid together with penalties, interest, and administrative charges owing constitutes a lien upon all real property in the county owned by such person or thereafter acquired before the lien expires. The lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a tax lien and shall continue for ten (10) years from the filing of a certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
(b)  Recording service fee. Whenever the collector in his or her discretion determines that the recording of a certificate of lien is desirable to secure and effectuate the collection of any amount required to be paid under the terms of this chapter, then a recording service fee shall be applicable in the amount as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2161, § 9, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, 2-4-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, adopted February 4, 2013, amended the title of § 21-122 to read as set out herein. Previously § 21-122 was titled "Nonpayment of tax; assessment by lien."  
Secs. 21-123—21-125. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2841, § 5, adopted February 4, 2013, repealed §§ 21-123—21-125 in their entirety. Former §§ 21-123—21-125 pertained to notice of hearing of lien collection of delinquent taxes by special tax roll assessment; recordation of lien for delinquent charges, respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-2161, § 9, adopted June 15, 1992.  
ARTICLE XII. - MARIJUANA COLLECTIVES/COOPERATIVES 
 
Sec. 21-126. - Purpose. 
This article is required for the purpose of fixing the rate of taxation for marijuana collectives/cooperatives and for the purpose of providing a tax levy for the usual and current expenses of the City of Santa Ana. The taxes required to be paid under this article are declared to be required pursuant to the taxing power of the City of Santa Ana solely for the purpose of obtaining revenue and are not regulatory permit fees. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 5, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 21-127. - Marijuana collectives/cooperatives—Annual business license tax assessment. 
(a)  Annual business license tax assessment for marijuana collectives/cooperatives. 
(1)  Every collective/cooperative whether it is organized or conducted as a "not for profit" business, a "non-profit" business, or a "for-profit" business, shall pay an annual business license tax in accordance with chapter 21 and the sections and subsections hereunder. 
(2)  For the purposes of this article, a marijuana collective/cooperative is defined in section 18-611 and is considered to be a business as that term is defined in section 21-3. 
(3)  For the purposes of this article, a collective/cooperative is not considered to be a religious or charitable organization. 
(4)  "Medical marijuana collective/cooperative" or "collective/cooperative" shall mean any activity regulated or permitted by chapter 18. 
(5)  For the purposes of this article, a marijuana collective/cooperative is not considered to be a business or person having a "specified exemption" or "specified exclusion" from business license taxation as set forth in sections 21-48 and 21-49. 
(6)  For the purposes of this article, a "nonprofit organization" shall mean any institution or organization that is exempted from taxes measured by income or gross receipts pursuant to Article XIII, Section 26 of the California Constitution as codified under Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 23701) of Part 11 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 37101 (c) of the Government Code or Sub-Chapter F (commencing with Section 501) of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. An institution or organization operating as a collective/cooperative and claiming a gross receipts assessment business license tax exemption under this section shall have the burden of furnishing to the collector such information as the collector may require to validate the claim of exemption including but not limited to such a determination by the California Franchise Tax Board or any other information requested by the collector. 
(7)  For the purposes of this article, "gross receipts" shall mean any transfer of title or possession, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of tangible personal property for a consideration including any monetary consideration for marijuana whatsoever, including, but not limited to, membership dues, reimbursements provided by members, regardless of form, or the total amount of cash or in-kind contributions, including all operating costs related to the growth, cultivation or provision of marijuana or any transaction related thereto. "Gross receipts" shall also include without limitation anything else of value obtained by a collective/cooperative. The term "gross receipts" shall also include the total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all refunds, cash credits and properties of any amount or nature, any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom, on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, the labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, losses, or any other expense whatsoever; provided that cash discounts allowed or payment on sales shall not be included. "Gross receipts" shall also include the amount of any federal, manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the retailer thereof and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge. "Gross receipts" shall not include the amount of any federal tax imposed on or with respect to retail sales whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge. "Gross receipts" shall not include the amount of any federal tax imposed on or with respect to retail sales whether imposed upon the retailer or the consumer and regardless of whether or not the amount of federal tax is stated to customers as a separate charge, or any California state, city or city and county sales or use tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, or such part of the sales price of any property previously sold and returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale. "Gross receipts" shall be calculated without any deduction on account of any of the following: 
(i)  The cost of tangible property sold or bartered; 
(ii)  The cost of materials or products used, labor or service cost, interest paid, losses, or other expense; or 
(iii)  The cost of transportation of the marijuana, or other property or product. 
(b)  Business license tax rates for marijuana collectives/cooperatives. 
(1)  Every collective/cooperative, excepting a qualified "nonprofit organization," whether it is organized or conducted as a "not for profit" business, a "non-profit" business, or a "for-profit" business, shall pay a separate business license tax at a rate of up to ten (10) percent of the gross receipts generated or otherwise received for each branch establishment or separate property location of the business. The gross receipts tax shall be initially set at a rate of five (5) percent. The maximum tax rate shall not exceed ten (10) percent of gross receipts. This tax shall not be adjusted for inflation pursuant to section 21-121. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the maximum tax rate of ten (10) percent of gross receipts imposed under subsection (b)(1), the city council may in its discretion at any time by ordinance implement a lower gross receipts tax rate for all marijuana collectives/cooperatives, as defined in such ordinance, subject to the maximum rate of ten (10) percent of gross receipts. The city council may by ordinance increase any such gross receipts tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum gross receipts tax rate established under subsection (b)(1). 
(3)  Effective January 1, 2018, the gross receipts tax initially set at a rate of five (5) percent pursuant to subsection (b)(1), shall be increased to a rate of six (6) percent. The maximum tax rate shall not exceed ten (10) percent of gross receipts. This tax rate shall not be adjusted for inflation pursuant to section 21-121. 
(4)  As part of the gross receipts tax imposed by this article, each collective/cooperative shall pay a minimum basic rate of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) annually for each separate branch location or separate property location of the business. 
(c)  Modification, repeal or amendment. The city council may repeal the ordinance codified in this article, or amend it in a manner which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein, without further voter approval. The city council may likewise by ordinance adopt and add additional provisions to any other article of this chapter and relate them to this article, or amend any existing provisions of any article of this chapter as they may already relate to this article in any manner which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein, without further voter approval. If the city council repeals said ordinance or any provision of this article, it may subsequently reenact it without voter approval, as long as the reenacted ordinance or section does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein. 
(d)  Administration—Rules, regulations, and guidelines; interpretation/clarification. In order to aid in the city's collection of taxes due under this article and to ensure that all marijuana collectives/cooperatives are taxed consistently to the best of the city's ability, the collector, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may promulgate rules, regulations, and guidelines, to implement and administer this article including, but not limited to rules, regulations, and guidelines harmonizing other provisions of this chapter with the provisions of this article in any manner not inconsistent with the intent of this article and which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein. The collector may also, with the concurrence of the city attorney, interpret or clarify the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this article. 
(e)  Occasional transactions—Exemptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons having no fixed place of business within the city who come into the city for the purpose of transacting a specific item of marijuana collective/cooperative business at the request of a specific patient, client or customer, provided that such person does not come into the city for the purpose of transacting business on more than five (5) days during any calendar year. 
(2)  For any person not having a fixed place of business within the city who comes into the city for the purpose of transacting collective/cooperative activities, the business tax payable by such person may be apportioned by the collector in accordance with this chapter. 
(f)  Reporting and remittance. Beginning as set forth in subsection (k) below, and monthly thereafter, each marijuana collective/cooperative (except qualified nonprofit organizations exempt from taxes measured by income or gross receipts) required to pay a tax based on gross receipts under this article, shall report to the city any gross receipts received during the preceding monthly reporting period and shall likewise remit to the city the taxes due and owing during said period. For purposes of this section, month shall mean calendar month, and taxes shall begin to accrue on the date that a person or entity first receives a business license or other permit to operate as a collective/cooperative. 
The payment of the two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) minimum basic rate gross receipts tax required annually for each separate branch location or separate property location of the business in accordance subsection (b)(3), shall be made annually prior to the beginning of the fiscal year beginning April first of the current year and expiring on the 31st day of March of the following year. In the case of a new collective/cooperative the minimum basic rate gross receipts tax shall be paid in advance prior to any new business activity being undertaken. Every new licensee shall pay in advance an amount equal to one-quarter (¼) of the annual minimum basic rate gross receipts tax, for each quarter and fraction of a quarter remaining during the period for which the new license is issued. 
(g)  Delinquent date—Penalty. Any individual or entity who fails to pay the taxes required by this article when due shall be subject to penalties and interest as set forth in accordance with this chapter. The collector is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business. 
(1)  The payment of a business tax required by this article, and its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any collective/cooperative unless the person has complied with all of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any collective/cooperative in any building or on any premises in the event that such building or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such collective/cooperative is in violation of any law. 
(2)  No tax paid under the provisions of this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any legal business in an illegal manner, or any business in violation of any ordinance of the city. Nothing in this article implies or authorizes that any activity connected with the distribution or possession of marijuana is legal unless otherwise authorized and allowed by California and federal law. Nothing in this section shall be applied or construed as authorizing the sale of marijuana. 
(i)  Business license tax certificate—Required. There are imposed upon all persons engaged in transacting and carrying on any collective/cooperative business activity in the city taxes in the amounts prescribed in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person, either for him or herself or for any other person, to commence, transact or carry on any business in the city without first having procured a business license from the city under this chapter and having paid the taxes set forth in this article, and without complying with any and all applicable provisions contained in this chapter. The carrying on of any collective/cooperative without complying with all the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and every day that such collective/cooperative is so carried on. 
(j)  Classification of business license assessment type—Term and renewal. The business license issued to marijuana collectives/cooperatives shall be classed as a gross receipts assessment type, issued for the same term of license as set forth in subsection 21-71(c) and shall be subject to renewal in accordance with sections 21-72(c), 21-73(c), and 21-77. 
(k)  Operative date. Upon the approval by the majority of the voters of the city at the November 4, 2014 general election, the taxes imposed by this article shall become operative and shall be applied by the collector upon all marijuana collectives/cooperatives. 
(l)  Operative date of increased gross receipts tax rate. The gross receipts tax set initially at a rate of five (5) percent pursuant to subsection (b)(1) shall be increased to a rate of six (6) percent effective January 1, 2018, pursuant to subsection (b)(3). 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 5, 12-9-14 ; Ord. No. NS-2930, § 8, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 21-128. - Effect of state and federal reference/authorization. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this article or chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease. Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent. 
To the extent that the city's authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this article is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this article shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 5, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 21-129. - Violation deemed misdemeanor—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by the maximum penalties provided for in Penal Code Section 19. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 5, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 21-130. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article, or its application to any person or circumstance, be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this article or chapter or the application of this article or chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. 
( Ord. No. NS-2864, § 5, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 21-131. - Transferability of collective/cooperative business license. 
Section 21-67 notwithstanding, business licenses issued to collective/cooperatives pursuant to this article shall be transferable or assignable upon presentation of a valid regulatory safety permit issued in the name of the transferee or assignee. 
( Ord. No. NS-2918, § 12, 7-5-17 )  
ARTICLE XIII. - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 21-132. - Purpose. 
This article is required for the purpose of fixing the rate of taxation for commercial cannabis businesses including delivery, distribution, manufacturing, cultivation, testing and retail sales of cannabis and related products. This article does not apply to medical marijuana collectives/cooperatives (also referred to as medicinal cannabis retail businesses) which are subject to a business license tax under article XII of this chapter. The taxes required to be paid under this article are declared to be required pursuant to the taxing power of the City of Santa Ana solely for the purpose of obtaining revenue and are not regulatory permit fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-133. - Commercial cannabis businesses—annual business license tax assessment. 
Every person engaged in a "commercial cannabis business" or "commercial cannabis activity" shall pay an annual business license tax as outlined below. This article shall not apply to medical marijuana cooperatives/collectives also referred to as medicinal cannabis retail businesses which are governed by article XII of this chapter or to personal cultivation as defined in section 18-611(n) of this code. 
(a)  For each branch establishment or separate property location of a commercial cannabis business transacted and carried on in the city, and for each separate type of commercial cannabis business conducted at the same location, the higher of the two (2) following tax rates shall be due to the city for each monthly reporting period: 
(1)  Up to ten percent (10%) of each dollar of gross receipts received or generated for each monthly reporting period. 
(2)  Up to $35.00 per square foot (annual tax rate) prorated monthly to one-twelfth (1 1/12 ) of the annual tax rate amount. 
(b)  These tax rates shall not be adjusted for inflation pursuant to section 21-121 of this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the tax rates imposed herein under subsection (a), the city council may, in its discretion, at any time by resolution implement any lower tax rate it deems appropriate, and may by resolution increase such tax rate from time to time, not to exceed the maximum rates established by subsection (a). 
(d)  As of the operative date of this article, the business license gross receipts tax rates and square footage tax rates application to specific commercial cannabis business activities shall be established as follows: 
Commercial Cannabis Business Activity 	Gross Receipts Tax Rate 	Gross Square Footage Tax Rate 
Adult-use Cannabis Retail Business (including Delivery) 	8% 	$25.00 
Cultivation 	6% 	$10.00 
Distribution 	6% 	$4.00 
Manufacturing 	6% 	$10.00 
Testing Facility or Testing Laboratory 	5% 	$1.50 
 
Commercial cannabis businesses not having a fixed place of business within the city but conducting regular, non-incidental commercial cannabis business activities within the city shall be subject to the gross receipts tax rate(s) as set out in the table above based on the category/categories of commercial cannabis activity conducted. However, such out-of-town commercial cannabis businesses shall not be subject to any gross square footage tax rate(s). 
(e)  As part of the annual gross receipts/square footage tax(es) imposed by this article, each commercial cannabis business located within the city shall pay a minimum basic rate of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) annually for each branch establishment or separate property location of the commercial cannabis business transacted and carried on in the city, and for each separate type of commercial cannabis business conducted at the same location. Commercial cannabis businesses having no fixed place of business within the city shall be exempted from this requirement. 
(f)  In the event the city should in the future permit additional categories of commercial cannabis business activity, as may from time to time be licensed by the State of California, such categories of commercial cannabis activities shall be subject to the same maximum tax rates as imposed herein. The city may by ordinance of the city council initially set the required gross receipts/gross square footage tax rates based on category of cannabis business activity at lesser rates as may be deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(g)  For purposes of this article, a commercial cannabis business is not considered to be a business or person having a "specified exemption" or "specified exclusion" from business license taxation as set forth in sections 21-48 and 21-49 of this chapter. 
(h)  For purposes of this article any person claiming an exemption from the gross receipts tax rate component of the combined gross receipts/square footage tax imposed under this article on the basis of a claim of being a qualified "nonprofit organization" shall have the burden of substantiating their claim to the same extent and in the same manner as a marijuana collective/cooperative in accordance with section 21-127(a)(6) of this chapter. 
(i)  Cannabis businesses shall not pass the taxes imposed by this article through to an adult-use cannabis retail business customer or commercial cannabis business customer in any fashion except as part of the basic product sales and/or service price. 
(j)  Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Adult-Use cannabis retail business" as defined in section 40-2(4) of this code. 
(2)  "Commercial Cannabis Activity" as defined in section 40-2(9) of this code. 
(3)  "Commercial cannabis business" as defined in section 40-2(10) of this code excluding medical marijuana collectives/cooperatives also referred to as medicinal cannabis retail sales. 
(4)  "Cultivation" as defined in section 40-2(11) of this code. 
(5)  "Delivery" as defined in section 40-2(13) of this code. 
(6)  "Distribution" as defined in section 40-2(16) of this code. 
(7)  "Gross receipts" - section 21-3 of this chapter notwithstanding, "gross receipts" for the purposes of this article shall mean: 
(A)  Transfer of title or possession, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of tangible personal property for a consideration including any monetary consideration for cannabis, including, but not limited to, membership dues, reimbursements provided by members, regardless of form, or the total amount of cash or in-kind contributions, including all operating costs related to the growth, cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, testing, or provision of cannabis or any transaction related thereto; 
(B)  Anything else of value obtained by a cannabis business; 
(C)  The total amount of the sale price of all sales and services; 
(D)  The total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise (whether at wholesale or retail), for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all refunds, cash credits and properties of any amount or nature; 
(E)  Any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom, on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, the labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, losses, or any other expense whatsoever; provided that cash discounts allowed or payment on sales shall not be included; 
(F)  The amount of any federal manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of property sold, even though the manufacturer or importer is also the retailer thereof and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge; 
(G)  The amount of any California state cannabis excise tax or state cannabis cultivation tax regardless of whether or not the amount of such excise tax or cultivation tax is included in the price of the product or stated to customers as a separate charge; 
(H)  "Gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
i.  The amount of any federal tax imposed on or with respect to retail or wholesale sales or the sale of services whether imposed upon the cannabis business or the consumer whenever the amount of federal tax is authorized by law to be stated and passed through to customers as a separate charge; 
ii.  Any California state, county, or city sales or use tax, including any add-on, district, or transaction and use tax, required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser, or such part of the sales price of any property previously sold and returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale; or 
iii.  The amount of the sale price of business personal property (all property owned or leased by a cannabis business operator used in the operation cannabis business activities, including but not limited to: furniture, fixtures, and business equipment); real property, including land, buildings and other improvements; 
iv.  The amount of equity contributions, investments, and/or loan proceeds to cannabis business' operation, and/or proceeds from the sale or transfer of cannabis business' retail or commercial cannabis business. 
(I)  "Gross receipts" shall be calculated without any deduction on account of any of the following: 
i.  The cost of tangible or intangible property sold or bartered; 
ii.  The cost of materials or products used, labor or service cost, interest paid, losses, or other expense; 
iii.  The cost of transportation of cannabis, or other property or product; 
iv.  The amount of any federal or state income or franchise taxes; and 
v.  Any other business costs or expenses, unless otherwise specifically exempted. 
(8)  "Manufacturing" as defined in section 40-2(22) of this code. 
(9)  "Retail businesses" as defined in section 40-2(40) of this code. 
(10)  "Gross Square foot" or "gross square footage" for the purposes of this article shall mean: 
(A)  The gross number of square feet comprising a commercial cannabis business' property location (as confirmed by the corresponding "approved building set" or "approved certificate of occupancy" on file with the City of Santa Ana Planning and Building Agency) whichever is the greater of any square footage indicated. 
(B)  In the case of commercial cannabis businesses licensed by the state to engage in cultivation "gross square foot" or "gross square footage" shall mean the aggregate sum of the number of square feet comprising all areas of the premises under "canopy," whether such sum is greater or lesser than the gross square footage as stated in the "approved building set" or "approved certificate of occupancy." 
"Canopy," shall mean the designated area(s) of a premise that will contain mature plants at any point in time. Canopy shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable boundaries of all area(s) that will contain mature plants at any point in time, including all of the space(s) within the boundaries. Canopy may be noncontiguous, but each unique area included in the total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary which includes interior walls, shelves, greenhouse walls, hoop house walls, garden benches, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds, or garden plots; and if mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation. 
(11)  "Testing Facility" or "Testing Laboratory" as defined in section 40-2(44) of this code. 
(12)  "Wholesale" as defined in section 40-(46) of this code. 
(k)  Modification, repeal or amendment. The city council may repeal the ordinance codified in this article, or amend it in a manner which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein, without further voter approval. The city council may likewise by ordinance adopt and add additional provisions to any other article of this chapter and relate them to this article, or amend any existing provisions of any article of this chapter as they may already relate to this article in any manner which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein, without further voter approval. If the city council repeals said ordinance or any provision of this article, it may subsequently reenact it without voter approval, as long as the reenacted ordinance or section does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein. 
(l)  Administration—Rules, regulations and guidelines. In order to aid in the city's collection of taxes due under this article and to ensure that all commercial cannabis businesses are taxed consistently to the best of the city's ability, the collector, with the concurrence of the city attorney, may promulgate rules, regulations, and guidelines, to implement and administer this article including, but not limited to rules, regulations, and guidelines harmonizing other provisions of this chapter with the provisions of this article in any manner not inconsistent with the intent of this article and which does not result in an increase in the tax or taxes imposed herein. The collector may also, with the concurrence of the city attorney, interpret or clarify the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this article. 
(m)  Occasional transactions—Exemptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons having no fixed place of business within the city who come into the city for the purpose of transacting a specific item of commercial cannabis business at the request of a specific client or customer, incidental to a commercial cannabis business principally established elsewhere, provided that such person does not come into the city for the purpose of transacting such business on more than three (3) days during any calendar year. 
(2)  For any person not having a fixed place of business within the city who comes into the city for the purpose of transacting commercial cannabis business activities, the business license tax(es) payable by such person may be apportioned by the collector in accordance with this chapter. 
(n)  Reporting and remittance. 
1.  Beginning as set forth in subsection (q) below, and monthly thereafter, each commercial cannabis business required to pay a tax or taxes based on gross receipts under this article (except qualified nonprofit organizations exempt from taxes measured by income or gross receipts), shall report to the city any gross receipts received during the preceding monthly reporting period. In addition, each cannabis business (including qualified nonprofit organizations) required to pay a tax or taxes based on square footage shall report to the city the gross square footage of the cannabis business' property location. Every cannabis business shall then compute the business license taxes at both the gross receipts rate and the gross square footage rate—prorated monthly to one-twelfth (1 1/12 ) of the annual tax rate amount—and shall then remit to the city the amount of the higher of the two tax calculations due and owing during said period in accordance with section 21-133, subsection (d). In the case of a qualified nonprofit organization only the gross square footage computation shall be made and the amount of such calculation shall represent the amount due and owing during said period. All reporting and remitting made shall be done in accordance with instructions from the collector and shall be made using forms provided or approved by the collector. 
2.  For purposes of this section, month shall mean calendar month and shall include any fraction of a month. Taxes shall begin to accrue on the date that a person or entity first receives a business license or other city permit to operate as a commercial cannabis business or upon the operative date of this article should a person or entity already possess a commercial cannabis business license or other city permit to operate as a commercial cannabis business. 
3.  The payment of the two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) minimum basic rate gross receipts tax required annually for each separate branch location or separate property location of the business in accordance with this section, shall be made annually prior to the beginning of the fiscal year beginning April first of the current year and expiring on the 31st day of March of the following year. In the case of a new commercial cannabis business the minimum basic rate gross receipts tax shall be paid in advance prior to any new business activity being undertaken. Every new licensee shall pay in advance an amount equal to one-quarter (¼) of the annual minimum basic rate gross receipts tax, for each quarter and fraction of a quarter remaining during the period for which the new license is issued. 
(o)  Delinquent date—Penalty. Any individual or entity who fails to pay the taxes required by this article when due shall be subject to penalties and interest as set forth in accordance with this chapter. The collector is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this article and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this article. 
(p)  Business license tax certificate—Required. There are imposed upon all persons engaged in transacting and carrying on any commercial cannabis business activity in the city taxes in the amounts prescribed in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person, either for him or herself or for any other person, to commence, transact or carry on any business in the city without first having procured a business license from the city under this chapter and having paid the taxes set forth in this article, and without complying with any and all applicable provisions contained in this chapter. The carrying on of any commercial cannabis business activity without complying with all the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and every day that such commercial cannabis activity is so carried on. 
(q)  Classification of business license assessment type—Term and renewal. The business license issued to commercial cannabis businesses shall be classed as a gross receipts assessment type, issued for the same term of license as set forth in subsection 21-71(c) of this chapter and shall be subject to renewal in accordance with sections 21-72(c), 21-73(c), and 21-77. 
(r)  Operative date. Upon the approval by the majority of the voters of the city at the November 6, 2018 general election, the taxes imposed by this article shall become operative and shall be applied by the collector upon all commercial cannabis businesses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-134. - Payment of tax does not authorize unlawful business. 
(a)  The payment of a business tax required by this article, and its acceptance by the city, shall not entitle any person to carry on any commercial cannabis business unless the person has complied with all of the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any commercial cannabis business in any building or on any premises in the event that such building or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such commercial cannabis business is in violation of any law. 
(b)  No tax paid under the provisions of this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any legal business in an illegal manner, or any business in violation of any ordinance of the city, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-135. - Single property location; multiple state licenses; separate city business licenses. 
Sections 21-7, 21-8, and 21-9 of this chapter notwithstanding, separate city business licenses, issuable to commercial cannabis businesses pursuant to this article, shall be required for each separate type of commercial cannabis business activity transacted and carried on at a single city property location for which a commercial cannabis business may seek licensure by the state, or for which a state license has been approved or issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-136. - Security for collection of commercial cannabis business' business license tax. 
To ensure compliance with business license tax payment requirements established pursuant to this article, the collector shall require, beginning on the operative date of this article, that each commercial cannabis business owner (including but not limited to each transferee, assignee, or purchaser of a commercial cannabis business subject to the business licensing requirements of this article) deposit within thirty (30) days such security (per individual business license) in a form acceptable to the collector in an amount not larger than the cannabis business owner's estimated average monthly tax liability as determined by the collector or the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is the greater. Each new city commercial cannabis business licensee shall upon obtaining their city business license(s) deposit a similar security per business license within thirty (30) days after commencing business. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-137. - Effect of state and federal reference/authorization. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this article or chapter (whether by direct citation or by definitional reference to another chapter of this code) shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease. Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent. 
To the extent that the city's authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this article is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this article shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-138. - Violation deemed misdemeanor—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by the maximum penalties provided for in California Penal Code Section 19. The penalties under this section are in addition to any other penalties available pursuant to this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-139. - Transferability of commercial cannabis business license. 
Section 21-67 of this chapter notwithstanding, business licenses issued to commercial cannabis businesses pursuant to this article shall be transferable or assignable upon presentation of a valid regulatory safety permit issued in the name of the transferee or assignee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Sec. 21-140. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article, or its application to any person or circumstance, be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this article or chapter or the application of this article or chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. 
(Ord. No. NS-2962 , § 2(Exh. A-1), 11-6-18)  
Chapter 22 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, adopted July 5, 2016 , repealed ch. 22, §§ 22-1—22-17, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 22, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-1335, §§ 1—15, adopted December 20, 1976; Ord. No. NS-1338, §§ 1—5, adopted December 28, 1976; Ord. No. NS-1353, § 1, adopted March 21, 1977; Ord. No. NS-1355, § 1, adopted April 18, 1977; Ord. No. NS-1458, §§ 1—4, adopted November 6, 1978; Ord. No. NS-2145, §§ 4, 5, adopted September 16, 1991; Ord. No. NS-2361, § 2, adopted July 20, 1998; Ord. No. NS-2779, §§ 3—16, 18, 19, adopted March 16, 2009 and Ord. No. NS-2792, § 15, adopted August 17, 2009. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter: 
(a)  "California Massage Therapy Council" or "CAMTC" means the state-organized, non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry as set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600, as amended). 
(b)  "Employee" includes every owner, partner, operator, manager, supervisor and worker, whether part-time, full-time, or temporary, whether paid or not, who renders services of any nature or is otherwise employed in the operation of a massage establishment. For purposes of this chapter, the term employee shall also include massage technicians who provide massage services as independent contractors to a massage establishment. 
(c)  "Manager" means the owner or operator of the massage establishment, or any person(s) designated by the owner or operator to act as the representative and agent of the owner or operator in managing daily operations. Evidence of management may include, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules, or purchase supplies. 
(d)  "Massage" means any scientific manipulation of soft tissue, or method of applying pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
(e)  "Massage certificate" means a certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with section 4600, as amended). 
(f)  "Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massage or baths as regular functions. 
(g)  "Massage technician" means any massage practitioner, masseuse, massage therapist or any person who administers or in any way assists in administering any form of massage, bath, or health treatment involving massages or baths as the principal functions to another person for any consideration whatsoever. A massage technician may be an employee or independent contractor. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-2. - Massage establishment permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, the business of a massage establishment without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every such massage establishment. 
(b)  Any healing arts professional or other state licensed practitioner listed in section 22-5 of this chapter who employs, or contracts with, more than two (2) massage technicians must obtain a massage establishment permit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-2.1. - Massage establishment permit term. 
(a)  Permits for massage establishments shall be for a period of one (1) year, unless sooner revoked as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the limit period. All massage establishments subject to this chapter, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and as may be amended hereafter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-3. - Massage establishment permit application. 
(a)  Any person, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the chief of police or his/her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of administering the requirements of this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize conducting a massage establishment business until such permit has been granted. 
(c)  Each applicant shall be the owner of the massage establishment and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth. 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last thirty (30) days. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. The responsible managing officer may complete and sign all applications on behalf of the corporate officers and partners. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and a notarized copy of the lease or rental agreement, including any addendums to the agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  Proof of submission to the California Department of Justice a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints taken by a police department or California Department of Justice approved contractor. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee. 
(14)  A site plan depicting the building and/or unit proposed for the massage establishment and a dimensional interior floor plan depicting how the massage establishment will comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(15)  The complete name, date of birth, phone number and residence address of the proposed on-site manager who will be principally in charge of the operation of the establishment, and any other information as requested by the massage establishment application. A manager must possess the same qualifications as an owner. 
(16)  A statement in writing, and dated, by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(d)  The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the police department of the city and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(e)  The chief of police shall have forty-five (45) calendar days in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The department of building safety shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage establishment and shall make separate recommendations to the chief of police or designee concerning compliance with the foregoing provisions. 
(f)  The chief of police or designee, after receiving the application and aforementioned recommendations, shall grant the permit if he/she finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not within five (5) years prior to the application filing date been convicted of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 311.6, 314, 315, 316, 318, 415, 647(a), 647(b), or 647(d), or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude, or any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054 through 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(6)  The applicant has not had a massage establishment permit or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state within the five (5) years prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The massage establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(g)  Any person, corporation or partnership denied a permit by the chief of police or designee pursuant to these provisions may appeal pursuant to chapter 3 of this Code. 
(h)  It shall be the responsibility of any massage establishment permit holder to notify the city within thirty (30) days of changing either his/her home address, phone number, or the address of the massage establishment. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-3.1. - Massage establishment permit renewal. 
(a)  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the current permit. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee allowing his/her permit to lapse or which permit expired during a suspension shall be required to submit a new application and pay the corresponding original application fees. 
(b)  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his/her respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the chief of police who shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in his/her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed. 
(c)  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his/her respective permit shall provide a valid city issued business license at the time of filing. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-4. - Massage technician requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician, practitioner, or therapist unless such person holds a valid massage certificate issued by the CAMTC pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Profession Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with Section 4600, as amended) and a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city. 
(b)  Any massage technician acting or operating as an independent contractor shall have and maintain a valid city issued business license.  
Sec. 22-5. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(a)  Acupuncturists, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. Practical nurses, licensed vocational nurses, or other persons without qualifications as massage technicians, whether employed or contracted by acupuncturists, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors or osteopaths or not, may not give massage or massage procedures. 
(b)  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state. 
(c)  Nurses registered under the laws of the state. 
(d)  Barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists and estheticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state when engaged in such practice within the scope of their license. Except that this exception applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the customer of said barber or cosmetologist or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearm, hands, calves and/or feet. State licensed estheticians may provide skin care, which is limited to the face, neck, arms or upper part of the human body. 
(e)  Accredited high schools and colleges, and coaches and trainers therein while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(f)  Trainers of any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-5.1. - Persons working for exempted individuals. 
Any person conducting massage for an exempted class individual must possess a massage certificate and shall comply with all massage regulations. A massage technician employed by an exempted class individual must work under the direction and control of that individual who must be physically present at the location where the massage is being administered. A massage technician cannot rent office space or workspace at an exempt individual's location. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-5.2. - Evidence of exempt status. 
(a)  Any person or business exempted from the provisions of this chapter pursuant to section 22-5 shall file with the city a copy or provide other evidence of the certificates, permits, licenses, registration, or other approved authorizing documentation held by the persons who are providing massage services at the business, prior to commencing services within the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to make reasonable investigations into the information so provided pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-6. - Massage establishment facilities. 
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  Sign. Establishment must comply with the city sign ordinance contained in chapter 41. 
(b)  Lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code, and, in addition, at least one (1) unobstructed artificial light of not less than sixty (60) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons. 
(c)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with Section 1105 of the Uniform Building Code. 
(d)  Equipment. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(e)  Water. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(f)  Linen storage. Closed cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linens, and approved receptacles shall be provided for storage of soiled linen. 
(g)  Separation of sexes. If a shower facility is provided at a massage establishment, separate shower and dressing facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons, and each such separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such. 
(h)  Facilities for employees. A minimum of one (1) separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided sanitary towels in permanently installed dispensers at each wash basin. 
(i)  Compliance with Code. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-7. - Massage facilities operation. 
Every person who owns, operates, manages or is employed in any massage establishment shall comply with the following operating requirements. These requirements shall be prominently and publicly displayed in a conspicuous place upon every premises operating under the provisions of this chapter: 
(a)  No person shall be employed or permitted to act as a massage technician who is not in possession of a valid unrevoked massage certificate. 
(b)  Bath and massage operations shall be carried on and the premises shall be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open, public place on the premises, and shall be described in readily understandable language. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, independent contractor, manager, or permittee shall permit, and no massage technician shall offer to perform any services other than those posted. 
(d)  The massage establishment shall prominently display the massage establishment permit and any and all massage certificates for each and every massage technician employed in the establishment in the front lobby area of the premises, for examination upon demand by any police or code enforcement officer of the city. 
(e)  Each massage technician shall wear a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city while administering a massage. The identification card shall be worn on outer clothing with the photo facing out. The massage technician shall not use any name other than specified on the photo identification card while on duty. 
(f)  Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall not be used on more than one (1) patron unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one (1) patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in approved receptacles. 
(g)  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered only to members of the same sex at any one (1) time, such persons of the same sex shall be placed in a single separate room or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place such persons of the same sex in separate rooms or booths having adequate ventilation to an area outside said room or booth while massage services are being performed. 
(h)  Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, shower rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the health department. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the health department after each use. 
(i)  Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one (1) patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilizing methods. 
(j)  No persons shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of, consuming, or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises. 
(k)  No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage, except as provided below. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any massage upon a member of the general public while on the premises of a school of massage. 
(l)  No part of the establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. 
(m)  All massage establishments shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage establishment is open. The designated manager must possess a valid and current CPR certificate issued by the American Red Cross or the American Heart Association. 
(n)  The operator, or the manager in the operator's absence, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter and any applicable provisions of this Code. Any change in management must be reported to the police department within ten (10) days. 
(o)  An operator and/or on-duty manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees, or independent contractors, while the employees are on the licensed premises. Any act of omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter and any applicable provision of this Code shall be deemed the act of omission of the operator for the purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(p)  All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-8. - Inspections. 
The department of building safety and/or the police department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment in the city for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this Code are met. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-9. - Sale or transfer. 
(a)  Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the permit shall be null and void. Any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the massage establishment shall make a new application. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be payable for each such application involving sale or other transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment. The provisions of section 22-3 of this chapter shall apply to any person, firm, or entity applying for a massage establishment permit for premises previously used as such establishment. 
(b)  Any such sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with section 22-6 of this chapter. 
(c)  The owner or operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for notifying the city of any intention to rename, change management, change location, or convey the business to another person. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-10. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  A change of location of any of the aforementioned and described premises may be approved by the chief of police and planning manager, provided a new application and fee are submitted and all ordinances and regulations of the city are complied with. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate under any name or conduct any establishment under any designation not specified in his permit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-11. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any massage technician to perform any massage services in any commercial establishment other than a premises holding a valid massage establishment permit. 
(b)  A massage technician shall be fully clothed at all times and shall not expose their genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or in the case of female technicians, their breasts, and such practices shall not be allowed or permitted by the massage establishment permittee or his designee. 
(c)  A massage technician shall not give massages at any location other than on the premises of a massage establishment with a valid massage establishment permit. 
(d)  A massage technician shall not give a massage unless the breasts of female patrons are covered and the genitals of all patrons are covered, and such practices shall not be allowed or permitted by the massage establishment permittee or his designee. 
(e)  No massage, for a fee, shall be done at the residence of a massage certificate holding massage technician or in any hotel, or motel in the city. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a massage establishment to use, sell or furnish any product that is infused with marijuana. Such product may take the form of a spray, patch, topical, lotion, salve, cream, oil, balm, or similar form intended for external application during a massage. Marijuana as used in this section includes any product infused with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or cannabidiol (CBD). 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a massage technician, massage practitioner or a massage therapist to use or apply any product that is infused with marijuana. Such product may take the form of a spray, patch, topical, lotion, salve, cream, oil, balm, or similar form intended for external application during a massage. Marijuana as used in this section includes any product infused with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or cannabidiol (CBD). 
(h)  It is a violation of this chapter for a permit holder to commit, and the city may deny an application for a permit or discipline a permit holder for, any of the following: 
(1)  Unprofessional conduct, including, but not limited to, denial of licensure, revocation, suspension, restriction, or any other disciplinary action against a certificate holder by another state or territory of the United States, by any other government agency, or by another California health care professional licensing board. A certified copy of the decision, order, or judgment shall be conclusive evidence of these actions. 
(2)  Procuring a permit by fraud, misrepresentation, or mistake. 
(3)  Violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting the violation of, or conspiring to violate, any provision or term of this chapter or any rule or bylaw adopted by the city. 
(4)  Conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor or infraction that is substantially related to the qualifications or duties of a permit holder, in which event the record of the conviction or plea shall be conclusive evidence of the crime. 
(5)  Conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor or infraction directly related to the operation of a massage establishment. 
(6)  Impersonating an applicant or acting as a proxy for an applicant in any examination referred to under this chapter for the issuance of a permit. 
(7)  Impersonating a certified practitioner or therapist, or permitting or allowing an uncertified person to use a certificate. 
(8)  Committing any fraudulent, dishonest, or corrupt act that is substantially related to the qualifications or duties of a permit holder. 
(9)  Committing any act punishable as a sexually related crime. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-12. - Suspension or revocation. 
When the chief of police finds that any person holding a permit under the provisions of chapter 22 has violated the provisions of this chapter or is found guilty of conduct which would form the basis of denial of the license as set forth in sections 22-2 and 22-4, he/she may revoke or suspend the permit. No such revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing by certified mail of his/her right to appeal the revocation decision pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3 of this Code. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has passed. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-13. - Conducting as a nuisance. 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence a civil action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-14. - Existing businesses. 
The provisions of this chapter and chapter 41 shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of this chapter. All massage establishments within the city that were conducting activities requiring permitting and regulated under this section whose activities existed prior to the effective date of this chapter, have a period of one (1) year from the date of the adoption of the revisions to apply for all permits required of massage establishments. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-15. - Advertising requirement. 
All advertising shall include the massage establishment permit number in any advertisement of services appearing in any printed or electronic advertising medium. The reference does not have to contain the words "massage establishment permit." "City of Santa Ana permit number" or similar language will suffice so long as the correct permit number is included. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 22-16. - Violation-penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Chapter 23 - MOBILE X-RAY UNITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, enacted Sept. 2, 1969 as adding §§ 5700—5707 to the 1952 Code, has been codified as Ch. 23, §§ 23-1—23-8 respectively, at the discretion of the editors. Catchlines were altered where appropriate, to facilitate indexing and reference. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Mobile X-Ray Units Regulations". 
(Code 1952, § 5700; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-2. - Enforcement and administration. 
The County of Orange and all of its offices, employees and agents are hereby authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter within the city. 
(Code 1952, § 5701; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  Mobile X-ray unit shall mean any X-ray generator which is, or can be, used for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. 
(b)  Mobile X-ray operator shall mean any person, or other entity, who owns or legally possesses, and operates, a mobile X-ray unit. 
(Code 1952, § 5702; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-4. - Applicability, scope of state law, regulations. 
All mobile X-ray units shall comply with the requirements of The Radiation Control Law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 5703 ; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-5. - Application for license; submission, investigation. 
Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile X-ray unit within the City of Santa Ana shall make application to the finance department of the city on forms prescribed by the finance director for issuance of a license. The finance director shall cause to be conducted an investigation of said applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information: 
(a)  Whether or not said unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code; 
(b)  Whether or not said applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, including those relating to the reporting to the health officer of abnormal X-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the state department of public health; 
(c)  Whether the proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit; 
(d)  The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by said mobile unit as hereinafter provided; and 
(e)  Such other information as shall be required by the county health officer. 
(Code 1952, § 5704; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-6. - Prerequisite to issuance, renewal, reinstatement of license. 
No license shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the county health officer determines, upon completing his investigation, that the mobile X-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with the applicable laws, ordinances and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees and the general public, and that all operations of mobile X-ray equipment have been certified by the county health officer to operate same. 
(Code 1952, § 5705; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-7. - Duration of license. 
Licenses may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. 
(Code 1952, § 5706; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 23-8. - Operations to comply with enumerated conditions. 
All mobile X-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the following conditions: 
(a)  No person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating that no person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test. 
(b)  No pregnant woman shall be X-rayed in a mobile X-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, a sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be X-rayed. 
(c)  The mobile X-ray operator shall require all persons, before being X-rayed, to complete an information form showing the following: Name; age; sex; address; telephone number; the person's physician's name and address; if a female, whether pregnant; if under fifteen (15) years of age, whether the person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test. 
(d)  All X-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least ten (10) years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile X-ray operator a report of his X-ray findings within thirty (30) days. Every thirty (30) days the operator shall submit to the county health officer a report of the total number of X-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month. 
(e)  The mobile X-ray operator shall make X-ray films available for use by the physician of the person X-rayed, provided said person gives his consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such service. 
(f)  A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating essentially the following: 
"A chest X-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest diseases. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year." 
The county health officer shall have the right to determine the location, size and wording of all required signs. 
(g)  The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three (3) inches high. The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statement, expressed or implied, that the mobile X-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency. 
(h)  The mobile X-ray operator shall give the county health officer notice at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance, concerning proposed dates, times and places of use of the unit. All such information will be forwarded by the county health officer to the City of Santa Ana. 
(i)  The mobile X-ray operation shall comply with all applicable city ordinances and resolutions while operating within the City of Santa Ana. 
(Code 1952, § 5707; Ord. No. NS-980, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Chapter 24 - PATROL SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, see § 7523, Bus. and P. Code. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be construed as follows, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
Patrol system and patrol service means any private service or private system which purports to furnish or does furnish to members or subscribers any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any part of the territory of the city or to guard or watch any property, including guarding against theft, fire, or both, or to perform any service usually and customarily performed by the city police force. 
(Ord. No. NS-2727, § 3, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 24-2. - Registration required. 
All private patrol operators providing patrol and/or standing guard service shall register their names and file with the chief of police a copy of their current state identification card, evidencing a license pursuant to Business and Professions Code Sections 7580 et seq. Only a business license application and fee shall be required for registration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2727, § 3, 10-16-06)  
Sec. 24-3. - Patrol and standing guard regulations. 
(a)  Compliance with state law All private patrol operators shall comply with applicable provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 7500 et seq., applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code regarding vehicles used in private patrol operations, and applicable provisions of the Penal Code regarding the use and carrying of weapons. 
(b)  Identification and qualification cards. Each private patrol operator shall carry his/her private patrol operator ID card issued by the state department of consumer affairs and any firearm or baton qualification card on their person at all times while on duty as a private patrol operator. Each operator shall also file copies of any other pertinent identification cards, licenses, and/or certificates. 
(c)  Verbal identification. Upon confrontation with any unknown individual, a private patrol operator shall immediately identify himself or herself as a private guard or patrol operator. 
(d)  Uniforms. A patrol officer shall not wear any uniform which is an imitation or can be mistaken for an official sheriff's uniform or an official police uniform of the police force of any city within the county or an official uniform of any state officer. 
(e)  Cooperation with law enforcement. An operator shall cooperate fully with the police department to provide information regarding the time and location of street patrols and other pertinent information upon request. 
(f)  Refusal, revocation or suspension of registration. When the chief of police finds that any person registering under the provisions of this chapter is a person of bad moral character or has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, he may refuse, revoke or suspend registration. No such refusal, revocation or suspension shall become effective until the registrant has been notified in writing by certified mail of his right to appeal pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3. If a timely appeal is filed, the refusal, revocation or suspension shall be effective only upon final decision of the city council. Otherwise, the refusal, revocation or suspension shall become effective after the timely appeal period has expired. 
(Ord. No. NS-2727, § 3, 10-16-06) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate, see § 7582.5, Bus. and P. Code.  
Sec. 24-4. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to operate as a private patrol operator providing patrol and/or standing guard service without police chief approval and compliance with this chapter. Private patrol operators are regulated pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7580 et seq. To operate, business licenses must be continuously maintained and updated annually. 
(Ord. No. NS-2727, § 3, 10-16-06)  
Chapter 25 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, every person as defined in Section 21000 of the Financial Code of this state shall be deemed a pawnbroker, and every person as defined in Section 21626 of the Business and Professions Code of this state shall be deemed a secondhand dealer. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.5; Ord. No. NS-389, § 1, 8-17-59; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 1, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-2. - Record of transactions—Particulars. 
Every person buying, lending money upon or otherwise accepting in pawn, trading, bartering, auctioning, taking on consignment, or otherwise dealing, as a business in any secondhand or used items of personal property within the city, shall keep a true, complete and accurate record of each article so dealt with, which records shall contain the date and hour of the day when said transaction was entered into, a description of the person from whom said article was purchased or received in pawn, the true name and address of said person so dealt with, as nearly as the same can be ascertained, printed by the dealer and written in said person's own handwriting, the number and state of issuance of the driver's license held by such person, or, if none, such other items of identification as may be available, the age, sex, weight, height, race, hair and eye color of such person; the name, manufacturer's name, color, size, shape, material, caliber, barrel length, serial number, description of automation, engraving, initials, identifying marks, damage marks, amount, or as many of said items of information as can be ascertained and are applicable to the particular article so dealt with; the pawn ticket number, amount loaned, paid or received for said article, and the name of the dealer. Said records shall at all times during regular business hours be open to inspection by any police officer of the city. Any person buying, accepting in pawn, auctioning, or otherwise lending money upon any secondhand article, or any new article, except at wholesale or retail through regular trade channels, who takes part in ten (10) or more such transactions during any calendar year, shall be deemed, to be dealing in such articles as a business and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter as they relate to such transactions. 
(Code 1952, § 6391; Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, 2-17-58; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 2, 6-7-76) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, see §§ 21652, 21653, 21639, Bus. and P. Code.  
Sec. 25-3. - Same—Reporting transactions to police. 
(a)  Every person buying, accepting in pawn, auctioning, taking on consignment, or otherwise dealing with articles as set forth in section 25-2, who is by said section required to keep a record of each such transaction, shall furnish and deliver to the police department of this city, on a blank form to be furnished by said department, a true and complete report of all of the information, and each of the items required to be completed and taken from and about the person with whom such dealing or transaction was had, and from and about the article bought, sold, taken in pawn, auction, or otherwise dealt with. Said report shall be delivered to the police department on the day following the day in which the transaction took place. 
(b)  Every business machine dealer shall report all used business machines which he has purchased, taken in trade, accepted for sale or consignment, or which he has repaired to the police department of this city, on a blank form to be furnished by said department, the information required to be recorded pursuant to section 25-2 of this Code. 
No report of repair shall be required from a dealer servicing or repairing a machine in the possession of the owner to whom that dealer sold that machine when it was new. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "business machines" includes, but is not limited to, typewriters, adding machines, check writing devices, cash registers, calculators, addressing machines, copying and accounting equipment, letter sorting and folding devices, and recording equipment, but does not include office furniture or fixtures. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.1; Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, 2-17-58; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 3, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-4. - Same—Forms; examination; filing; keeping confidential. 
The chief of police shall cause blanks to be printed in such form as he may direct, which form may be changed from time to time when the supply on hand indicates that a new printing is necessary, and he shall deliver free of charge a supply of said blanks to all persons holding a city business license as pawnbroker, known dealers in secondhand goods and merchandise, and to any other person known by him to be required by section 25-2 to keep the record therein provided for. Additional supplies of said blanks shall be furnished upon request of any such person. 
The chief of police shall require that the reports furnished as required by section 25-3 are examined by some member or members of the police department and filed in a secure place in the department. Such blanks shall be open to inspection only to the police department or, in their discretion, to police officers of other departments where the same may be necessary in regular police work, unless upon order from a court duly made for the purpose of ordering disclosure of information from said file. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.3; Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, 2-17-58)  
Sec. 25-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1305, § 4, adopted June 7, 1976, repealed § 25-5, setting forth certain prerequisites to the issuance of a pawnbroker's on secondhand dealer's license and causes for license revocation. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 6391.2, and Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 1958.  
Sec. 25-6. - Secondhand dealer and pawnbroker certificate—Application; information. 
Every person desiring to engage in the business of a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall first make written application to the chief of police of this city, stating his name, age, residence address, proposed business address, the business addresses of all other businesses in which he has an interest, a statement of the time, place and circumstances of every time he has been convicted of a crime, a statement of the number of employees he will have in such place of business, the names and addresses of such employees then known to applicant, and shall submit himself and each of said employees for the purpose of having photographs and fingerprints taken. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.6; Ord. No. NS-389, § 1, 8-17-59; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 5, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-7. - Same—Granting; revoking. 
If the chief of police finds that the applicant under section 25-6 has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a certificate or if said chief of police finds that the applicant under section 25-6 or any proposed employee of a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker has been convicted of a violation of any statute of this state or any ordinance of this city, regulating pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers, or has been convicted of any crimes involving theft, receiving stolen property, embezzlement, fraud, false pretenses, or moral turpitude, when such conviction bears a reasonable connection to the business for which the certificate is sought, he shall refuse to issue said certificate. Any certificate issued hereunder may be revoked for failure to maintain the standards required for issuance for same. No person shall carry on the business of a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker within the city without first receiving the certificate herein referred to, from the chief of police, and a clearance as to himself and as to each of his employees as herein provided for or after the certificate herein referred to has been revoked; and no person shall employ any person in such business who would be disqualified hereunder from obtaining a certificate to operate such business as herein provided for, or until such employee has been submitted to the chief of police for checking as provided for in section 25-6. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.7; Ord. No. NS-389, § 1, 8-17-59; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 6, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-8. - Same—Appeal to council. 
Any person who is refused a certificate or whose certificate is revoked as provided for herein, may appeal the entire question to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.8; Ord. No. NS-389, § 1, 8-17-59; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 12, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 25-9. - Inspection and period of holding articles. 
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer who receives any article by purchase, trade, barter or gift shall hold the same for police inspection for a period of not less than twenty-one (21) days after he has reported receiving said article to the police department, as required by section 25-3, and shall not sell, lend or otherwise transfer possession of said article to any person during said period. 
Every article purchased, received in pawn, or otherwise acquired in any transaction which is required by section 25-3 to be reported to the police department, shall be kept in a place convenient for inspection and detailed examination by any member of the police department, or any person accompanied by a police officer of the city for the purpose of identifying said article, getting further information regarding the identity of said article, determining whether or not the reports required by section 25-3 have been accurately and completely made, to ascertain whether there has been a violation of said section, or for any other police purpose. 
The police department may place a hold on any article dealt with as herein defined by notifying the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer that the same shall be held until released by the police department or until the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date of placing such order to hold. This may be done whenever such item is necessary for evidence in court, to determine ownership, to allow the true owner a reasonable time to redeem or recover such article in cases where the same has been stolen, or for any other proper police purpose. Such order to hold an item may be renewed in a like manner, for a like period, and no secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall sell any article which is the subject to such an order from the police department that the same be held until the order has been released by the police department, for the time set forth in such order to hold, or the ninety (90) day period mentioned herein has expired without a renewal of such order. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.4; Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, 2-17-58)  
Sec. 25-10. - Hours of secondhand dealer and pawnbroker operation. 
No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, and no person employed by same, shall buy, trade, take in pawn, accept for sale on consignment, or accept for auctioning secondhand personal property, nor make any loan on any item of personal property except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1952, § 6391.4; Ord. No. NS-308, § 1, 2-17-58; Ord. No. NS-1305, § 7, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-11. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any identifiable secondhand tangible personal property which is exempt from state regulation of this subject, as found in Section 21629 of the Business and Professions Code of this state. 
(Ord. No. NS-1305, § 8, 6-7-76)  
Sec. 25-12. - Taxation. 
Every person defined as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer under section 25-1 shall be considered a retailer for taxation purposes as set forth in Chapter 35 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1305, § 9, 6-7-76)  
Chapter 26 - PUSHCARTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, adopted July 15, 1991, repealed former Ch. 26, relative to peddlers, solicitors and solicitations, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Formerly, Ch. 26 consisted of substantive §§ 26-100—26-113 and derived from § 6390.8 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-1738, §§ 1—14, adopted July 2, 1984; Ord. No. NS-1775, §§ 1—5, adopted May 20, 1985; Ord. No. NS-1875, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1986; Ord. No. NS-1889, § 1, adopted Apr. 6, 1987; Ord. No. NS-2123, adopted Apr. 15, 1991; and Ord. No. NS-2120, § 2, adopted May 6, 1991. 
Cross reference— Licenses, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms have the following respective meanings: 
(a)  Pushcart. Any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, not a "vehicle" as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage or product is offered for sale to the public. This includes an ice cream pushcart as defined herein. 
(b)  Vend or vending. Offering food, beverage or product of any kind for sale from a pushcart on any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or unenclosed place open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including the movement or standing of a pushcart for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of products. 
(c)  Person. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, stockholder, including, but not limited to, owners and operators. 
(d)  Owner. Any person who owns or controls one (1) or more pushcarts and: 
(1)  Conducts or permits or causes the operation of such pushcart(s) vending food, beverage or product; 
(2)  Owns, operates, controls or manages such pushcart(s); or 
(3)  Contracts with persons to vend food, beverage or product from such pushcart(s). 
(e)  Operator. Any person who operates a pushcart for the purpose of vending food, beverage or product therefrom. 
(f)  Owner's permit. A permit issued by the city authorizing the holder to engage in the business of vending food, beverage or product from a pushcart. This includes an owner's ice cream permit as defined herein. 
(g)  Operator's permit. The permit issued to any person who operates a pushcart for the purpose of soliciting, vending or offering for sale any food, beverage or product from a pushcart on any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or public place within the City of Santa Ana. 
(h)  Uniform. At a minimum, a collared shirt containing the logo, insignia, name or other identifying characteristic of the owner. 
(i)  Civic Center District. The open-space pedestrian areas in the civic center complex bounded by Flower Street, Civic Center Drive, Broadway and Santa Ana Boulevard. 
(j)  Downtown District. All public property and private property open to the public bounded by Ross Street on the west, First Street on the south, Civic Center Drive on the north, and French Street on the east, excluding therefrom any portion of the area defined as the Civic Center District in section 26-1(i) of this Code. 
(k)  Director. The executive director of the Planning and Building agency or his or her designated representative. 
(l)  Ice cream pushcart. Any pushcart from which ice cream, frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, novelties commonly known as ice cream, or other prepackaged frozen items, are offered for sale to the public. 
(m)  Owner's ice cream permit. A permit issued by the city authorizing the holder to engage in the business of vending from an ice cream pushcart. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2366, § 1, 8-17-98; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 2, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-2. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage or product from any portable box, stand, bag or similar container other than a pushcart, on any street, parkway or sidewalk, or in any unenclosed area open to the public. 
(b)  No person shall employ, direct or otherwise cause any other person to vend or offer to vend any food, beverage or product in violation of any provision of this chapter or regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection 26-22(c). 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2366, § 2, 8-17-98; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 1, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-3. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate as an owner without an owner's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter, or without any other business tax, license or permit required under any other chapter of this Code for each and every pushcart such person is operating or causing to be operated in the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within the Civic Center District as defined in subsection 26-1(i) unless the owner of the pushcart holds a valid Civic Center owner's permit for such pushcart. 
(c)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within the Downtown District as defined in 26-1(j) unless the owner of the pushcart holds a valid Downtown District owner's permit for such pushcart. 
(d)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart in violation of any permit restriction placed upon the pushcart owner's permit pursuant to section 26-22. 
(e)  No person shall vend from a pushcart without having first obtained a valid operator's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Article III of this chapter. 
(f)  No person shall vend from a pushcart without having upon his/her person a valid operator's permit in his/her own name. 
(g)  No person shall employ or retain any person to operate a pushcart for the purpose of vending unless the person so employed or retained has an operator's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Article III of this chapter. 
(h)  No person shall operate or vend from an ice cream pushcart as defined in subsection 26-1(l) unless the owner of the pushcart holds a valid owner's ice cream permit for such ice cream pushcart. All owners who possess a valid owner's permit and vend ice cream as of January 1, 2002, shall have two (2) years commencing January 1, 2002, to obtain an owner's ice cream permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 3, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-4. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart which is located within fifty (50) feet of any other pushcart. 
(b)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within two hundred (200) feet of any property utilized for school uses or church uses. 
(c)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the Santa Ana Zoo located within Prentice Park. 
(d)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within ten (10) feet of any intersection, driveway, building entrance, or in any space designated for vehicular parking. 
(e)  Pushcarts shall not remain stationary except for the purpose of conducting a sales transaction. Such restriction shall not apply to any pushcart who is legally operating within the Civic Center or Downtown Districts. 
(f)  No pushcart which is permitted to vend in the Civic Center or Downtown Districts shall vend in any location other than that area designated by the director pursuant to section 26-22. 
(g)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart before 9:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m. during periods of standard time. 
(h)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart before 9:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m. during periods of daylight savings time. 
(i)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart, except those pushcarts permitted to vend in the Civic Center and Downtown Districts, in violation of any standards set forth in section 26-5. 
(j)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart within the Civic Center and Downtown Districts in violation of any standards set forth in section 26-5 and 26-6. 
(k)  No person shall operate or vend from a pushcart in violation of any restriction placed upon the owner's permit issued to such pushcart pursuant to 26-22. 
(l)  No person shall operate or vend from an ice cream pushcart in violation of any standards set forth in sections 26.5 and 26-5.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 4, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-5. - Pushcart standards. 
(a)  Each pushcart shall have affixed to it in plain view the owner's permit and any permit required by section 18-502 of this Code. 
(b)  The maximum dimensions of any pushcart shall be six (6) feet in length and four (4) feet in width. 
(c)  The only signs used in conjunction with a pushcart shall be signs affixed to or painted on the pushcart or its canopy. 
(d)  The operator of a pushcart, if such a person is an employee, contractee, lessee of an owner, shall be required to wear a uniform as defined in section 26-1 and shall carry his operator's permit upon his person. 
(e)  No artificial lighting of any pushcart is permitted. 
(f)  A refuse bin of at least one (1) cubic foot shall be provided in or on the pushcart. 
(g)  No noise-making devices shall be used in conjunction with pushcart vending except one (1) bell with a maximum diameter of two (2) inches. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-5.5. - Additional standards for ice cream pushcarts and ice cream pushcart owners and operators. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 26-5, all ice cream pushcarts must be stainless steal, the maximum dimensions of which shall not exceed forty-six (46) inches in length, thirty-one (31) inches in height and twenty-two (22) inches in width. The city logo shall be affixed to the body of the ice cream pushcart. The owner shall provide evidence that the ice cream pushcart was purchased after January 1, 2002, in new condition and is not refurbished. 
(b)  Notwithstanding section 26-5, the only sign to be used in conjunction with the ice cream pushcart shall be a sign affixed to the ice cream pushcart depicting the types of products offered for sale. The sign shall be approved by the director. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 26-5, the operator of a pushcart, if such a person is an employee, contractee, lessee of an owner, shall be required to wear a uniform consisting of pants, a hat, and a vest and shirt, or polo shirt. The company logo of the owner shall be affixed to the shirt, vest, and hat. The director shall designate acceptable colors for the uniform. 
(d)  All owners who possess a valid owner's permit and vend ice cream as of January 1, 2002, shall have two (2) years commencing January 1, 2002, to obtain an owner's ice cream permit and to comply with the provisions of section 26-5.5. 
(Ord. No. NS-2481, § 5, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-6. - Additional pushcart standards for the Civic Center and Downtown Districts. 
Notwithstanding section 26-5, the maximum dimensions of any pushcart operating in the Civic Center and Downtown Districts shall not exceed eight (8) feet in length, seven (7) feet in height and five (5) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2366, § 3, 8-17-98; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 2, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-7. - Relation to zoning laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the grantee of any owner's permit or operator's permit to vend from a pushcart in a manner which violates the zoning regulations set forth in Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-8. - Conducting as a nuisance. 
Any pushcart operated contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a pushcart contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-9. - Impounding pushcarts. 
A pushcart may be impounded by a police officer or by any other person authorized to enforce this chapter pursuant to section 1-18.1 of this Code, in the course of an arrest of the operator for a violation of this Code when the pushcart is to be used as evidence of the violation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Secs. 26-10, 26-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OWNER'S PERMIT PROCEDURES  
DIVISION 1. - CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY 
 
Sec. 26-12. - Application for owner's permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an owner's permit shall first file an application with the chief of police or his designated representative for a certificate of eligibility for such permit. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Fees required under this article shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this chapter or any other chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Neither the filing of an application for a certificate of eligibility, nor the payment of an application fee, nor the issuance of a certificate for eligibility shall authorize the vending from, operation or management of a pushcart. 
(c)  Each applicant for a certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit shall furnish the following: 
(1)  The full and true name under which the business will be conducted. 
(2)  The full and true name and any other name used by the applicant. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, either foreign or domestic, a copy of the articles of incorporation and, if domestic, a copy of the domestic stock statement. 
(4)  The present residence and business address of the applicant and telephone numbers of the applicant. 
(5)  A description of the merchandise which the pushcarts will vend. 
(6)  The maximum number of pushcarts owned, operated, leased, controlled or contracted by the applicant to be used in the City of Santa Ana. 
(7)  A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia and any other distinguishing characteristics of the applicant's pushcarts and description of the uniform as required in subsection 26-5(d) or 26-5.5(c) of this article. 
(8)  The full and true names and residences of all persons employed, contracted, leased or otherwise given control of the applicant's pushcarts. 
(9)  The applicant, if an individual; or each of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of the corporation; or each of the partners, including limited partners or profit interest holders, managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from pushcarts, shall also furnish the following information: 
a.  California driver's license or identification number of the above-described natural persons; 
b.  Date of birth of the above-described natural persons; 
c.  The permit history of the above-described natural persons for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such person, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit or franchise revoked or suspended and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
d.  All criminal convictions suffered by the above-described natural persons, including ordinance violations, but excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction. 
(10)  The applicant, if other than an individual, shall also furnish the following information: 
a.  Each business address of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application and the inclusive dates of each such business; 
b.  The nature of the business or firm for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
c.  The permit history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit or franchise revoked or suspended and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
d.  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations, stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction. 
(11)  Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police or his designated representative may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The applicant, if a natural person, or if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the designated responsible managing officer, shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application contains the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within two (2) weeks after such change. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 3, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 6, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-13. - Investigation of applications. 
The chief of police shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for a certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit. The chief of police or his representative shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the application, approve or deny the application for the certificate or renewal thereof. If an application is deemed pending under subsection 26-14(f) the chief of police or his designated representative shall, within thirty (30) days after the adjudication of the pending criminal matter approve or deny the application for the certificate or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 3, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-14. - Issuance of certificate. 
The chief of police or his designated representative, after receiving the application, shall issue the certificate only if he finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  The required fees have been paid; 
(b)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(e)  The applicant, if an individual; or any of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of the corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners or profit interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from pushcarts in the City of Santa Ana or a natural person employed or contracted or leased with to be an operator has not been convicted or pled nolo contendere or guilty within five (5) years prior to his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but not limited to: the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 through 11058; the sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter; indecent exposure; selling or disposing of lottery tickets; permitting gambling, pool selling or book-making; or in the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses. 
(f)  The investigating city employee is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the California Penal Code. Any complaint for the charges listed in (e) pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint. 
(g)  For each individual who is issued a certificate of eligibility, an operator's permit shall also be issued if such individual, at the time of application, provides two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 3, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-15. - Certificate term and renewal. 
The term of a certificate of eligibility for an owner's ice cream permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of five (5) years, and for all other owner's permits, for a period of one (1) year. Upon the expiration of such term, the person may renew the certificate for additional terms by submitting new applications in conformance with section 26-12 together with such renewal fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. No certificate of eligibility may be sold, leased, transferred, conveyed or granted to any other person. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 3, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 7, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-16. - Denial of certificate. 
If the chief of police or his designated representative does not find that all of the requirements set forth in section 26-14 have been met, he shall deny the application for the certificate of eligibility. In the event the application for the certificate is denied by the chief of police or his designated representative, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the certificate shall be deemed to have been served if it, in fact, is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the certificate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-17. - Suspension and revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Any certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Falsehood of any information supplied by the applicant upon which issuance of the certificate was based; 
(2)  Failure of the applicant to promptly notify the chief of police of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the certificate in the information supplied by the applicant upon which the issuance of the certificate was based; 
(3)  Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the applicant of any offense set forth in section 26-14(e). 
(b)  A holder of a certificate of eligibility shall be notified in writing when a certificate has been suspended or revoked. Such notice shall contain the grounds upon which suspension or revocation is based and the right to seek an appeal of the suspension or revocation under Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. If no appeal is filed under Chapter 3 suspension or revocation of the certificate shall become effective ten (10) days after notice is served. If a Chapter 3 appeal is filed the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon final determination by council of the appeal. Notification shall be deemed to have been served when it is personally served upon the certificate holder or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the certificate holder at the last known address of the certificate holder. 
(c)  Any person whose certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new certificate for a period of one (1) year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 4, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-18. - Appeal. 
Any person whose application for a certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit is denied or whose certificate is suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 4, 11-20-00)  
Secs. 26-19, 26-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ISSUANCE OF OWNER'S PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, adopted November 20, 2000, repealed in their entirety the provisions of this division 2 (§§ 26-21—26-25) and replaced them with the similar provisions of §§ 26-21—26-25 as currently set out herein. Former division 2 derived from Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, adopted July 15, 1991 and Ord. No. NS-2366, § 4, adopted August 17, 1998. 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Request and eligibility for owner's permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a certificate of eligibility an applicant may make a request to the director for an owner's permit. No person except the holder of a certificate of eligibility for an owner's permit issued pursuant to division 1 of this article may be issued an owner's permit. In addition, no person may be issued such a permit unless he or she has obtained such approval from the Orange County Health Department as may be required for the pushcart from which such person intends to vend, has paid all required fees, and has obtained the business license required by Chapter 21 of this Code. 
(b)  Any owner who possesses a valid owner's permit and vends ice cream as of January 1, 2002, and desires to obtain an owner's ice cream permit, shall have two (2) years commencing January 1, 2002, to comply with provisions of section 26-5.5. Upon compliance within the two (2) year period, the chief of police shall issue a certificate of eligibility for an owner's ice cream permit and the director shall issue an owner's ice cream permit to the owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 8, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-22. - Permit issuance, transferability and terms. 
(a)  The term of an owner's permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be identical to the period set forth in the underlying certificate of eligibility. 
(b)  The director is authorized and directed to establish permit application and issuance procedures for all owner's permits consistent with this section, 26-21 and 26-23. 
(c)  The director or his/her designated representative is authorized and directed to place reasonable and necessary restrictions upon owner's permits to ensure that the potential adverse effects of pushcart vending are ameliorated to the greatest extent possible. Such restrictions may extend to such matters as the quantity, location, appearance, product mix, mobility, pushcart design and cleanliness of pushcarts and their operation. These restrictions include, but are not limited to, specific vending locations for all pushcarts located within the Civic Center and Downtown Districts. 
(d)  No owner's permit may be sold, leased, transferred, conveyed or granted to any other person regardless of whether or not such person holds a certificate of eligibility. 
(Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-23. - Limitation on the number of permits. 
No owner's permit shall be issued which would cause the number of pushcarts vending outside of the Civic Center and Downtown Districts to exceed one hundred and seventy eight (178). No Civic Center District owner's permit shall be issued pursuant to this article which would cause the number of pushcarts vending in the Civic Center District to exceed nine (9). No Downtown District owner's permit shall be issued pursuant to this article which would cause the number of pushcarts vending in the Downtown District to exceed thirteen (13). The number of owner's ice cream permits issued city wide shall not exceed one-hundred twenty (120). 
(Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 9, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-24. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The director may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of the certificate of eligibility issued to the owner pursuant to Division 1 of this article or of required Orange County Health Care Agency permits. 
(2)  Conviction on three (3) or more violations of the regulations set forth in this chapter by the owner or any of his operators. 
(3)  Conviction on three (3) or more failures of the holder of a permit or any of his operators to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the permit. 
(b)  An owner's permit holder shall be notified in writing when a permit has been suspended or revoked. Such notice shall contain the grounds upon which suspension or revocation is based and the right to seek an appeal of the suspension or revocation under Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. If no appeal is filed under Chapter 3 suspension or revocation of the permit shall become effective ten (10) days after notice is served. If a Chapter 3 appeal is filed the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon final determination by council of the appeal. Notification shall be deemed to have been served when it is personally served upon the permit holder or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the permit holder at the last known address of the permit holder. 
(c)  Any person whose owner's permit is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one (1) year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-25. - Appeal. 
Any person whose request for a permit is denied for any reason other than non-availability pursuant to section 26-23, or whose permit is suspended or revoked, may appeal such decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2453, § 5, 11-20-00)  
Secs. 26-26—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATOR PERMITS 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Application for operator's permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any owner may apply for the permit required under this section on behalf of any and all operators employed or otherwise retained by such owner. If the operator is also the pushcart owner, such person shall be exempt from the provisions of this article and be only subject to the provisions of Article II of this chapter. 
(b)  To obtain an operator's permit, application shall be made to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(c)  Neither the filing of an application for a permit nor the payment of an application fee shall authorize the vending from or operation of a pushcart until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(d)  Each applicant for an operator's permit shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The operator's full true name, present residence, telephone number and social security number; 
(2)  Any other names used by the applicant; 
(3)  Acceptable written proof of identification attesting to the truth of the information provided in subsection (1); 
(4)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(5)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the one-year period immediately preceding the date of application; 
(6)  The permit history of the applicant for the one-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license, permit or franchise revoked or suspended and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
(7)  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations and traffic offenses; 
(8)  Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police or his designated representative may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(e)  The applicant shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (b) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within two (2) weeks after such change. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-32. - Investigation of applications. 
The chief of police shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for an operator permit. The chief of police or his representative shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the application, approve or deny the application for the permit or renewal thereof. If an application is deemed pending under subsection 26-33(f) the chief of police or his designated representative shall, within thirty (30) days after the adjudication of the pending criminal matter approve or deny the application for the certificate or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 6, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-33. - Issuance of permit. 
The chief of police or his designated representative, after receiving the application, shall grant the permit only if he finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  The required fees have been paid; 
(b)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(e)  The applicant has not been convicted or pled nolo contendere or guilty within five (5) years prior to his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but not limited to: the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11054 through 11058; the sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter; indecent exposure; selling or disposing of lottery tickets; permitting gambling, pool selling or book-making; or in the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses. 
(f)  The investigating city employee is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the California Penal Code. Any complaint for the above-listed charges pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint. 
(g)  The applicant has completed a minimum of two (2) hours of class room training in the area of sanitation, handling and preparation of food, and hygiene. Such training may be provided by the city, or by the owner if approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 6, 11-20-00; Ord. No. NS-2481, § 10, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 26-34. - Permit term and renewal. 
The term of operator permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one (1) year. Upon the expiration of such term, the permittee may renew the permit for additional one-year terms by submitting new applications in conformance with section 26-31 together with such permit renewal fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. No operator's permit may be sold, leased, transferred, conveyed or granted to any other person. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 6, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-35. - Denial of permit. 
If the chief of police or his designated representative does not find that all of the requirements set forth in section 26-33 have been met, he shall deny the application for the permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied by the chief of police or his designated representative, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be deemed to have been served if it, in fact, is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91)  
Sec. 26-36. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designated representative for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based; 
(2)  Failure of the permittee to promptly notify the chief of police of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the permittee upon which the issuance of the permit was based; 
(3)  Failure of the permittee to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Violation by the permittee of any state law or municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from pushcarts pursuant to the permit; 
(5)  Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the permittee of any offense set forth in section 26-33(e). 
(b)  An operator's permit holder shall be notified in writing when a permit has been suspended or revoked. Such notice shall contain the grounds upon which suspension or revocation is based and the right to seek an appeal of the suspension or revocation under Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. If no appeal is filed under Chapter 3 suspension or revocation of the permit shall become effective ten (10) days after notice is served. If a Chapter 3 appeal is filed the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon final determination by council of the appeal. Notification shall be deemed to have been served when it is personally served upon the permit holder or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the permit holder at the last known address of the permit holder. 
(c)  Any person whose operator's permit is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one (1) year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 7, 11-20-00)  
Sec. 26-37. - Appeal. 
Any person whose application for an operator's permit is denied or whose operator's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2133, § 1, 7-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2453, § 7, 11-20-00)  
Chapter 27 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 1991, repealed former Ch. 27, planning, Arts. I—III, §§ 27-1, 27-11—27-21 and 27-33—27-41, and enacted similar new provisions as Arts. I—III, §§ 27-1—27-4, 27-11—27-16 and 27-21—27-25. Formerly, Ch. 27 derived from §§ 9100, 9111, 9112—9112.6, 9121—9121.5, 9122—9122.6, 9131—9131.1, 9141—9147.4 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-323, § 3, adopted June 2, 1958. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; zoning, Ch. 41. 
State Law reference— For authority and requirements, see § 65100 et seq., Gov. Code. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the adoption and amendment of elements of the general plan of the City of Santa Ana and for the adoption and amendment of specific plans and to specify certain responsibilities regarding the implementation of such plans. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Amendment includes alteration, repeal, deletion, and/or replacement. 
Director shall mean the Executive Director of the Planning and Building Agency of the City of Santa Ana and his or her designated representatives within the planning division. 
Planning division shall mean the planning division of the Planning and Building Agency of the City of Santa Ana. 
Plan adoption or amendment shall mean any of the following: The adoption of one (1) or more elements of the general plan, the amendment of any part or parts of the general plan, the adoption of a specific plan, or the amendment of a specific plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-3. - Relationship to state law. 
(a)  The provisions of Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 65100) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California, as it may from time to time be amended, shall have no application to or in the City of Santa Ana, except to the extent any such provision is either (1) applicable to or in charter cities, or (2) adopted by reference in this chapter. However, with regard to state laws which make reference to general plans or specific plans and which are applicable to or in charter cities, the general plan of the City of Santa Ana, as adopted and amended pursuant to this chapter, shall have the same force and effect within the City of Santa Ana as general plans adopted and amended pursuant to such Chapter 3 have within general law cities, and specific plans adopted pursuant to this chapter shall have the same force and effect within the City of Santa Ana as specific plans adopted and amended pursuant to such Chapter 3 have in general law cities. 
(b)  The planning division shall be the "planning agency" of the City of Santa Ana for purposes of all state laws which make reference to a "planning agency" and which are applicable to or in the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-4. - Relationship of specific plans to general plan. 
A specific plan is a plan adopted pursuant to this chapter which provides for the systematic implementation of the general plan in the City of Santa Ana or any specified part thereof. A specific plan shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Secs. 27-5—27-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT 
 
Sec. 27-11. - Initiation of proposed plan adoptions and amendments. 
Proposed plan adoptions and amendments may be initiated by the director or by the planning commission upon their own initiative or upon instruction by the city council. A proposed amendment to the general plan may be initiated by any person who has a property interest in the real property which is the subject of the proposed amendment by completion of an application for such amendment on the form provided by the planning division for such purpose and by payment of such application fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. The director shall cause any duly initiated proposed plan adoption or amendment to be prepared in a form appropriate for submittal to the planning commission and shall notice a hearing by the planning commission on such proposed plan adoption or amendment in accordance with section 27-15. The director shall provide his or her recommendations to the planning commission concerning any proposed plan adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-12. - Review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
Prior to being submitted to the city council, each proposed plan adoption or amendment shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. 
The planning commission may make such recommendations to the city council concerning the proposed plan as it deems appropriate. Before making any recommendation regarding a proposed plan adoption or amendment, the planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing, noticed in accordance with section 27-15. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-13. - Transmittal to the city council. 
(a)  In any case where the planning commission has recommended approval of a proposed plan adoption or amendment or in any case where the proposed plan amendment was initiated by application of a private person, the director shall cause the proposed plan adoption or amendment to be prepared in the form of a draft resolution of the city council. If the substantive provisions of the proposed plan adoption or amendment are lengthy, they may be prepared in the form of a publication which is incorporated by reference into the draft resolution. Any such publication shall be forwarded to the clerk of the council and distributed to the members of the city council prior to the date of the city council hearing on the proposed plan adoption or amendment. 
(b)  In the case of any proposed plan amendment which was initiated by the director or by the planning commission, the proposed plan adoption or amendment transmitted to the city council shall be consistent with the recommendations of the planning commission. In the case of any proposed plan amendment which was initiated by application of a private person, the proposed plan adoption or amendment transmitted to the city council shall be consistent with the application of the private person, but the director shall set forth the recommendations of the planning commission in a report to the city council accompanying the proposed plan adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-14. - Action by the city council. 
The approval of a plan adoption or amendment shall be by resolution of the city council. Before approving a plan adoption or amendment, the council shall hold at least one (1) public hearing, noticed in accordance with section 27-15. In approving a plan adoption or amendment, the city council may modify the proposed plan adoption or amendment, as the city council determines to be appropriate; provided, however, that any modifications which would cause the plan adoption or amendment to be outside the scope of the notice of the hearing provided for such plan adoption or amendment shall require a new hearing by the city council based on a revised notice prior to approval of the modified plan adoption or amendment. The city council may, in its discretion, refer any proposed plan adoption or amendment back to the planning commission for reconsideration. 
Any publication containing a plan adoption or amendment which has been incorporated by reference into a resolution which has been adopted by the city council shall be certified as approved, with the resolution number and date of adoption, by the clerk of the council and maintained as a public record in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-15. - Notice of public hearing. 
Notice of the time and place of a hearing by the planning commission or the city council on a proposed plan adoption or amendment shall be given by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The director may provide such additional notice as the director may deem appropriate, and shall give such additional notice as the planning commission or the city council may direct, but the failure to provide additional notice in full accord with a direction of the planning commission or the city council shall not affect the validity of the proceedings taken by the planning commission and the city council on the subject plan adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-16. - Adoption of specific plan by ordinance. 
As an alternative to adoption by resolution, a specific plan may be adopted by ordinance, in which case the draft resolution specified in section 27-13 shall be a draft ordinance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Secs. 27-17—27-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPLEMENTATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 27-21. - Implementation in general. 
The general plan and specific plans shall be implemented in accordance with those laws of the State of California which are applicable to or in a charter city and in accordance with the Santa Ana Municipal Code, insofar as those laws and code provisions require a finding of consistency of a proposed project, activity or entitlement with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, or otherwise provide for the implementation of a general plan and specific plans. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-22. - Maintenance of the general plan and specific plans. 
(a)  Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution approving a plan adoption or amendment, the clerk of the council shall forward to the director a certified copy of the resolution, together with any publication which has been incorporated by reference into such resolution. The director shall maintain all such resolutions and incorporated publications within the planning division in a manner that provides for reasonable inspection by the public. 
(b)  The director shall, from time to time, cause to be prepared editions of the general plan which incorporate all amendments approved since the previous edition in a single, integrated document, provided that (1) the housing element may be maintained separately from the remainder of the general plan, and (2) maps which, because of their size, cannot be included in such a document may likewise be maintained separately from the remainder of the general plan. The preparation of such documents and maps pursuant to this section shall not constitute a plan adoption or amendment requiring approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-23. - Entry on land by planning agency personnel. 
Section 65105 of the Government Code of the State of California, as it may from time to time be amended, is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-24. - Standard of judicial review. 
Section 65301.5 of the Government Code of the State of California, as it may from time to time be amended, is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 27-25. - Acquisition and disposal of real property and construction of buildings in the City of Santa Ana by the County of Orange and by other local agencies. 
Paragraphs (b) and (c) of Section 65402 of the Government Code of the State of California, as they may from time to time be amended, are hereby adopted. Paragraph (b) of said section shall not apply to acquistion or abandonment for street widening or alignment projects of a minor nature. 
(Ord. No. NS-2144, § 1, 9-16-91)  
Chapter 28 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BONDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2 special tax financing improvement code, Ch.20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Findings and determinations. 
The city council of the City of Santa Ana hereby finds and determines as follows: 
(a)  The full employment of residents of the City of Santa Ana, and the prevention of unemployment and underemployment of such residents, serves a vital and compelling public interest of the City of Santa Ana and promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the city by reducing the incidence of crime, improving the mental and physical health and well-being of the city's residents, alleviating the financial drain upon limited public and private resources for welfare programs and unemployment assistance, and enhancing the financial resources of the city. 
(b)  The encouragement of industrial and commercial development within the city serves a vital and compelling public interest of the city and promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the city by increasing the employment of residents of the city, increasing the tax and revenue base and thereby enhancing the financial resources of the city, and preventing physical deterioration and abandonment of industrial and commercial areas within the city. In addition, the city's participation in the financing of such development serves the public interest by ensuring that such development will reflect the needs and objectives of the community more so than if such development were undertaken without city participation. 
(c)  The state legislature has not acted to place such public interests solely under state control or to prevent local action with respect thereto. 
(d)  In the past, efforts have been made to assist industrial and commercial development and to promote local employment by state and federal agencies acting through local government. However, such efforts have generally been inadequately funded, unresponsive to local needs and objectives of the community, or have been unavailable to the city, making such efforts unsatisfactory for the city in effectuating the aforesaid public interests of the city. 
(c)  The city can promote such public interests by assisting the financing of industrial and commercial development within the city, pursuant to this chapter, without adversely affecting areas outside the boundaries of the city or transient residents of the state, and without conflicting with or in any way impairing the efforts of the state to solve problems of legitimate statewide concern. 
(f)  Encouraging industrial and commercial development pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Will promote the health, safety and welfare of the city, including those public interests enumerated in subsection (a) and subsection (b) hereof, and will improve the social, moral, economic and physical condition of the community thereby, and 
(2)  Constitutes a municipal affair of the City of Santa Ana, a valid exercise of the police powers of the City of Santa Ana, and a public purpose in which the City of Santa Ana has a peculiar and unique interest. 
(Ord. No. NS1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
Acquisition : "Acquisition" and its variants means acquisition, construction, improvement, furnishing, equipping, remodeling, repair, reconstruction or rehabilitation. 
Administrative expenses : "Administrative expenses" means the reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the city in the administration of the provisions of the chapter with respect to a particular project and the issuance of bonds pursuant to this chapter for said project, including without limitation fees and expenses of paying agents, trustees, bond counsel and financing consultants, and costs of printing and advertising. 
Application : "Application" means an application submitted by a participating party pursuant to this chapter to obtain financing for a project. 
Bonds : "Bonds" means any bonds, notes, interim certificates, debentures or other obligations issued by the city pursuant to his chapter, which are payable exclusively from revenues and other funds permitted by this chapter, and which are "industrial development bonds" within the meaning of Section 103(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or any similar provision of said Code then in effect. 
City : "City" means the City of Santa Ana, California, a charter city in the state existing under and exercising powers pursuant to the city charter. 
City council : "City council" means the city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
City charter : "City charter" means the charter of the city, entitled "The Charter of the City of Santa Ana," as amended from time to time. 
Costs : "Costs" means, with reference to a project, any or all of the following costs incurred for the acquisition thereof: 
(a)  Obligations of the participating party incurred for labor and materials in connection with the acquisition of the project; 
(b)  The cost of acquisition of any property, whether real or personal and improved or unimproved, including franchise rights and other intangible property, and any interests therein, required for the acquisition of the project; 
(c)  The cost of demolishing, removing or relocating any building or structure, and the cost of making relocation assistance payment required by law; 
(d)  The cost of contract bonds and of insurance of all kinds that may be required or necessary during the course of the acquisition of the project; 
(e)  All costs of engineering, legal and consultant services, including the costs of the participating party for surveys, estimates, plans and specifications and preliminary investigation therefor, and for supervising construction, as well as for the performance of all other duties required by or consequent upon the proper acquisition of the project; 
(f)  All cost incurred in connection with proceedings by the participating party necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended; 
(g)  All amounts required to fund any reserve funds for bonds and any interest on bonds becoming due and payable during a period not exceeding the period of acquisition of the project and twelve (12) months thereafter; 
(h)  All administrative expenses; 
(i)  All costs which the participating party shall be required to pay, under the terms of any contract or contracts, for the acquisition of the project; 
(j)  The refinancing of any existing indebtedness secured by an interest in any real property comprising any portion of the project, so long as and to the extent that such refinancing does not cause interest on the bonds to become taxable under Section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; and 
(k)  Any sums required to reimburse the participating party for advances made for any of the above items or for any other costs incurred and for work done which are properly chargeable to the project. 
Finance : "Finance" and its variants means the lending of moneys or any other thing of value, or the purchase of loans, for the purpose of paying any or all of the costs of a project pursuant to this chapter. 
Participating party : "Participating party" means any person, corporation, partnership, firm or other entity or group of entities requiring financing for the acquisition of a project pursuant to this chapter. No member of the city council or officer, staff member or employees of the city shall be eligible to be a participating party under the provisions of this chapter. 
Project "Project" means real property located within the city and improved or to be improved with an industrial or commercial structure, and all property in connection therewith or incidental thereto, including machinery, equipment and furnishings, the acquisition of which is financed or otherwise assisted pursuant to this chapter. 
Revenues : "Revenues" means, with respect to a project, all amounts received as repayment of principal, interest and all other charges received for, and all other income and revenue (including the proceeds of insurance) derived by, the city in connection with such project, and any receipts derived from the investment of such income or revenues, including moneys deposited in a sinking, redemption or reserve fund or other fund to secure the bonds or to provide for the payment of the principal of or interest on the bonds and such other moneys as the city council may in its discretion make available therefor. 
Rules and regulations : "Rules and regulations" means the rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager of the City of Santa Ana pursuant to section 28-7 hereof. 
State : "State" means the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
ARTICLE II. - POWER AND PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 28-3. - Powers. 
The city is authorized and empowered: 
(a)  To determine the location and character of any project to be financed under the provisions of this chapter, and to finance such projects by making or purchasing loans to participating parties therefor. 
(b)  To issue bonds for the purpose of financing or otherwise assisting the acquisition of projects authorized by this chapter and for the purpose of funding or refunding bonds. 
(c)  To fix fees, charges and interest rates for financing any project, and to revise such fees, charges and interest rates from time to time, and to collect interest and principal on any loan made to a participating party together with such fees and charges incurred in such financing, and to contract with any person, partnership, association, corporation or public agency with respect thereto. 
(d)  To hold deeds of trust as security for financing any project and to pledge the same as security for repayment of bonds issued therefor. 
(e)  To establish the terms and conditions for the financing of any project undertaken pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  To require that the full amount owed on any loan for the financing of a project pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable upon sale or other transfer of ownership of such project. 
(g)  To acquire, by deed, purchase,lease, contract, gift, devise, or otherwise, any real or personal property, structures, rights, rights-of-way, franchises, easements, mortgages and other interests in property located within the state necessary or convenient for the financing or acquisition of a project, upon such terms and conditions as it deems advisable and to lease, sell or dispose of the same in such manner as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the objects and purposes of this chapter. 
(h)  To employ or contract for such engineering, architectural, accounting, collection, economic feasibility, or other services in connection with the servicing of loans made to participating parties, as may be necessary in the judgment of the city council for the successful financing of a project. The city may pay the reasonable costs of consulting engineers, architects, accountants, construction experts, and economic feasibility experts, if, in the judgment of the city council, such services are necessary to the successful financing of a project and if the city is not able to provide such services. The city may employ, contract for, and fix the compensation of financing consultants, bond counsel, and other advisers as may be necessary in its judgment to provide for the issuance and sale of bonds. 
(i)  In addition to all other powers specifically granted in this chapter, to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-4. - Non-operation. 
The city shall not have the power to operate any project as a business. Furthermore, the city shall not realize a profit from any project financed pursuant to this chapter nor shall the city compete with any private firm in connection therewith. The city shall take no more action with respect to any project than is necessary to promote the public interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-5. - Applications for financing. 
Participating parties may apply for financing pursuant to this chapter by filing an application with the city in such form and with such person or office as shall be specified by the rules and regulations. Applications shall set forth all information required to evaluate the financial reliability and stability of the participating party and the feasibility of the proposed project, and to verify and assure that the long-term employment of residents of the city will be increased. Among all other information, agreements and undertakings required to be contained therein, applications shall include an estimate of the maximum amount of bonds proposed to be issued, a description or itemization of the costs of the proposed project, and an agreement to pay all administrative expenses for the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-6. - Acceptance of applications. 
Upon receipt of an application containing all require information, agreements and undertakings, the city council shall at such time as is deemed convenient by it, review such application and any staff recommendations with respect thereto. If the city council chooses to approve any application, it shall adopt a resolution in which it: 
(1)  Finds and determines that the proposed project described in the application: 
(a)  Promotes the long-term employment of residents of the city, 
(b)  Will not adversely affect areas outside the boundaries of the city or transient residents of the state, and 
(c)  Is in the public interests of the city and constitutes a municipal affair of the city, a valid exercise of the police powers of the city, and a public purpose in which the city has a peculiar and unique interest, and 
(2)  Accepts and approves such application and the participation of the city in the financing of such project, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the conclusion of all proceedings undertaken to consummate such financing to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-7. - Rules and regulations. 
All proceedings taken in connection with the processing of applications and the financing of projects shall be in accordance with this chapter and with such rules and regulations as promulgated, and as shall be amended or supplemented from time to time, by the city manager of the City of Santa Ana in furtherance of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
ARTICLE III. - BONDS 
 
Sec. 28-8. - Authorization. 
The city is hereby authorized to issue bonds in an aggregate principal amount of not to exceed five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000.00) for the purpose of financing or otherwise assisting the acquisition of projects authorized by this chapter. Every issue of bonds shall be a special obligation of the city, payable solely from all or any part of the revenues of projects. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-9. - Issuance of bonds. 
The bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds, or the city council, in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The bonds shall be issued pursuant to resolution of the city council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America, at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption as the resolution or resolutions of the city council may provide. The bonds may be sold at either a public or private sale and for such prices as the city council shall determine. Pending preparation of the definitive bonds, the city may issue interim receipts, certificates, or temporary bonds, which shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-10. - Terms of bonds. 
Any resolution issuing any bonds may contain provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of the bonds: 
(a)  The pledge of all or any part of the revenues, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist. 
(b)  The interest and principal to be received and other charges to be charged and the amounts to be raised each year thereby, and the use and disposition of the revenues. 
(c)  The setting aside of reserves of sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof. 
(d)  Limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of a sale of any issue of bonds, then or thereafter issued, may be applied, and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds or any issue of bonds. 
(e)  Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding bonds. 
(f)  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given. 
(g)  Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of its obligations, and providing the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default. 
(h)  The mortgaging of land, improvements, or other assets owned by a participating party for the purpose of securing the bondholders. 
(i)  Such other terms and conditions pertaining to the issuance of the bonds as are deemed advisable by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-11. - Trust agreement. 
In the discretion of the city council, any bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter may be secured by a trust agreement by and between the city and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust agreement or the resolution providing for the issuance of such bonds may pledge or assign the revenues to be received or proceeds of any contract or contracts pledged, and may convey or mortgage any property. Such trust agreement or resolution providing for the issuance of bonds may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee or trustees, and may restrict the individual right of action by bondholders. In addition to the foregoing, any such trust agreement or resolution may contain such other provisions as the city council may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-12. - Personal liability. 
Neither the members of the city council nor any person executing the bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-13. - Refunding bonds. 
The city council may provide for the issuance of bonds any portion of which is to be used for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds, including the payment of the principal thereof and interest and redemption premiums, if any, thereon. The proceeds of bonds issued to refund any outstanding bonds may, in the discretion of the city council, be applied to the retirement of such outstanding bonds at maturity, or the redemption (on any redemption date) or purchase of such outstanding bonds prior to maturity, upon such terms and subject to such conditions as the city council shall deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-14. - Repayment of bonds. 
Revenues shall be the sole source of funds pledged by the city for repayment of bonds issued hereunder. Bonds issued hereunder shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from revenues. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect: 
"Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City is pledged to the payment of the principal of or interest on this Bond." 
The issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the city council to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCING OF PROJECTS 
 
Sec. 28-15. - Authority to assist projects. 
The city may provide financing to any participating party for, or otherwise assist the acquisition of, duly approved projects pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-16. - Loan agreements. 
The city may enter into loan agreements with any participating party with respect to the financing of a project, which agreements may provide that the architectural and engineering design of the project shall be subject to such standards as may be established by the city and that the acquisition of the project shall be subject to such supervision as the city deems necessary. The terms and conditions of such loan agreements may be as mutually agreed upon, but shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations. Any such loan agreement may provide the means or methods by which any mortgage taken by the city shall be discharged, and it shall contain a covenant by the participating party to complete the project whether or not bond proceeds are sufficient therefor, and such other terms and conditions as the city may require. The city is authorized to fix, revise, charge and collect interest and principal and all other rates, fees and charges with respect to the financing of a project. Such rates, fees, charges and interest shall be fixed and adjusted so that the aggregate of such rates, fees, charges and interest will provide funds sufficient with other revenues and moneys which it is anticipated will be available therefor, if any, to do all of the following: 
(a)  Pay the principal of and interest on outstanding bonds issued to finance such project, as the same shall become due and payable. 
(b)  Create and maintain reserves required or provided for in any resolution authorizing such bonds. A sufficient amount of the revenues from the project may be set aside at such regular intervals as may be provided by the resolution or trust agreement in a sinking or other similar fund, which shall be pledged to, and charged with, the payment of the principal of and interest on such bonds as the same shall become due, and the redemption price or the purchase price of bonds retired by call or purchase as therein provided. Such pledge shall be valid and binding from the time the pledge is made. The rates, fees, interest, and other charges, revenues or moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the city shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract, or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution, the trust agreement nor any loan agreement by which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the city. The use and disposition of moneys to the credit of such sinking or other similar fund shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(c)  Pay administrative expenses to the extent not paid from bond proceeds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-17. - Trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, whether proceeds from the sale of bonds or revenues, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely for the purposes of this chapter. Any bank or trust company in which such moneys are deposited shall act as trustee of such moneys and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes specified in this chapter, subject to the terms of the resolution or trust agreement authorizing the bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 28-18. - Liberal construction. 
This chapter, being necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the city and its residents, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. Furthermore, the city council hereby declares that this chapter is an exercise of the power granted to the city by the city charter and the constitution of the state and is an exercise by the city of its powers has to municipal affairs and its police powers, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to uphold its validity under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-19. - Supplemental and additional powers. 
This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of bonds. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-20. - Actions to determine validity of bonds and proceedings. 
One or more actions may be brought pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 or the Code of Civil Procedure to determine the validity of this chapter or the bonds or the legality and validity of all proceedings previously taken and (as provided in the bond resolution) proposed to be taken for the issuance, sale and delivery of the bonds and for the payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 28-21. - Amendment of chapter. 
This chapter shall not be amended so as to affect adversely the rights of the holders of any outstanding bonds theretofore issued hereunder, or the rights of participating parties with respect to whom projects have theretofore been financed hereunder, without the written consent of such bondholders and participating parties; provided, however that this chapter may be amended at any time: 
(a)  To make such provisions for the purpose of curing any ambiguity, or of curing, correcting or supplementing any defective provision herein contained, as the city may deem necessary or desirable; or 
(b)  If such amendment does not materially impair or adversely affect the interests of any such bondholder or participating party in the opinion of the city council; or 
(c)  If such amendments apply solely to bonds not theretofore issued hereunder or participating parties with respect to whom projects have not theretofore been financed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. NS-1609, § 1,11-16-81)  
Chapter 29 - POOL AND BILLIARDS 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Permit—Required; application; granting or denying. 
No person shall engage in any business where games of billiards or pool are conducted unless a permit for such business has been issued by the chief of police and such permit has not expired or been revoked. Any person desiring to engage in any such business shall first make application in writing for such permit to the chief of police. The chief of police shall have full power to grant or deny said permit and, after investigation, if it shall appear to the chief of police that said person is a proper and suitable person and the location and arrangement of the proposed place where said business is to be conducted is satisfactory, the chief of police shall grant said permit, subject to all applicable provisions of this Code; otherwise, he shall deny the same. Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the chief of police to grant a permit may appeal the decision to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of the City Code. 
(Code 1952, § 6330; Ord. No. NS-365, § 1, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS—814, § 1, 8-2-65; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 29, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-1966, § 1, 7-18-88)  
Sec. 29-1.1. - Same—Term. 
No permit required by section 29-1 shall be issued by the chief of police for a period in excess of twelve (12) months. The expiration date of said permit shall be December 31 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. NS-1966, § 2, 7-18-88)  
Sec. 29-1.2. - Same—Fee. 
Every application for a permit required by section 29-1 shall be accompanied by an application fee in such amount as shall be established by resolution of the city council. Any person applying for a permit of less than twelve (12) months shall pay a prorated fee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1966, § 3, 7-18-88)  
Sec. 29-2. - Same—Revocation or continuing on condition—Authorized. 
In addition to the penalties provided for violation of this Code, the chief of police may revoke any permit given to carry on or conduct a business where games of billiards or pool are conducted for profit for any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or for repeated violations of law in said place of business. Before such revocation the permittee shall be given notice and may appeal to the city council as provided in Chapter 3 of this Code. If the council determines, after such hearing, that the permittee has wilfully violated the terms of this chapter, or has so conducted his business as to have repeated fights, disturbances, batteries, or other violations of law occurring in his place of business, the permit shall be revoked or may be continued upon such conditions as the council may impose. 
(Code 1952, § 6338; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-719, 2-17-64; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 30, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 29-3. - Same—Same—Notice; hearing. 
If the chief of police determines that a permit should be revoked, he shall notify in writing the holder of such permit or his manager or agent, stating in the notice, the ground of complaint against said holder and informing him of his right to appeal under Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Service of such notice shall be upon the holder, or his agent by delivering the same to such person or to his manager or agent, or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of such holder with some adult person. If the holder of such permit cannot be found and served as herein provided, a copy of said notice shall be mailed, postage paid, addressed to the holder at such place of business. 
(Code 1952, § 6319.3; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 31, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 29-4. - Right to control. 
The chief of police, in granting a permit or license for the carrying on of said business, reserves the right at all times to determine where said games may or shall be carried on, including the character and nature of the building, its surroundings, arrangement, construction, accessibility, and suitability for the purpose of conducting said business. The character, reputation and reliability of the person conducting such business and of his employees shall be considered. 
(Code 1952, § 6331 ; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 32, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 29-5. - Entrance open. 
The entrance to every place or room where games of billiards or pool are conducted for profit shall be open and unobstructed to all adults and especially to peace officers, firemen, and city inspectors, at all times when such games are so carried on. 
(Code 1952, § 6332; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65)  
Sec. 29-6. - Gambling prohibited. 
No games of cards, dice, or other games of chance shall be carried on in any room in which any pool or billiard business is conducted or in any room accessible therefrom. 
(Code 1952, § 6333; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-719, 2-17-64; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65) 
Cross reference— Gambling, generally, § 10-54.  
Sec. 29-7. - Interior visibility. 
Any room or place which meets the requirements of section 29-8 shall be at all times open to public view and any partitions between said area and other game areas shall be not less than fifty (50) percent transparent glass between a point three feet (3') above the floor and six feet (6') above the floor. 
(Code 1952, § 6335; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-719, 2-17-64; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65)  
Sec. 29-8. - Minors—Conditions under which permitted. 
When any room or place is maintained where games of billiards or pool are conducted for profit, which room or place is a portion of a business affording amusement or recreation games for which a fee is charged, and which room or place occupies not more than sixty (60) percent of the total floor space devoted to such games, and which business primarily provides for family recreation and amusement which is regularly used by husbands, wives, and children, minors under the age of eighteen (18) years may be permitted to enter the room or area where billiards and pool are offered to the public and may be permitted to play at said games. 
However, no minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to enter the room or place where billiards or pool are so conducted after the hour of ten (10) p.m. of any day, and the owner, operator, or any person in charge of any such room or place shall not permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to remain therein after the hour of ten (10) p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1952, § 6334 ; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65)  
Sec. 29-9. - Same—Prohibited where alcoholic beverages sold. 
No person owning, managing, or in charge of any room or place where billiards or pool are played, in which room or place any alcoholic beverage is sold or consumed, shall permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to play at any game there offered or remain in said room or place. 
(Code 1952, § 6336; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-719, 2-17-64; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65)  
Sec. 29-10. - Same—Exception where accompanied by parent or guardian. 
The prohibitions of sections 29-8 and 29-9 shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1952, § 6337; Ord. No. NS-365, 3-2-59; Ord. No. NS-814, § 1, 8-2-65)  
Sec. 29-11. - Hours of operation. 
All pool rooms, except pool rooms or pool tables operated in conjunction with bowling alleys, shall be closed and cease all business, playing and games between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day. 
(Ord. No. NS-1134, § 1, 8-21-72)  
Chapter 30 - PLACES OF HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and structures, Ch. 8; zoning, Ch. 41. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Register of historical properties. 
The historic resources commission may, by resolution and at a noticed public hearing, designate as historical property any building or part thereof, object, structure, or site having importance to the history or architecture of the city in accordance with the criteria set forth in section 30-2. The commission secretary shall maintain a register which shall consist of copies of each such resolution and which shall be known as the city register of historical properties. The historic resources commission may at any time repeal, revise, or modify any such resolution upon reconsideration of the historical or architectural importance of the places therein described. 
(Ord. No. NS-1519, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. NS-2338, § 1, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 3, 8-3-98; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 1, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 3, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-1.5. - Definitions. 
Certificate of appropriateness means the method by which the historic resources commission approves modifications to a historic property pursuant to section 30-6. 
Dangerous building shall have the same definition as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings which may from time to time be amended. 
Historic property shall include a building, structure, object or site designated as having historical significance and listed on the federal, state or local register of historical properties, as well as those contributing properties located in an historic district. 
Local historic district means a collection or group of historic properties within a defined area. 
Modification means any change, alteration, restoration, remodeling, rehabilitation, construction, or relocation of the physical exterior of a historic structure. Modification shall not include painting. 
Register of historical properties means the official list of historic properties in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2338, § 2, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 3, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 4, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-2. - Criteria for selection. 
(a)  Any person or group may request a building, or part thereof, structure, object or site, to be designated to be included on the city register of historical properties (called "register" in this section). The applicant must submit documentation that demonstrates how the nominated building, structure, object or site satisfies the criteria for designation. A building, structure, object, or site may be designated for inclusion on the register if the building, structure, object or site is fifty (50) or more years old and if the commission finds that one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Buildings, structures or objects with distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style or period, that exemplify a particular architectural style or design features; 
(2)  Works of notable architects, builders, or designers whose style influenced architectural development; 
(3)  Rare buildings, structures, or objects or original designs; 
(4)  Buildings, structures, objects or sites of historical significance which include places: 
a.  Where important events occurred; 
b.  Associated with famous people, original settlers, renowned organizations and businesses; 
c.  Which were originally present when the city was founded; or 
d.  That served as important centers for political, social, economic, or cultural activity. 
(5)  Sites of archaeological importance; 
(6)  Buildings or structures that were connected with a business or use which was once common, but is now rare. 
(b)  The owner of a property(s) must be notified of its nomination upon receipt of an application by the planning and building agency. Upon adoption and placement of the property on the register, the resolution of designation shall be recorded with the county recorder's office pursuant to California Public Resources Code section 5029, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. NS-1519, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. NS-2338, § 3, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 4, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 5, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-2.1. - Criteria for selection; exceptions. 
A building, structure, object or site less than fifty (50) years old may be nominated provided that it can be proven to be of exceptional significance as outlined in subsections 30-2(a)(1)—(6). 
(Ord. No. NS-2338, § 4, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 5, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 6, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-2.2. - Categorization. 
The historic resources commission shall, by resolution and at a duly noticed public hearing, place all buildings, structures, objects, or sites on the city register of historical properties in one (1) of the following categories based upon the criteria for each category: 
(1)  Landmark category. 
a.  The building, structure, object or site is on the national register or appears to be eligible to be placed on the register; or 
b.  The building, structure, object or site is on the state register or appears to be eligible to be placed on the register; or 
c.  The building, structure, object or site has an historical/cultural significance to the city; or 
d.  The building, structure, object or site has a unique architectural significance. 
(2)  Key category. 
a.  The building, structure, object or site has a distinctive architectural style and quality; or 
b.  The building, structure, object or site is characteristic of a significant period in the history of the city; or 
c.  The building, structure, object or site is associated with a significant person or event in the city. 
(3)  Contributive category. The building, structure, object or site contributes to the overall character and history of a neighborhood or district and is a good example of period architecture. 
The historic resources commission may after a duly noticed public hearing revise, or modify any such categorization upon reconsideration of the historical or architectural importance of the places therein described. 
(Ord. No. NS-2417, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 6, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 7, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-2.3. - Removal from the city register of historical properties. 
(a)  Any owner of a historic property may apply to the city for removal from the city register of historical properties. The historic resources commission shall by adoption of a resolution, following a duly noticed public hearing, remove the historic property from the city register of historical properties if the historic property meets one or more of the following: 
(1)  The building, structure, object or site does not meet the criteria for being placed on the city register of historical properties; or 
(2)  Discovery of information subsequent to placement on the register of historical properties regarding the significance of the building, structure, object or site, such that the criteria for placement on the city register of historical properties is not met; or 
(3)  The building, structure, object or site has been substantially damaged or destroyed by a catastrophic event such that it no longer meets the criteria for placement on the city register of historical properties; or 
(4)  There has been a loss of the integrity of the building, structure, object or site, provided the loss of integrity was not the result of any illegal act or willful neglect by the owner or agent of the owner; or 
(5)  The owner proves that he/she would have no economically viable use of the property unless the building, structure, object or site is removed from the register of historic properties. 
(b)  The historic resources commission shall give notice of its decision, which shall be final unless timely appealed pursuant to section 30-8. 
(Ord. No. NS-2521, § 8, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-2.4. - Same—Filing fees. 
Every application under this chapter to designate a building, or part thereof, structure, object or site for inclusion on the city register of historical properties or appeal to the city council shall be accompanied by a filing fee. No application shall be accepted for filing without the required fee, except that all governmental agencies are exempt from the fee requirement. The city council shall from time to time by resolution adopt a schedule of fees to be charged, a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the planning department. 
(Ord. No. NS-2802, § 2, 2-16-10)  
Sec. 30-3. - Application of state historical building code. 
Any building or structure designated as having historical or architectural importance by inclusion in the city register of historical properties shall be deemed a "qualified historical building or structure" for purposes of applying the state historical building code, as set forth in Part 2.7 (commencing with Section 18950) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. The city's building official is authorized to apply the said state historical building code to any such building or structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1519, § 1, 3-17-80; Ord. No. NS-2338, § 5, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 9, 1-21-03)  
Sec. 30-4. - Local historic districts. 
(a)  The historic resources commission, after public hearing noticed and held in the manner prescribed by Section 37628 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, may, recommend that the city council designate an area within the city as a local historic district. 
(b)  A local historic district shall be designated only if it meets one or more of the following standards: 
(1)  The area constitutes a distinct section of the city and has special character, historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest and value. 
(2)  The area provides significant examples of architectural values of the past or landmarks in the history of architecture. 
(3)  The area serves as a reminder of past eras, events, or persons important in the history of the city, the county, the state or the United States of America or illustrates past living styles for future generations to observe, study, or inhabit. 
(4)  The area is the site of a historically or culturally significant ground, garden, or object. 
(c)  The city council, after receiving the recommendation from the historic resources commission, may by resolution designate the recommended area as a local historic district. At the time of the creation of the local historic district, the city council may adopt design guidelines for the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2521, § 10, 1-21-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2521, § 10, adopted January 21, 2003, amended § 30-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 30-4 pertained to historic districts and neighborhoods and derived from Ord. No. NS-1519, § 1, adopted March 17, 1980; Ord. No. NS-2338, § 6, adopted December 1, 1997; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 4, adopted August 3, 1998.  
Sec. 30-5. - Historical rehabilitation financing program. 
The standards set forth in sections 30-2 and 30-4 shall constitute criteria for selection of historical properties eligible for financing and criteria for the selection of historical rehabilitation areas, pursuant to the provisions of the Marks Historical Rehabilitation Act of 1976, as set forth in Part 10 (commencing with Section 37600) of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, for the purposes of any historical rehabilitation financing program which may be undertaken pursuant to that act by the City of Santa Ana or the community redevelopment agency of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1519, § 1, 3-17-80)  
Sec. 30-6. - Modification of historic properties. 
(a)  No exterior physical modifications, other than those identified by the historic resources commission for administrative approval by city staff, shall be permitted with respect to an historic structure until the historic resources commission approves such request at a duly noticed public hearing and issues a certificate of appropriateness. The historic resources commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness upon finding that the proposed modification(s) does not substantially change the character and integrity of the historic property. The minutes of the historic resources commission meeting shall serve as the official record. 
(b)  An application for exterior modification of a historic structure shall be accompanied, except for those subject to administrative approval by city staff pursuant to subsection (a), by payment of an application fee set in such amounts as shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The building official may determine a historic property is a dangerous building. Modifications as determined necessary by the building official to correct the dangerous building shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. Modifications shall be consistent with the overall architectural design and historic character of the structure and blend in with the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2521, § 11, 1-21-03; Ord. No. NS-2780, § 3, 4-6-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2521, § 11, adopted January 21, 2003, amended § 30-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 30-6 pertained to historic resources commission approvals and derived from Ord. No. NS-2338, § 7, adopted December 1, 1997; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 5, adopted August 3, 1998; Ord. No. NS-2405, § 1, adopted October 18, 1999; Ord. No. NS-2438, § 1, adopted August 21, 2000; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 7, adopted December 4, 2000.  
Sec. 30-7. - Demolition of historic properties. 
(a)  An application of intent to demolish an historic property shall be submitted to the planning and building agency. At a duly noticed public hearing, the historic resources commission must review all applications for demolition permits for historic properties. The commission shall investigate all feasible alternatives to demolition. These alternatives include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Seeking private citizens, local trusts, and other financial sources who may be willing to purchase the structure for restoration or relocation. 
(2)  Publicizing the availability of the structure for purchase for restoration or relocation purposes. 
(3)  Exploring possible sites for relocation of the historic building if on-site preservation is not possible. Any structure relocated under this section shall not require a residential relocation permit, pursuant to section 41-620 of this Code. 
(4)  Suggesting to the city council that the city purchase the structure when private preservation or relocation is not feasible. 
(b)  All of the above items are to be completed within two hundred and forty (240) days from the date of application submittal. After two hundred and forty (240) days, or at the conclusion of the environmental review period, whichever is longer, a demolition permit must be issued. Prior to the issuance of the demolition permit, the applicant shall provide, to the reasonable satisfaction of the commission, and at the applicant's sole cost, complete photo-documentation of archival quality and historical profile of the structure to be demolished, prior to the scheduling of the demolition. 
(c)  The building official may determine a historic property is a dangerous building. Such determination allows the waiver of historic resources commission review and the required review period for demolition if the historic property is declared a dangerous building. 
(Ord. No. NS-2338, § 8, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 6, 8-3-98; Ord. No. NS-2405, § 2, 10-18-99; Ord. No. NS-2455, § 8, 12-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2521, § 12, 1-21-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2521, § 12, adopted January 21, 2003, changed the title of § 30-7 from "demolition of historic structures" to "demolition of historic properties."  
Sec. 30-8. - Appeals from decisions of historic resources commission. 
(a)  An appeal from a decision or requirement of the historic resources commission may be made by any interested party, individual or group. 
(b)  Any appeal made under the terms of this section shall be made within ten (10) calendar days following the date of the decision by the historic resources commission, and shall be accompanied by payment of an appeal fee set in such amounts as shall be established by resolution of the city council. Further, such appeal period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following such date of the decision by the historic resources commission. If such tenth calendar day ends on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the ten-day period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the next regular business day. The formal action by the historic resources commission shall become effective on the day following the first regularly scheduled council meeting after the ten-day appeal period, unless the city council, in compliance with section 41-643, section 41-644 or section 41-645, holds a public hearing on the matter, then the decision of the city council will become effective on the day following the hearing and decision by the city council. 
(c)  All appeals shall be in writing and on forms provided by the planning department and shall specify wherein there was any error of decision or requirement by the commission. Furthermore, a copy of such appeal shall be filed with the planning department and the clerk of the council. 
(d)  Upon receipt of such appeal, the planning department shall set the matter for hearing by the council. 
(e)  All appeals shall be heard in the same manner as prescribed for the original hearing. 
(f)  Upon filing of an appeal, the planning department shall forward to the clerk of the council a copy of the written findings, maps, papers and exhibits upon which the decision of the historic resources commission was based. 
(g)  The council may, after public hearing, affirm, reverse, change, or modify the original decision and may make any additional determination it shall consider appropriate within the limitations imposed by this chapter. Such decision shall be filed with the clerk of the council, and the city planning department; one (1) copy thereof shall be sent to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2338, § 8, 12-1-97; Ord. No. NS-2363, § 7, 8-3-98; Ord. No. NS-2780, § 4, 4-6-09)  
Sec. 30-9—30-24. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 1. - HISTORIC PROPERTY PRESERVATION AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 30-25. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds and determines that entering into historical property preservation agreements, as hereinafter provided, will provide an incentive for owners of properties listed on the city register of historical property to preserve the historic and architectural character of their property, thereby providing a cultural benefit to the citizens of the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
"Eligible historic property" shall mean property that is listed on the city register of historical properties. 
"Historic property preservation agreement," shall mean an agreement between the owner(s) or agent for the owner(s) of an eligible historic property and the city, meeting all requirements of this division. 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Sec. 30-27. - Authority. 
The historic resources commission reviews and forwards recommendations for historic property preservation agreements to the city council for approval consistent with the procedures established in section 2-374(c). 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Sec. 30-28. - Eligibility. 
Eligibility for historic property preservation agreements are limited to the owner(s) of properties duly listed on the city register of historical properties. 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Sec. 30-29. - Required provisions of agreements. 
The required provisions of a historic property preservation agreement are those as stipulated pursuant to California Government Code Section 50281 et seq. and any additional provisions required by the council as deemed appropriate to preserve eligible historic properties. 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Sec. 30-30. - Application procedures and processing fee for agreements. 
All applications for historic property preservation agreements shall be made in writing and filed with the planning and building agency upon forms provided by the agency. The procedures and content of the application and review of historic property preservation agreements shall be provided by the executive director of the planning and building agency, or his or her designee, to effectuate implementation of this division. A historic property preservation agreement application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee, established by council resolution, to offset the cost to administer the agreement. 
( Ord. No. NS-2382, § 1, 3-15-99 )  
Chapter 31 - RECREATION, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Parks and Playground Act, dealing mainly with developing such facilities, see § 38000 et seq., Gov. Code. 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(1)  The words "amplified sound" mean music or speech projected or transmitted by artificial means including, but not limited to, amplifiers, loudspeakers or any similar devices. 
(2)  The word "department" means the recreation and parks department of the City of Santa Ana. 
(3)  The word "director" means the director of the recreation and parks department. 
(4)  The word "park" means any public park or recreation or playground area, including Class I Bike Trails and paseos, or building or facility thereon within the City of Santa Ana, owned and maintained by the city as a public park or recreation or playground area, whether or not such areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose. 
(5)  The word "pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of park waters. 
(6)  The word "smoke or smoking" shall include the carrying, holding, possession or smoking of a lighted pipe or cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
(7)  The word "stadium" means the Eddie West Field-Santa Ana Stadium. 
(8)  The word "vehicle" includes any wheeled device or conveyancy, whether propelled by motor, animal or human power. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any kind, size or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city. 
(9)  The word "zoo" means the Santa Ana Zoo at Prentice Park. 
(Ord. No. NS-1407, § 1, 3-20-78; Ord. No. NS-2827, § 3, 2-6-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1407, § 1, amended § 31-1 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment said section regulated conduct in public parks, playgrounds and recreation centers and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 4261—4261.26.  
Sec. 31-1.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1407, § 6, enacted March 20, 1978, repealed §§ 31-5—31-11 derived from Code 1952, §§ 3812—3812.4, 4264.2, 4264.3; Ord. No. NS-193, § 3, adopted July 2, 1956, and Ord. No. NS-353, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1958. Said sections prohibited unauthorized personnel from being inside the fence of Prentice Park Zoo during such hours that the zoo was closed to the public, regulated conduct of persons at Prentice Park Zoo and pertained to municipal swimming pools.  
Sec. 31-2. - Prohibited conduct. 
The conduct described in sections 31-2.1 through 31-2.19 shall be prohibited within the exterior boundary lines of any public park unless specifically allowed through the issuance of a permit pursuant to the requirements of section 31-3. The conduct described in sections 31-2.1 through 31-2.19 shall be prohibited in the stadium or zoo unless inconsistent with the terms and conditions of uses permitted by a contract approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1407, § 3, 3-20-78; Ord. No. NS-1522, § 1, 4-7-80; Ord. No. NS-1572, § 1, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-2026, § 1, 10-16-89; Ord. No. NS-2827, § 4, 2-6-12)  
Sec. 31-2.1. - Alcohol and drunkenness. 
(a)  No person shall bring into, possess, consume or sell alcoholic beverages in a park or zoo. 
(b)  No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any park, zoo or stadium. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 2, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.2. - Animals and pets. 
(a)  No person in a park shall ride a horse, mule, donkey, pony or bovine animal except on designated paths or trails. 
(b)  No person shall abandon or bring into any park, except on leash, any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind. This prohibition shall not apply to seeing eye dogs used by a visually handicapped person, provided that the dog is at all times kept under control. 
(c)  No person shall willfully frighten, molest, injure, chase, capture or annoy any animal or bird in any park or zoo. No person shall throw or propel anything of any kind into any animal area at a zoo. 
(d)  No person shall feed or offer food to any mammal, reptile or fowl in a zoo, unless such food is an approved type obtained from a dispenser within such zoo for that purpose. 
(e)  No person owning or having charge, custody or control of any dog in a park shall either knowingly or through failure to exercise due care and control, permit such animal to defecate and allow such droppings to thereafter remain. A person shall not be considered in violation of this section if the person has the necessary equipment, i.e., shovel, bag, etc., readily available and takes immediate action to remove such droppings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 3, 4-20-81; Ord. No. NS-1987, § 1, 12-19-88)  
Sec. 31-2.3. - Camping. 
(a)  No person shall camp in a park except in an area that has been designated for camping by the director. 
(b)  No person shall camp in a park without first obtaining a permit from the director pursuant to section 31-3. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 4, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.4. - Defacing park property. 
(a)  No person shall willfully mark, deface or injure in any manner, or displace or remove, or tamper with any park property of any kind. 
(b)  No person shall willfully dig, cut, move or remove from any park or park area any sand, wood, turf, grass, gravel, shrub, or other material. 
(c)  No person shall willfully pick, saw, cut, chop, carve, remove or injure any flowers, seeds, blooms, bark, branches, twigs, shrubs, vines, bush, or any other vegetation within any park property. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 5, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.5. - Firearms and dangerous instruments. 
(a)  No person, except an authorized law enforcement officer, shall bring onto park property, other than at such firing ranges as may be specifically designated by the director, any firearm or ammunition, any explosive, dynamite cap, fireworks, airgun, pellet gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, or any other dangerous instrument. 
(b)  No person shall discharge any weapon or dangerous instrument in a park other than at a firing range as specifically designated by the director for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 6, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.6. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall start or maintain, in any park, any outdoor fire, except in areas designated for picnicking or camping. Fires shall be limited to cooking fires, or fires in camp lanterns or heaters. 
(b)  No person starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the area where the fire is located without first completely extinguishing such fire. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 7, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.7. - Gambling. 
No person shall conduct any raffle or card game for money or drawing for prizes or participate in any form of gambling within a park. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 8, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.8. - Games. 
No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, kites or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 9, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.9. - Hours. 
As a general rule, parks shall be open to the public every day of the year between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. However, the director may, in his reasonable discretion, extend or limit such hours for any park or portion of any park. No person shall enter, be or remain in any park during the time when such park is closed, unless he has obtained a permit therefor from the director. Park closing hours shall be posted at park entrances. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 10, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.10. - Noise. 
No person in a park shall operate a device producing amplified sound except pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of section 31-3. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 11, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.11. - Picnicking. 
No person in a park shall conduct or participate in any picnic, or prepare or serve any food, except in an area designated by the director for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 12, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.12. - Restroom and bathing facilities. 
No person over the age of eight (8) years shall enter or use restroom, bath or dressing room facilities designated for the use of persons of a sex different from that of such person. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 13, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.13. - Sanitation. 
(a)  No person in a park shall willfully throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park any substance which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(b)  No person in a park shall willfully bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse or other trash, except in receptacles designated for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 14, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.14. - Signs. 
No person in park or zoo shall disobey any sign or notice posted or displayed by or at the direction of the director. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 15, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.15. - Swimming. 
(a)  No person in a park shall swim, bathe or wade in any water or waterway in or adjacent to any park, except in such water or waterway as the director may designate and then only during such hours as the director may have established for such purposes. 
(b)  No person in a park shall change into bathing clothes from street clothes or from bathing clothes to street clothes, except in a bath house or other structure designated for such use. 
(c)  No person in a park shall fail to wear bathing clothes that cover the genitals and buttocks and in the case of females, the areola and nipples. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 16, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.16. - Vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vehicle in a park except upon designated paved or improved park roads or driveways, or in and upon designated areas or trails set aside for use by such vehicles, unless directed to do so by a law enforcement officer or park guard or by official signs or markings. 
(b)  The director may, in his reasonable discretion, set aside or designate areas, paths, trails or roads in a park where the operation of bicycles, tricycles, motorcycles, scooters and minibikes may be allowed. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle on park property other than in an area designated for parking such vehicle, unless there is an emergency or unless directed to do so by a law enforcement officer. Parking shall conform to officially posted signs or markings unless other instructions are given by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 17, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.17. - Zoo. 
(a)  The zoo shall be open to the public every day during such time or times as the director may determine, except on New Years Day and Christmas. 
(b)  No person shall enter, be or remain in the zoo at any time when the zoo is not open to the public, except as the director may authorize. 
(Ord. No. NS-1572, § 18, 4-20-81)  
Sec. 31-2.18. - Selling. 
(a)  Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage or product of any kind on any park, zoo or stadium property. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the operation of concession stands owned by the city, nor shall it apply to vendors authorized by the director to sell food and beverages at the Centennial Park soccer field complex. 
(Ord. No. NS-2026, § 2, 10-16-89; Ord. No. NS-2262, § 1, 9-5-95)  
Sec. 31-2.19. - Smoking prohibited in parks, stadium and zoo. 
Smoking is prohibited and is unlawful within the boundaries of any park, stadium or zoo. 
(Ord. No. NS-2827, § 5, 2-6-12)  
Sec. 31-3. - Permits—Required. 
No person in a park shall conduct, operate, present, manage or take part in any of the following activities, unless a permit is obtained prior to the start of the activity. 
(a)  Any picnic, outing or gathering sponsored by any person and composed of forty (40) or more persons. 
(b)  Any exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio or television broadcast, fair, circus, musical event or any similar event. 
(c)  Any public meeting, assembly or parade including, but not limited to, drills, maneuvers, ceremonies, addresses, speeches or political meetings. 
(d)  Any use of any park facility by a certain person or group of persons to the exclusion of others. 
(Ord. No. NS-1407, § 4, 3-20-78; Ord. No. NS-2026, § 2, 10-16-89)  
Sec. 31-3.1. - Same—Standards for issuance. 
A permit for use of a park shall be issued unless one (1) or more of the following findings are made by the director: 
(a)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public use and enjoyment of the park; or 
(b)  That the proposed activity or use of the park will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(c)  That the conduct of the proposed activity or use is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or property resulting in serious harm to the public; or 
(d)  That the proposed activity or use will entail an extraordinary expense or operation by the city; or 
(e)  That the facilities desired have been reserved for another activity or use on the date and hour(s) requested in the application; or 
(f)  That the proposed activity will include fencing of a portion of the park for the exclusive use of persons attending the activity and/or charging of an admittance fee to attend. 
(Ord. No. NS-2026, § 4, 10-16-89)  
Sec. 31-3.2. - Same—Conditions. 
The director may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions on the granting of a permit including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(a)  Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment or vehicles, the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage, or any other use which appears likely to create a risk of unreasonable harm to the use and enjoyment of the park by others, or of damage to park property. 
(b)  A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable security deposit for the repair of any damage to park property or the cost of cleanup, or both. 
(c)  A requirement that the applicant pay a reasonable fee to defray the cost of furnishing adequate security forces by the city at the proposed use or activity. 
(d)  A requirement that the applicant pay any required business license tax or other required fees. 
(e)  A requirement that the permittee furnish additional sanitary and refuse facilities that might be reasonably necessary based on the use or activity for which the permit is being sought. 
(f)  A requirement that the permittee provide comprehensive liability insurance in an amount established by resolution of the city council naming the city and its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. 
(g)  A requirement that the permittee shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury to any person or property whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit was issued. 
(h)  A requirement that the permittee shall be bound by park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in his permit. 
(i)  A requirement that the permit shall not be transferable without the written consent of the permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-2026, § 5, 10-16-89)  
Sec. 31-3.3. - Same—Appeal. 
Within three (3) days after receipt of an application, the director shall apprise applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit or of any conditions attached to the issuance of a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within five (5) days to the city manager who shall consider the standards set forth in section 31-3.1 and sustain or overrule the director's decision within four (4) days. 
(Ord. No. NS-2026, § 6, 10-16-89)  
Sec. 31-3.4. - Same—Revocation. 
The permitting authority shall have the authority to revoke any permit granted under this chapter upon finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon violation of any condition or restriction under which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-2026, § 7, 10-16-89)  
Sec. 31-4. - Metal and glass container prohibited. 
No person shall bring into or possess in the stadium any metal or glass bottle, can, canister or similar container. This provision shall not apply if inconsistent with terms and conditions of uses permitted by a contract approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1407, § 5, 3-20-78) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ord. No. NS-1407, § 5, § 31-4 established hours for Prentice Park Zoo, and was derived from Code 1952, § 4263.  
Sec. 31-5. - Skate park facility regulations. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to the riding of skateboards and in-line skating, at any facility or park owned or operated by the city that is designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skateboard use: 
(1)  No person shall ride a skateboard or partake in in-line skating at any facility owned or operated by the city that is designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skateboard use unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads as required by the State of California Health and Safety Code Section 115800. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to enter the skateboard facility unless during posted hours of operation. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to enter the designated skate area, unless operating skateboard or partaking in in-line skating. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to organize any activity, event or competition in any designated public skate park facility without the written permission of the executive director of the parks, recreation and community services agency. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to make modifications, alterations, or additions in any manner to the skate facility. 
(6)  No bicycles, BMX, scooters and/or motorized devices are permitted within any designated public skate park facility. Public skate park facilities are for in-line skating and skateboarding only. 
(7)  Skating outside the designated skate park area is prohibited. This does not include skating or using skateboards as a means of transportation. 
(b)  The executive director of the parks, recreation and community services agency is authorized to post signs giving notice of the aforementioned regulations as well as any additional regulations as he or she determines are valuable for the optimal operation of the designated public skate park facility. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within same year; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within same year; 
(4)  Fourth violation within same year will result in six-month banishment from the use of the facility; and 
(5)  Failure to pay fines will result in automatic six-month banishment from the use of the facility until said fines are paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2504, § 2, 8-5-02)  
Secs. 31-6—31-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 31-5, providing that § 31-1, as said section existed prior to amendment by Ord. No. NS-1407, § 1, would not apply to Santa Ana Municipal Stadium, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1407, § 2, enacted March 20, 1978. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1292, § 4, adopted Feb. 17, 1976.  
Sec. 31-12. - Rules and regulations. 
The director of recreation and parks shall issue from time to time as he deems necessary, rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, and the failure to obey same shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1407, § 7, 3-20-78) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1407, § 7, amended § 31-12 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment said section was derived from Code 1952, § 3812.5, and Ord. No. NS-192, § 3, enacted July 2, 1956, and pertained to eviction of persons from municipal swimming pools for violation of former §§ 31-7—31-11.  
Chapter 32 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - AMBULANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2339, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1997, repealed the former Art. I, § 32-1, §§ 32-1.4—32-2.19, and §§ 32-2.21—32-25, and enacted a new Art. I. The former Art. I pertained to general provisions and derived from Ord. No. NS-1394, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1978, and Ord. No. NS-2041, §§ 4—28, adopted Jan. 2, 1990. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Agreement. 
Ambulances, or other vehicles used in the transportation of sick, injured, wounded, handicapped or deceased persons, will be licensed and regulated by the County of Orange, through a mutual agreement of the City of Santa Ana and the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 1, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-2. - Requirement. 
Those companies operating vehicles used in the transportation of sick, injured, wounded, handicapped or deceased persons in Santa Ana shall obtain a permit through the County of Orange and shall pay city business tax fees as adopted by the Santa Ana City Council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 1, 12-1-97)  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, adopted Dec. 1, 1997, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 32-30—32-38, and § 32-40, and enacted a new Art. II. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. NS-1394, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 1978. 
 
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases defined in this section shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions. 
(a)  City means the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  City authorization means city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city. 
(c)  Driver means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab. 
(d)  Driver's permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab. 
(e)  OCTAP means the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
(f)  Operate a taxicab means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the city. 
(g)  Owner means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab. 
(h)  Person includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity. 
(i)  Taxicab means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city, capable of carrying not more than eight (8) persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission. 
(j)  Taxicab business permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business. 
(k)  Taxicab vehicle permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. 
(l)  Vehicle for hire permit means a permit issued by the City of Santa Ana to operate a taxicab company in Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-4. - City taxi permit required. 
(a)  A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab has a vehicle for hire permit issued by the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner of that taxicab has a vehicle for hire permit issued by the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  Any taxicab company with a valid OCTAP taxicab business permit may apply to operate a taxicab business in Santa Ana. 
(1)  An application for a taxicab vehicle for hire permit shall be filed with the chief of police. The application will include the following information. 
a.  Company name, address, telephone numbers; 
b.  Owner information (corporation officers if incorporated); 
c.  Name of principal person in charge of day to day operations; 
d.  Copy of valid OCTAP permit; 
e.  Radio frequencies utilized to dispatch taxicabs; 
f.  List of vehicles to be licensed in Santa Ana, information to include vehicle license (or VIN if no license), vehicle make, vehicle year; 
g.  List of other Orange County cities company is licensed to work in; 
h.  Proof that any background fees have been paid. 
(2)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall verify the OCTAP taxicab business permit is valid and the vehicles listed have current taxicab vehicle permits issued by OCTAP. The application information shall also be verified. 
(3)  After verification of the required information, the company will be directed to Santa Ana Business Licensing to pay any licensing fee. 
(4)  Santa Ana Business Licensing will issue business tax stickers for each vehicle licensed to work in Santa Ana. Each vehicle shall display the sticker in the lower left-hand corner of the rear window. No taxicab shall pick up passengers in Santa Ana without displaying both a valid OCTAP vehicle sticker and a current City of Santa Ana business tax sticker. Nor shall any owner allow a driver to pick up a passenger in a vehicle without the required stickers. 
(5)  The company shall then provide an updated list of vehicles licensed to work in Santa Ana to the chief of police, or his designee, to include vehicle license (or VIN), vehicle year, vehicle make, and the business tax sticker number for that vehicle. The company shall provide an updated list of licensed vehicles to the chief of police, or his designee, within seventy-two (72) hours of any changes. 
(d)  Any taxicab company with a suspended, revoked, or expired OCTAP taxicab business permit must cease operating in Santa Ana and notify the chief of police, or his designee, of the circumstances surrounding the revocation, suspension or expiration, in writing. The taxicab company will be eligible to work in Santa Ana after the OCTAP taxicab business permit is reinstated. 
(e)  Three (3) or more violations of this Code within any twelve-month period by a taxicab business permit holder shall constitute grounds for revocation of such holder's permit to operate a taxicab company in Santa Ana. For the purpose of such revocation proceedings, a presumption is created that any person convicted of or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to any violation of this Code, who was using a vehicle during such violation which at the time of the violation was registered to, or owned or controlled by, a permit holder, is deemed to have been acting with the permission of such permit holder. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-5. - Driver's permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person possesses a driver's permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver's permit and if city authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-6. - Taxicab vehicle permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the city if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-7. - Taxicab business permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab business in the city if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if city authorization has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-8. - Application for permits. 
Application for a driver's permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP, and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing such application as established by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-9. - Testing for controlled substances and alcohol. 
A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-10. - Insurance required. 
A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. Such proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-11. - Nontransferability. 
No permit issued under this article shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-12. - Equipment. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-13. - Mechanical condition. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this article shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-14. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/her destination by the most direct and accessible route. 
(b)  A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(c)  A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger's compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(1)  A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of such taxicab; 
(2)  The driver's name and address; 
(3)  The owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(4)  The taxicab identification number; 
(5)  The driver's permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(6)  The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(7)  Any other information required by the city. 
(d)  A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare. 
(e)  A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  A driver shall not leave his taxicab to solicit passengers. 
(g)  The name or trade name of the owner and the number of which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-15. - Rates and charges. 
No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Sec. 32-16. - Separate from business licensing. 
The requirements of this article are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2339, § 2, 12-1-97)  
Secs. 32-17—32-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2041, § 29, adopted Jan. 2, 1990, repealed former Art. III of this chapter, which pertained to ambulances, consisted of §§ 32-60—32-80, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1394, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1978. For similar new provisions, see § 14-101 et seq. of this Code. 
 
Secs. 32-60—32-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TOW TRUCKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2637, § 3, adopted September 2, 2003, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. NS-1616, § 1, adopted January 4, 1982; Ord. No. NS-2159, §§ 1—12, adopted June 15, 1992; Ord. No. 2164, § 1, adopted July 6, 1992. 
 
Secs. 32-81—32-93. - Reserved.  
Sec. 32-94. - Removal of vehicle from private property; notification, fee. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the tow truck operator to ensure that the Santa Ana Police Department is notified by the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property pursuant to California Vehicle Code, Section 22658 prior to the tow truck operator removing any illegally parked vehicle. The tow truck operator, when authorized by the owner or person in possession of the private property, shall notify the Santa Ana Police Department on behalf of the owner or person in possession of the private property. 
(b)  The city council may, by resolution, establish a fee to defray the cost of logging and creating computer entries for vehicles stored from private property. The fee shall be paid by the registered owner or agent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-2637, § 3, 9-2-03)  
Secs. 32-95—32-106. - Reserved.  
Sec. 32-107. - Towing operation guidelines; rotational list; authority of the chief of police to promulgate written guidelines; recommendation of list of rotational tow operators to the City Council. 
1.  In order to provide a workable and comprehensive policy regarding the towing and/or storage of abandoned, disabled, stored or impounded vehicles from public or private property, the chief of police hereby authorized to promulgate and issue, by general order, and amend, if necessary written rules and regulations governing the following but by no means exclusive subjects: 
(a)  Requirements and standards for placement on the rotational tow list; 
(b)  Requirements and standards for continued placement on the rotational tow list; 
(c)  Grounds for, and procedures governing, discipline and removal from the rotational tow list; and 
(d)  Any other pertinent and relevant matters pertaining to the administration of a rotational tow list. 
2.  Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect of law, and the failure to obey same shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this article for purposes of renewal, suspension or revocation of placement on the rotational tow list. 
3.  At least once every five (5) years, the chief of police will make a recommendation to the City Council of a list of rotational tow operators. 
(Ord. No. NS-2637, § 3, 9-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2894, § 2, 3-1-16 ) 
Ord. No. NS-2894, § 2, adopted March 1, 2016 , amended § 32-107 to read as set out herein. Previously § 32-107 was titled "Towing operation guidelines; rotational list; authority of the chief of police to promulgate written guidelines."  
Chapter 33 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WORKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motion picture permit, § 10-2 et seq.; parades, § 10-7 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Building numbering—Required. 
Every person having, controlling or occupying any house, store, storeroom, building or structure, situated upon premises fronting any of the streets within the city, shall procure and place in a conspicuous position immediately over, upon or adjacent to every door or entryway to any of said premises from such streets, a suitable metallic plate with conspicuous figures and numbers of the denominations hereinafter stated. 
(Code 1952, § 8500)  
Sec. 33-2. - Same—System. 
(a)  Street apportioned. There is apportioned to each twenty-five feet (25') and separate fractional part thereof of frontage on each street in the city, its certain number as prescribed in this section. 
(b)  Starting point, streets crossing Main. All premises fronting on streets intersecting Main Street shall be numbered from Main Street and east and west thereof, and the even numbers shall be placed on the south side of each street and the odd numbers shall be placed on the north side of each street. 
(c)  Starting point, streets crossing First. All premises fronting on streets intersecting First Street shall be numbered from said First Street and north and south thereof, and the even numbers shall be placed on the west side of each street and the odd numbers shall be placed on the east side of each street. 
Cross reference— Special tax financing improvement code, Ch. 20 
(d)  Starting point, street not crossing Main or First. All premises fronting on any street not intersecting either First Street or Main Street, shall be numbered from their ends nearest to Main Street, and First Street respectively. 
(e)  Numbers per block. In all numbering each block shall be estimated as containing one hundred numbers but the numbers on each block fronting on said Main and First Streets shall be commenced with the number one hundred. 
(f)  Fractional numbers. If more than one door or entryway to any premises required to be numbered exists, it shall be numbered by adding its proper fractional number to its appropriate number. 
(g)  Vacant premises. This section shall not be construed to require the numbering of any premises whereon no building shall or does exist, but shall be construed to require the numberings of all entryways to all premises whereon any house or other structure to be occupied by human beings as a residence or place of business exists. 
(Code 1952, §§ 8501, 8502, 8502.1, 8502.2, 8503, 8504)  
Sec. 33-3. - Same—Notice to number. 
The planning director shall notify from time to time the owners or occupants of all new structures and other buildings and structures, that may be without numbers from any cause, to comply with the provisions of sections 33-1 and 33-2 and to enforce the same. 
(Code 1952, § 8505)  
Sec. 33-4. - Same—Improper numbers. 
The planning director or clerk shall notify the owners or occupants of all structures and buildings which shall be found to be improperly numbered to number the same in accordance with the provisions of sections 33-1 and 33-2. 
(Code 1952, § 8506)  
Sec. 33-5. - Names of streets and other public facilities—Submittal of requests. 
Requests for the naming or renaming of streets, public buildings, parks or recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city, except proposals initiated by the city council or the planning commission, shall be submitted in writing to the director of planning and development services. 
(Ord. No. NS-1683, § 1, 6-20-83)  
Sec. 33-6. - Same—Decision by planning commission. 
All requests for the naming or renaming of any public street, public building, park or recreational facility shall be referred to the planning commission for determination. The planning commission may approve the name proposed, approve it with modifications or approve a different name. In reaching its decision the planning commission shall give consideration to the following policy guidelines: 
(a)  Any street which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing street should be given the same name as the already existing street, in the absence of other overriding considerations. 
(b)  Streets and other public facilities should not be given names which would cause confusion with other streets or public facilities. 
(c)  Names which achieve any of the following purposes should be promoted: 
(1)  A name which serves to identify the location of the subject by reference to distinct geographic, environmental or development features in the immediate area. 
(2)  A name which references the history of the subject site or its immediate area. 
(3)  A name which identifies a person or family which made an extraordinary donation of land or funds to promote the construction or improvement of the subject public facility. 
(4)  A name which recognizes a person or family who made a distinct, significant contribution to the well-being of the city, including past mayors, council members, board or commission members, officers or employees of the city, but not anyone who currently holds any such position. 
(Ord. No. NS-1683, § 2, 6-20-83)  
Sec. 33-7. - Same—Public hearings. 
(a)  Prior to any change of name of an existing street, if the renaming would change the street address of one or more occupants of abutting property, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed street renaming. The director of planning and development services shall endeavor to mail or deliver written notice of the proposed renaming to all such affected occupants at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, but the failure of any such affected occupant to receive such notice shall not invalidate any determination to change the name of the street made pursuant to this article. 
(b)  In cases other than those governed by subsection (a), the director of planning and development services, the planning commission, or the city council may set a public hearing on any request for the naming or renaming of any street or other facility, subject to such notice as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. NS-1683, § 3, 6-20-83)  
Sec. 33-8. - Same—Review by the council. 
(a)  Following the decision of the planning commission under section 33-6, the director of planning and development services shall prepare a report of the commission's action, summarizing the public input, if any, and the reasons for the commission's decision. Such report shall be submitted to the city council at its first regular meeting occurring at least ten (10) days after the commission's action. The city council may affirm the commission's decision, remand the matter back to the planning commission for further consideration, or make its own decision on the matter. 
(b)  Any person who desires to express opposition to the planning commission's decision may address the council prior to the council's action under this section or may submit such opposition in writing prior to such time. The director of planning and development services shall provide notification of the date and approximate time of the council's action to any person who requests such notification. 
(Ord. No. NS-1683, § 4, 6-20-83)  
Sec. 33-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-10. - Directional signs for places of public assembly. 
(a)  The executive director of the public services agency is authorized to provide for the installation in the public right-of-way of signs which provide motorists with direction to places of public assembly, including but not limited to churches and other privately owned or operated places of public assembly, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign shall be installed by city personnel. 
(2)  All costs of construction, installation, maintenance, repair, replacement, relocation, and removal of the sign shall be borne by the organization which owns or operates the facility to which the sign pertains. 
(3)  The sign shall be so located as to avoid any interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the creation of any traffic hazard. 
(4)  Sign installation shall be limited to arterial streets. 
(5)  No more than two (2) signs shall be installed for any single place of public assembly, and no more than one (1) sign for any single such place of public assembly shall be installed on any single street. 
(6)  The place of public assembly to which the sign pertains shall be classified as Group A with an occupancy load of at least fifty (50) persons under the Building Code of the City of Santa Ana. 
(7)  The sign shall comply with the regulations issued by the executive director of the public services agency pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The executive director of the public services agency is further authorized to: 
(1)  Issue regulations governing the size, shape, color, materials and location of signs to be installed pursuant to this section and the procedures for applications for such signs. 
(2)  Relocate any sign as necessary to accommodate the public use of the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Remove any sign which no longer serves the purpose for which it was installed or upon the failure of the responsible organization to pay amounts due to the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Each application for a sign pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1805, § 1, 11-4-85)  
Secs. 33-11—33-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions of "street", §§ 1-2, 41-154; use by community antenna television system, Ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 33-26. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations and procedures for the construction, repair and reconstruction of street and alley subgrade, base and surfacing; curbs; gutters and cross-gutters; sidewalks; sanitary sewers and water lines; drainage structures; or other improvements made in, on or over streets or ways in the city. 
(Code 1952, § 7200 ; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-27. - Official grade and standards. 
All street improvements designated in this article shall be done in conformance with lines and grades furnished by the director of public works or approved by him and in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by resolution of the city council, copies of which are on file in the office of the director of public works, planning director and clerk of the council. 
(Code 1952, § 7201 ; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-28. - Effect of master plan. 
All street improvements as defined or listed in this article shall be done in accordance with the standards for width and type established by the master plan of streets and highways of the city. If no master plan of streets and highways has been adopted by the city council, the provisions of this section shall apply to any map showing proposed street development as adopted by the city council or to any proceedings affecting said streets and alleys initiated by the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 7202; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-29. - Notice of work commencement to be given. 
No person shall begin any of the work designated in this article without first notifying the director of public works of the time such work will begin. 
(Code 1952, § 7203; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-30. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any excavation or any other street improvement work in, on or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk, or any other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole, or any other facility or installation or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the director an excavation permit in compliance with this chapter. This provision shall not apply to any of the officers or employees of the city under the direction of the various city departments or his or her authorized representative. 
(Code 1952, § 7204; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54; Ord. No. NS-2447, § 2, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-30.5. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Applicant shall mean the person applying for an excavation permit, as well as a person owning the facility or installation for which the excavation will be made. 
(b)  Article shall mean this Article II of Chapter 33 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(c)  Department shall mean the public works agency. 
(d)  Director shall mean the executive director of the public works agency for the City of Santa Ana or his or her authorized representative. 
(e)  Excavation shall mean any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility or facilities in, on or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
(f)  Facility or facilities shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, cabinets, ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes, pipes, pipelines, splice boxes, surface location markers, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults and other appurtenances or tangible items owned, leased, operated or licensed by a owner or person that are located in the public right-of-way. 
(g)  Owner shall mean any person, including the city, who owns the facility, or facilities that are or are proposed to be installed and maintained in the public right-of-way. 
(h)  Permit or permit to excavate shall mean a permit to perform an excavation. 
(i)  Permittee shall mean the person to whom an excavation permit is issued, as well as the person owning the facility or installation for which the excavation permit is issued. 
(j)  Person shall mean any person, company, partnership, corporation, entity, agency or other public or private utility entity, excepting the city or a contractor performing an excavation for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 3, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-31. - Same—Fees. 
Fees for permits to perform work under this article shall be charged in amounts which the city council shall establish by resolution. 
(Code 1952, § 7205; Ord. No. NS-28, 3-1-54; Ord. No. NS-43, 6-7-54; Ord. No. NS-108, § 1, 6-20-55; Ord. No. NS-385, § 1, 8-3-59; Ord. No. NS-1248, § 1, 3-10-75; Ord. No. 2447, § 4, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32. - Same—Requirements. 
(a)  Before issuing an excavation permit, the director shall require a written application on a form furnished by the director, setting forth: 
(1)  The name and residence or business address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; 
(3)  The purpose of the excavation; 
(4)  The proposed start date of excavation and duration of the excavation; 
(5)  A current business license issued by the City of Santa Ana. 
(6)  Evidence of insurance as required by section 33-32.19. 
(7)  A traffic control plan to be approved by the city traffic engineer. 
(8)  The applicant shall attach to the application form a scaled plan per director's requirement showing the location of the proposed excavation, the method of excavation, the facilities to be installed, to be maintained or repaired in connection with excavation, the dimensions thereof, and any other details the director may require. The director may establish different requirements for blanket permits issued under section 33-32.13 of this chapter. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to defray the city's costs to process the application and to inspect the excavation. 
(c)  Except for requirements subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of another regulatory agency, the location, depth and other physical characteristics of any facilities for which an excavation permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the director, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of the director. 
(d)  In the event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, no fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of the public and private utilities with facilities installed in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city.  
Sec. 33-32.1. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon receiving a written application for an excavation permit and plan, the director shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the application, sign and return it to the applicant. Excepting only excavations made pursuant to section 33-32.12 ("Emergency excavations"), and section 33-32.13 ("Blanket permits"), at least one (1) working day prior to the start of work, the applicant shall telephone the development engineering section of the public works agency and request a permit number, informing city the date the work will commence. Upon approval, a permit number shall then be assigned to the job and a permit shall be sent to the applicant. 
(b)  No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within thirty (30) working days from the date of its issuance. 
(c)  Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done thereunder. After said date, the permit shall be void unless the director has granted an extension of time for good cause. 
(d)  No person in violation of any requirement of this chapter shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued an excavation permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the director, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.2. - Permit to be available at excavation site. 
The permit or a photo duplicate shall be available for review at the site of the excavation for the duration of the excavation and shall be shown, upon request, to any police officer or any employee of the city with jurisdictional responsibility over activities in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.3. - Compliance with safety regulations. 
The permittee shall be responsible to comply with all current federal, state and local safety regulations and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.4. - Excavations not in accordance with permit declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any excavation or to install or cause to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place at any location, other than that described in the application for the excavation permit and as shown on the plans filed with the director, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the director may grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
(b)  Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this chapter or on any permit shall be cause for revocation of the permit until the violations have been corrected or alternative requirements have been approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.5. - Restoration of pavement, traffic loops, and pavement markings. 
Restoration of the asphalt pavement, traffic loops, pavement markings, legends and stripes of any street, alley or other public place shall be performed by permittee. Nothing in this section shall relieve the person opening or tearing up any pavement from the responsibility to maintain the excavation or installation in a safe condition until it is repaved or otherwise restored. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.6. - Opening, backfilling and paving trenches. 
(a)  No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than four hundred (400) feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, except when the prior written consent of the director has been obtained. 
(b)  Each permittee shall cover open excavation with non-skid surface steel plates ramped to the elevation of the contiguous street, pavement or other public right-of-way or otherwise protected in accordance with guidelines prescribed by the department. 
(c)  All excavations shall comply with the standards and requirements established by the director for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. The standards and requirements may impose different requirements for different excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors, such as (i) the location, type and extent of excavation performed (ii) the condition of the surface being excavated, (iii) the period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated, and (iv) the average daily traffic volume and truck volume. Permanent pavement restoration shall be completed no later than two (2) weeks after the trench is backfilled; provided, however, that the director may grant an extension depending on the complexity of the work and testing which is demonstrated to be necessary to get the utility in service. 
(d)  The old torn up pavements and other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus excavated material, within one (1) working day from the time such material is placed upon the street, provided that exceptions to this requirement may be approved by the director. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the contractor or permittee shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the director. 
(e)  Whenever any caving in the sidewalls of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away. In no case shall any void under a pavement be filled by any side or lateral tamping. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.7. - Cleaning up streets. 
In every case and at all times the work of removing from the streets all obstructions, surplus materials, debris, graffiti and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be the responsibility of the permittee and shall be done in a manner deemed satisfactory to the director. Excavation sites shall be cleaned at the completion of each workday. In addition, the permittee shall remove all excavated material from the site of the excavation no later than the end of each workday. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.8. - Repair and maintenance obligation of permittee. 
Each permittee that excavates or causes to be made an excavation in the public right-of-way shall be responsible to maintain, repair, or reconstruct the site of the excavation so as to maintain a condition acceptable to the director until such time as the public right-of-way is reconstructed, repaved, or resurfaced by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.9. - Subsurface or pavement failures. 
In the event that subsurface material or pavement over or immediately adjacent to any excavation should become depressed, broken, or fail in any way at any time after the excavation has been completed, the director shall exercise his or her best judgement to determine the person(s) responsible, if any, for the failure in the subsurface or surface of the public right-of-way and shall designate such person as the responsible party. The director shall notify said person(s) of the condition, its location, and the required remedy, and such person(s) shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition to the satisfaction of the director within five (5) working days of the notification. The director may extend the time for the responsible party to repair or restore the affected public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.10. - Repair by the department. 
(a)  In the event that any person(s) fails, neglects, or refuses to repair or restore any condition pursuant to the director's notice as set forth in section 33-32.9, the director may repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party shall compensate the city for any costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the city that were made necessary by reason of the repair or restoration undertaken by the department. The director shall revoke the applicant's permit and may only reissue the permit or any future permits after all repair work done by the city has been reimbursed. The director's determination as to the cost of the repair or restoration performed shall be final. 
(b)  Subject to the limitation set forth in section 33-32.14, repair or restoration by the department in accordance with this section shall not relieve the person(s) from liability for future pavement failures at the site of the repair or restoration. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.11. - Emergency remediation by the department. 
(a)  If, in the judgement of the director, the site of an excavation is considered hazardous or if it constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare that requires immediate action, the director may order the condition remedied by a written, electronic, or facsimile communication to the person(s) responsible, if any, for remedying the condition and shall designate such person as the responsible party. 
(b)  If the responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects, or refuses to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in said communication, the director may remedy the condition or cause the condition to be remedied in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party shall compensate the city for any reasonable costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the department that were made necessary by reason of the emergency remediation undertaken by the department. The director shall revoke the applicant's permit and may only reissue the permit or future permits after all repair work done by the city has been reimbursed. The director's determination as the cost of any remediation performed shall be final. 
(c)  Subject to the limitation set forth in section 33-32.14, remediation by the department in accordance with this section shall not relieve the person(s) from liability for future pavement failures at the site of the remediation. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.12. - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or duct in or under any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the director within one (1) day after the offices of the city are first opened subsequent to the excavation. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.13. - Blanket permits. 
The director may issue blanket permits to any person to make excavations for utility service connections, for the location of trouble in utility conduits or pipes and for making repairs thereto, or for emergency purposes. Blanket permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and shall authorize only excavations referred to in this section. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.14. - Liability of city. 
Pursuant to the protections of the California Tort Claims Act, neither the city nor any officer, agent, employee or volunteer thereof shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place made by any person under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. The permittee shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with excavation, and shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend city, its officers, agents, employees or volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgements, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its officers, agents, employees or volunteers may be subjected to for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. city shall promptly notify permittee, at the address set forth in the permit, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee in connection with an excavation. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.15. - Notice for marking of subsurface facilities. 
In accordance with state law, any person excavating in the public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of the underground service alert ("USA") regarding notification of excavation and marking of subsurface facilities. Such person shall provide USA with the assigned number for the permit to excavate or other information as may be necessary to properly identify the proposed excavation. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.16. - Abandonment of underground facilities, reports and maps. 
Whenever any facility is abandoned in the public right-of-way, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein, shall, within thirty (30) calendar days after such abandonment, file in the office of the director a statement in writing, giving in detail the location of the facility or facilities so abandoned. Each map, set of maps, or plans filed shall show in detail the location of each such facility or facilities abandoned subsequent to the filing of the last preceding map, set of maps, or plans. The maps or plans shall be a scaled drawing submitted in digital format on Mylar and on blueprint. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.17. - Identification of visible facilities. 
Each visible facility installed in the public right-of-way shall be clearly identified with the owner of the facility. The department shall adopt orders or regulations to specify other appropriate methods for identification. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.18. - City's obligation. 
In undertaking enforcement of this article, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers, agents, employees and volunteers an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 2447, § 6, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.19. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  All utility installations permitted under this chapter shall, upon demand of the director, be relocated or lowered if required by the city to avoid potential conflicts with a proper governmental use of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. All expenses incurred in relocating, lowering lines, pot-holing or marking of facilities to determine their exact location after the original installation shall be paid for by the permittee. 
(b)  Upon completion of underground or surface work permitted under this chapter and at the discretion of the director, permittee shall furnish as-built plans of the installation showing a correct plan view to scale, details and profile showing the locations of all elements of the installation based on data obtained in the field during construction. The as-built plan shall be submitted in digital format, on Mylar and on blue print. 
(c)  Private parties and non-public utilities shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Permittee shall take out, pay for and maintain during the period in which the permit is in effect, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance protecting permittee, permittee's agents and employees against any liability, injury or death sustained or suffered by the public or damage to the property of the public by reason of the work carried on under the permit. The public liability insurance shall be for the limits of at least for injury to one (1) and for injury to more than one (1) person, and the property damage insurance limit. The insurance shall be placed with a company satisfactory to the risk management division of city, prior to the date that work under the permit is commenced. The policy or policies of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insured and shall contain an endorsement precluding cancellation or reduction in coverage without giving the risk management division at least thirty (30) days written notice prior thereto. 
(2)  If required on the face thereof, the permit shall not be effective for any purpose unless and until the permittee files with the risk management division a corporate surety bond or other security approved by the risk management division in the amount specified on the face of the permit, said bond or other security to fully assure the performance by permittee of all obligations imposed upon permittee under the provisions of the permit and this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 7209; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54; Ord. No. NS-2447, § 5, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-32.20. - Standards for graffiti abatement. 
(a)  Common utility colors and paint-type. Any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the city shall paint its above-surface fixtures with a uniform paint type, specific to each company, and color that meets with the approval of the director of public works, or the designee of the director of public works. 
(b)  Condition encroachment permits. All encroachment permits issued by the city shall, among such other things, be conditioned: 
i.  The permittee's application of an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object of a type and nature that is acceptable to the director of public works, or the designee of the director of public works; 
ii.  The permittee's removal of any graffiti within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends or holidays, after notification; 
iii.  The city's right to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object upon the permittee's failure to remove the graffiti within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends or holidays, after notification; or 
iv.  The permittee's providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object containing graffiti. 
(Ord. No. NS-2798, § 3, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 33-33. - Charge for work by city employees. 
A charge shall be made for work performed by city employees, including but not limited to engineering and drafting, setting and checking line and grade stakes and engineering inspection, at cost plus twenty (20) percent and shall be in addition to any permit fees. 
(Code 1952, § 7206; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-34. - Driveway restrictions. 
The director of public works may not issue a permit for a driveway unless the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The driveway may not encroach upon a curb return that has a radius of 22 feet or less. The driveway may not encroach more than 5 feet upon a curb return that has a radius greater than 22 feet. 
(b)  The driveway must not be located closer than 22 feet measured along the curb from any existing or proposed driveway entering a parcel of land under a single ownership. 
(c)  The maximum number of driveways permitted to a parcel of land under a single ownership shall be determined by the width of the lot frontage on the street as follows: 
Width of property 
fronting on street under 
single ownership 	Maximum 
No. of 
driveways 
(1) Less than 50.99 feet 	One 
(2) 51 feet to 199.99 feet 	Two 
(3) 200 feet to 359.99 feet 	Three 
(4) 360 feet to 519.99 feet 	Four 
(5) Over 520 feet to 659.99 feet 	Five 
(6) Over 667 feet 	Six 
 
(d)  The maximum frontage of a lot permitted to be a driveway shall be fifty (50) percent. 
(e)  The provisions of subsection (c) (1) and (2) hereof shall not apply to West First Street between Broadway and Townsend Street, and, in lieu of said provisions, said area shall be regulated by the following provisions: 
Width of property fronting onWest First Street between Broadwayand Townsend Street under single ownership 	Maximum No. 
of driveways 
(1) Less than 49 feet 	One 
(2) 49 feet to 199 feet 	Two 
 
(f)  The maximum permitted width of a driveway shall be forty (40) feet. Driveways over forty (40) feet wide must have council approval. 
(Code 1952, § 7216; Ord. No. NS-385, § 2, 8-3-69 ; Ord. No. NS-637, § 1, 2-18-62)  
Sec. 33-35. - Plans. 
Plans for street improvements other than in subdivisions of five (5) or more lots shall be drawn in the office of the director of public works unless other arrangements are made satisfactory to the city engineer. All street improvement work must be done in strict conformance to the plans approved by the director of public works. 
(Code 1952, § 7207; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-36. - Protection of works. 
Any person performing or causing to be performed any street improvement work under a permit issued by the director of public works as provided in this article shall place or construct sufficient safeguards and protective devices at all times about the work area to warn and protect the public from injury. 
(Code 1952, § 7208 ; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-37. - Furnishing lines and grades. 
The director of public works may furnish lines and grades for any street improvement work other than for a subdivision of five (5) or more lots, for which a permit has been issued. 
(Code 1952, § 7210; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-38. - Removal of illegal work. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to remove from any public street or alley any work as designated in this article which has not or is not being performed in strict conformance to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1952, § 7211; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2168, § 1, adopted July 20, 1992, repealed § 33-39, which pertained to certifying completion of work and derived from § 7212 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, adopted Mar. 1, 1954.  
Sec. 33-40. - Acceptance of street improvements. 
The executive director of the public works agency shall not accept any streets or alleys or improvements thereto until he has determined that all requirements of this article have been fulfilled. When the executive director of the public works agency has determined that all work has been satisfactorily completed and payments made as required by this article, he or his designated representative may, on behalf of the city, release any bond required for such work. Upon the release of bonds pursuant to this section, the executive director of public works or his designated representative shall send written notification of such action to the clerk of the council. 
(Code 1952, § 7213; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54; Ord. No. NS-2168, § 2, 7-20-92)  
Sec. 33-41. - Costs of street improvements—Establishing. 
The costs of all original street improvements, other than those costs which the city council may determine as payable under the state gas tax major street development program or other street improvement project authorized by the city council, shall be paid by private persons having an interest therein. 
(Code 1952, § 7214; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54; Ord. No. NS-1121, § 1, 7-3-72)  
Sec. 33-42. - Same—Method and time of payment by city. 
Whenever the city council has established the portion of total cost on any project payable from city moneys as provided for in section 33-41, the director of finance shall pay the determined amount directly to the person to whom the permit has been issued; but such payment shall be made only after the work has been certified as completed by the director of public works and any bond applying to the project has been released. 
(Code 1952, § 7215; Ord. No. NS-28, § 1, 3-1-54)  
Sec. 33-43. - Assessment—Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
Before the city council adopts any resolution or ordinance ordering the construction of any improvement or the acquisition of any property for public use, or both, herein referred to as "improvement", where the cost thereof is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment taxes upon lands, a public hearing may be held and a finding and determination made by the city council as provided herein that the public convenience and necessity require the same. 
If such a procedure is not followed and if such finding and determination are not made thereto, the requirements otherwise prescribed by division 4 (section 2800 et seq.) Streets and Highways Code of the state, and article XIII, section 17, of the state constitution shall be complied with before any such resolution or ordinance may be adopted. 
(Code 1952, § 7230; Ord. No. NS-589, § 1, 7-2-62)  
Sec. 33-44. - Same—Public hearing. 
The city council may hold a public hearing to find and determine whether the public convenience and necessity require any such improvement. Reference may be made to one or more plans, profiles, specifications, maps or plats for the description of the improvement and all particulars relative thereto, which plans, profiles, specifications, maps, or plats shall be on file with the clerk of the council or the department of public works and open to inspection. 
(Code 1952, § 7231 ; Ord. No. NS-589, § 1, 7-2-62)  
Sec. 33-45. - Combined hearing and notice authorized. 
The hearing required by section 33-44 may be a separate hearing or may be combined and held concurrently with the hearing required by the improvement act pursuant to which the improvement proceeding is proposed. 
Whether said hearing is held separate, or combined and held concurrently with the hearing required by the improvement act pursuant to which the improvement proceeding is proposed, notice shall be given by posting and publication in the manner prescribed by the improvement act involved, and if said hearings are combined or held concurrently, such notice may be combined with the notice of hearing given under the said improvement act under which the improvement proceeding is proposed. 
(Code 1952, § 7232; Ord. No. NS-589, § 1, 7-2-62)  
Sec. 33-46. - Same—Conducting hearing; decision; effect. 
The hearing may be continued from time to time. After the conclusion thereof and prior to adoption of a resolution or ordinance ordering the improvement, the city council shall consider and pass upon all protests filed and all matters presented and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
If by such decision the city council finds and determines by no less than a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of all members thereof that the public convenience and necessity require such improvement, the city council may thereafter, in accordance with the improvement act specified or designated for the project, adopt a resolution or ordinance ordering the improvement substantially as proposed, or as modified, altered or changed by order of the city council as authorized by the improvement act for the project. 
After such finding and determination by the city council, the provisions of law for debt limitation and majority protest as mentioned in article XIII, section 17, of the state constitution shall not apply. 
(Code 1952, § 7233; Ord. No. NS-589, § 1, 7-2-62)  
Sec. 33-47. - Street dedications and public improvements required for the issuance of a construction permit—Generally. 
No building permit shall be issued for the erection, construction or enlargement of any building or structure in the City of Santa Ana for which aggregate work performed within any twelve-month period exceeds five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, nor for the enlargement, alteration or repair of any structure in the City of Santa Ana within any twelve-month period for which aggregate work exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) valuation, until there has first been compliance with the requirements of sections 33-49 through 33-53 of this chapter. 
Whenever public improvements are required for the issuance of a construction permit under this section, the executive director of the public works agency shall require the furnishing of a surety device to guarantee completion of the improvements. The surety device shall be in a form and in an amount which is reasonably acceptable to the executive director, subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. NS-1041, § 1, 11-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1143, § 1, 11-20-72; Ord. No. NS-1631, § 1, 5-17-82; Ord. No. NS-1649, § 1, 10-4-82; Ord. No. 2355, § 2, 6-15-98)  
Sec. 33-48. - Same—Waivers. 
The dedications required by section 33-49 and/or improvements required pursuant to section 33-50 shall be waived by the director of transportation if and to the extent that they do not fulfill any increased public need which may reasonably be anticipated to emanate from the use of the building or structure upon completion of the work performed. "Work performed" shall include aggregate work performed on the building or structure within any twelve-month period. "Increased public need" shall include, but not be limited to, any significant increase in traffic volume or congestion or in disruption of the smooth flow of traffic, or any significant increase in demand for or use of other public improvements, which would be mitigated or served by the required dedications and improvements. Any decision by the director of transportation against waiver pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 2, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 33-49. - Same—Dedications. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit subject to section 33-47, the owner of the lot on which the building or structure is located shall dedicate for public right-of-way purposes all portions of the lot located within any planned street or alley extension or adjacent to any public street or alley, which are not yet dedicated for such purposes and which are necessary to complete such street to its planned ultimate width as designated by standards set forth in the general plan, or by the future right-of-way lines established by sections 41-699 through 41-732 of this Code or by a specific plan of street alignment established by sections 41-733 through 41-748 of this Code, or in the absence of any such planned ultimate width, to a width of sixty (60) feet in the case of a street, or twenty (20) feet in the case of an alley. 
(b)  In unusual circumstances, the executive director of public works may reduce or waive the street right-of-way required to be dedicated if the right-of-way does not have a planned ultimate width and the existing street right-of-way is less than sixty (60) feet in width, and there is no reasonable prospect of the existing street right-of-way being widened in the future in the area of the lot. 
(c)  In addition, at each intersection of two (2) arterial streets there shall be a street dedication of a twenty-five-foot by twenty-five-foot triangular cutoff at each corner; at all other street intersections there shall be a street dedication of a seventeen-foot by seventeen-foot triangular cutoff at each corner; and at intersections of alleys with streets there shall be a street dedication of a ten-foot by ten-foot triangular cutoff at each corner. 
(d)  In such cases as the lot abuts an arterial street, the owner of the lot shall also waive vehicular access rights to the arterial street except at driveways approved by the executive director of public works. 
(e)  In the event that the executive director of public works determines that immediate dedication would not be in the interests of the City of Santa Ana, the city manager may accept either an irrevocable offer of dedication pursuant to Government Code, Section 7050, or an agreement between the city and the owner to dedicate in the future, in lieu of present dedication. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 3, 5-17-82; Ord. No. NS-2187, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. NS-2352, § 2, 6-1-98)  
Sec. 33-50. - Same—Public improvements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit subject to section 33-47, the following improvements, to the extent not already existing, or to the extent that restoration replacement, and/or relocation to a safe condition in accordance with city standards is necessary, shall be installed, restored, replaced, and/or relocated in the public right-of-way adjacent to the subject parcel at the sole expense of the owner or occupant or other person or entity interested in the issuance of the permit: 
(1)  Sidewalks; 
(2)  Curbs and gutters; 
(3)  Street and alley pavement; 
(4)  Driveway approaches, and removal of abandoned driveway approaches and replacement with standard curb, gutter and sidewalks; 
(5)  Sewer and drainage facilities; 
(6)  Street lights and installation facilities; 
(7)  Street trees and parkway landscaping; 
(8)  Bike trails. 
(b)  In addition to the improvements specified in subsection (a), whenever the permit subject to section 33-47 is for development of such magnitude that it can reasonably be anticipated to substantially increase traffic congestion in any street or streets in the vicinity of the subject parcel, then, prior to the issuance of such permit, traffic signals and/or other traffic-control devices which, in the opinion of the director of transportation, will mitigate such congestion, shall be installed at such locations on such streets as are determined by the director to be appropriate at the sole expense of the owner or occupant or other person or entity interested in the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 4, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 33-51. - Same—Standards of installation. 
All public improvements required under section 33-50 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of the City of Santa Ana. The director of transportation may require that plans be prepared by a registered civil engineer showing line and grade of the public improvements required to be constructed by this section. When such plans are required, no public improvement construction work shall be commenced until such plans are approved by the director of transportation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 5, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 33-52. - Same—Agreement for future installation of improvements. 
Whenever the director of transportation determines that immediate installation of public improvements set forth in section 33-49 is not required by the public interest and that the owner, lessee, or other person interested in obtaining the building permit for the subject property is willing to pay to the city the costs of installation, as determined by the director, the director may, on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement with such party to provide for the future installation of the improvement on the following terms: 
(1)  The party entering into the agreement with the city shall be required to pay to the city a specified amount representing the present costs of installation of the improvements. 
(2)  The City shall have the right to install the improvements thereafter at such time as the city shall deem appropriate, in which event neither the party entering into the agreement nor any other person shall either be obligated to pay any additional amount for the costs of such improvements or be entitled to any refund of any portion of the amount paid, except as provided in (4) below. 
(3)  In the event that the required improvements are subsequently installed by a person or entity other than the city, the party entering into the agreement, or his heirs, devisees, assigns, or duly authorized agent, or such other persons or entity as may be designated in the agreement, shall be entitled to a refund of the amount paid; provided, however, that no refund shall be made until all required improvements have been installed in accordance with city standards and specifications unless otherwise specified in the agreement. 
(4)  In the event that any part of the required improvements are subsequently included within the scope of public improvements to be installed pursuant to special assessment district financing, or similar limited fund financing procedure, the party entering into the agreement, or his heirs, devisees, assigns, or duly authorized agent, or such other person or entity as may be designated in the agreement, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount which bears the same proportion to the amount paid under the agreement as the costs of the required improvements included within the scope of the publicly financed improvements bears to the total costs of the required improvements; provided, however, that the agreement may apportion the costs of the required improvements according to type or location and may provide for the amount of the refund to be credited to any assessment levied against the subject parcel in lieu of refund. 
(5) 
In no event shall any person or entity other than the city be entitled to receive any amount representing interest on the amount paid to the city pursuant to the agreement. 
Upon execution of such agreement and payment of the amount specified therein, a building permit or utility release subject to section 33-47 may be issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 6, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 33-53. - Same—Alternative form of agreement. 
In lieu of the agreement specified in section 33-52, the director of transportation may enter into an agreement with any person interested in obtaining a building permit subject to section 33-47 which requires such person to cause the required improvements to be installed without expense to the city within a specified period of time, provided such person furnishes security in the form of a bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties in connection with the performance of such agreement in the same manner as required for security of agreements pursuant to Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Map Act. Upon execution of such agreement and the furnishing of the required security, a building permit or utility release subject to section 33-47 may be issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1631, § 7, 5-17-82)  
Sec. 33-54. - Preservation of newly constructed and reconstructed arterial streets. 
In order to preserve the ride quality, structural integrity and appearance of newly constructed or reconstructed arterial streets, the following conditions are hereby imposed: 
(a)  Cutting or opening arterial streets. 
(1)  Newly constructed or resurfaced arterial streets shall not be cut or opened for a period of five (5) years following construction or resurfacing, except in the case of emergency or imminent peril to life, limb or property, as determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  Upon a showing of good cause, the city engineer may permit newly constructed or resurfaced arterial streets to be cut or opened prior to expiration of the five-year period following construction or resurfacing. Any such exception shall require specific written approval by the city engineer. 
(b)  Connection of service lateral. For new utilities' service laterals, a maximum street opening of four (4) feet by four (4) feet may be made directly over the utility for purposes of connecting the service lateral. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the lateral itself shall be bored or jacked from the property line of the property being serviced. 
(c)  Compliance with construction requirements. All street openings, trenching, backfilling and resurfacing shall at all times comply with the City of Santa Ana Standard Plans, as specifically approved in writing by the city engineer. 
(d)  Requirement of permit. All street openings shall be subject to the then-current street work permit requirements and fees. 
(e)  Appeal. An applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision of the director of public works under this section 33-54 pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2054, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. NS-2447, § 7, 10-2-00)  
Sec. 33-55. - Authority of city manager. 
(a)  Acceptance of dedications. 
(1)  The city manager is authorized to accept the following dedications: 
a.  Statutory dedications of an interest in, or easement upon, real property made in accordance with the provisions of this Code; 
b.  Dedications of an interest in, or easement upon, real property made in conjunction with public works improvement projects; and 
c.  Dedications of an interest in, or easement upon, real property made pursuant to city approved entitlements, such as but not limited to building or other related permits, conditional use permits, variances or as a condition of a development agreement. 
(2)  All other dedications shall be accepted by the city council. 
(b)  Acceptance of roads or streets into the city street system. 
(1)  The city shall not incur any liability or responsibility for maintenance of a dedicated road or street unless such road or street has been accepted into the city street system. 
(2)  The city manager is authorized to accept streets and roads, or portions thereof, into the city street system. 
(3)  The city manager is further authorized to record conveyances to the city of real property interests for street and road uses and purposes. The city manager shall, prior to recording any conveyance under this section, affix a certificate to the instrument stating the acceptance into the city street system and designating the name or number, or both, of the city street or road. 
(c)  Acceptance of deeds or grants conveying an interest in real property for public purposes. 
(1)  The city manager is authorized to accept and consent to all deeds or grants conveying an interest in or easement upon real property to the city for public purposes. 
(2)  The city manager, or his designee, shall attach to or print on the deed or grant a certificate of acceptance in substantial compliance with the provisions of Government Code section 27281. 
(Ord. No. NS-2352, § 1, 6-1-98)  
Secs. 33-56, 33-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-58. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2480, § 2, adopted October 15, 2001, repealed § 33-58 in its entirety. Formerly, § 33-58 pertained to bond or insurance and derived from Code 1952, § 7300.  
Sec. 33-59. - Purpose of trench cut fee. 
Excavations in paved streets owned and maintained by the city degrade and shorten the life of the surface of the streets, and this degradation increases the frequency and cost to the public of necessary resurfacing, maintenance and repair. It is appropriate that entities responsible for excavating into the city's right-of-way bear this burden rather than the taxpayers of the city. In addition, establishment of a trench cut fee will create an incentive for coordination of efforts in excavating the streets to lay utilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2480, §§ 2, 3, adopted October 15, 2001, repealed and reenacted § 33-59 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 33-59 pertained to permits and derived from Code 1952, § 7301.  
Sec. 33-59.1. - Establishment of trench cut fee. 
No person shall excavate in the public right-of-way without, in addition to all other requirements of this Code, having first paid to the city a "trench cut fee." The amount of this trench cut fee shall be set from time to time by resolution, and shall not exceed the reasonable cost necessary to mitigate the degradation to the public streets caused by such excavation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 33-59.2. - Variance from payment of trench cut fee. 
Any person subject to the trench cut fee may request that the director waive the requirement of payment of the trench cut fee due to individual circumstances that demonstrate, on a case-by-case basis, that the amount of the fee is not reasonably related to the projected impact of the proposed excavation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 33-59.3. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Excavations in streets scheduled for pavement structural improvements in the city's capital improvement construction schedule within one (1) year of the date of excavation shall be exempt from the trench cut fee. The public works agency shall endeavor to notify public utilities of streets so scheduled. 
(b)  No trench cut fee shall be charged for underground utility district projects, utility line relocations necessitated by city street work projects or by street vacations or abandonments. 
(c)  No trench cut fee shall be charged with respect to excavation in a sidewalk or a concrete street. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 33-59.4. - Utility master plans. 
Any utility owning, operating or installing in city streets, alleys, sidewalks, or any other public places facilities providing water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, video or other utility services, shall prepare and submit to the director a utility master plan, in a format specified by the director, that shows the location of the utility's existing facilities in city streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public places, and shows all of the utility's planned major utility work in city streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places for the next five (5) years. Utilities shall submit an initial utility master plan no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section. Thereafter, each utility shall submit annually, on the first regular business day of July, a revised and updated utility master plan. As used in this subsection, the term "planned major utility works" refers to any and all future excavations planned by the utility when the utility master plan or update is submitted that will affect any city street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place for more than fifteen (15) days, provided that the utility shall not be required to show future excavations planned to occur more than five (5) years after the date that the utility master plan or update is submitted. Any and all utility master plans submitted pursuant to this section shall be confidential to the fullest extent provided by law and used solely for purposes of coordination. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01)  
Sec. 33-59.5 - Coordination with city. 
(a)  Prior to applying for an excavation permit in the city's streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places the city shall review on behalf of the applicant the utility master plans and the city's five (5) year repaving plan on file with the director. The applicant shall coordinate, to the extent practicable, with the utility and street work shown on such plans to minimize damage to, and avoid undue disruption and interference with the public use of such streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places. Such coordination shall include: 
(1)  Whenever two (2) or more parties (i.e., the city or any utility) have proposed a major excavation in the same block during a five (5) year period, they shall meet and confer with the city regarding whether it is feasible to conduct a joint operation. If the director determines that it is feasible to conduct a joint operation, a single contractor shall be selected and a single application fee charged. 
(2)  Any utility aggrieved by the director's decision to require a joint operation may, within thirty (30) days of the director's written notice, file an appeal pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. In determining such appeal, the hearing officer or council shall consider the impact of the proposed excavation on the neighborhood, the applicant's need to provide services to a property or area, facilitating the deployment of new technology as directed pursuant to official city policy, and the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience. 
(b)  To avoid future excavations and to reduce the number of street excavations, telecommunication companies shall be requested, when practical, to install spare conduits. 
(Ord. No. NS-2480, § 3, 10-15-01) 
Cross reference— For permit fee see § 33-31(e).  
Sec. 33-60. - Repairs. 
All persons digging the surface of any street of the city shall by proper means repair the street so as to comply with article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 7302)  
Sec. 33-61. - Appeal to council. 
Should any person be aggrieved by any act of the director of public works under this article after notice given to the director of public works, such person may appeal to the council. Such appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 7303; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 13, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 33-62. - Excavations under streets. 
No person shall construct or excavate any basement, elevator, elevator shaft, tunnel or other excavation, under any public street in the city beyond a point one-half the distance from the property line abutting such street to the curb of such street. 
The provisions of this section do not apply to temporary excavations in or under the public streets permitted by other provisions of this Code, nor do they apply to public utilities excavating in or under the city streets, under the valid exercise of a city franchise. 
(Code 1952, § 7306)  
Secs. 33-63—33-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BENCHES AND BUS SHELTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1706, §§ 1-13, enacted Dec. 5, 1983, affected Art. IV as follows: 
 (1) Amended §§ 33-101-33-105; 
 (2) Added § 33-106; 
 (3) Amended §§ 33-108-33-113; 
 (4) Added § 33-114. 
 Prior to amendment §§ 33-101—33-105 and §§ 33-108—33-113 were derived from Ord. No. NS-1406, § 1, adopted May 15, 1978. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. NS-2206, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1993, changed the title of Art. IV. from "Benches" to "Benches and Bus Shelters" without substantially altering the content of the article. 
 
Sec. 33-100. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Bench means a seat located upon any public street for the comfort, convenience or accommodation of pedestrians, or for persons awaiting transportation. 
(b)  Bus shelter means an enclosed or partially enclosed shelter located upon any public street for the comfort, convenience or accommodation of pedestrians, or for persons awaiting transportation. 
(c)  Street is a way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. NS-1406, § 1, 5-15-78)  
Sec. 33-101. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to install or maintain any bench or bus shelter on any street within the City of Santa Ana unless there has been issued a permit therefor as provided in this article. A separate permit shall be obtained for each bench or bus shelter, which permit shall be valid only for a particular location specified therein. Each permit shall bear a separate number. Not more than one permit shall be issued for any one location unless the executive director of the public works agency or his designee finds that more than one bench or bus shelter or combination thereof is reasonably necessary to accommodate persons using benches or bus shelters at such location. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 1, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-102. - Permit—Application. 
(a)  No bench or bus shelter permit shall be issued except upon written application, filed with, and upon a form prescribed by, the executive director of the public works agency or his designee, showing the proposed location of each bench or bus shelter and such other information as the executive director of the public works agency or his designee may require. The initial application for a bench or bus shelter permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee for each bench or bus shelter as established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Detailed plans and specifications of each bench or bus shelter shall be supplied by the applicant in a form as approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(c)  Each application for a permit to install a bench or bus shelter at a location not previously approved by the director of transportation services prior to the effective date of this section shall be accompanied by an affidavit or declaration of the applicant, reciting that the applicant has caused the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property abutting upon the public street at the place where the bench or bus shelter is proposed to be located to be served with a notice on a form prescribed by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. Such notice shall state that the applicant will file an application for a permit and that the person receiving such notice may object to the location of the bench or bus shelter. 
(d)  Each application must be signed by the owner or legal representative of the owner of the bench or bus shelter for which the permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 2, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 2, 6-15-87; Ord. No. NS-2206, § 1, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 33-103. - Permit—Fees. 
Upon approval of an application for a new or renewal permit a nonrefundable permit fee for each bench or bus shelter as established by resolution of the city council shall be submitted. Each new permit issued shall expire on either the first day of July or the first day of January next following the date of issuance. Thereafter, each such permit shall be subject to a semi-annual renewal on the first day of July and the first day of January. Each permit may be renewed, provided (1) a renewal application is filed, (2) a semi-annual renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council is paid, (3) all past fees as established by resolution of the city council are paid, and (4) the permittee has complied with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 3, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 3, 6-15-87; Ord. No. NS-2206, § 3, 10-4-93)  
Sec. 33-104. - Permit—Indemnity; insurance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit under this article, each applicant shall: 
(a)  Represent, stipulate, contract and agree that such applicant will indemnify and hold the City of Santa Ana and its officers and employees harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the placement of the bench or bus shelter. 
(b)  Obtain and file with the clerk of the council, and thereafter maintain during the term of any such permit, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or policies, approved as to form by the city attorney, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the State of California. The City of Santa Ana, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy or policies. The policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall be not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit for both bodily injury and property damage, or equivalent. 
Said policy or policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation, or change of coverage of insured or additional insured shall be effective until after twenty (20) days' notice thereof has been given in writing to the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 4, 12-5-83)  
Sec. 33-105. - Permit—Denial or revocation. 
(a)  The application for a bench or bus shelter permit shall be denied if it is found by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee that the maintenance of the bench or bus shelter would tend to obstruct passage along any public street, or to create a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. 
(b)  Any permit may be revoked or renewal thereof denied by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee for any violation of any of the provisions of this article, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application. 
(c)  The application shall be denied if the applicant fails to deposit the permit fee and accept the permit within thirty (30) days after notice of the approval of the application by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this article shall be canceled and revoked if the permit holder fails to install the bench or bus shelter within sixty (60) days after the date of issuance of such permit. 
(e)  If the owner, tenant or person in lawful possession or control of the property abutting the street at the place where the bench or bus shelter is to be located gives written notice of objection to such location to the executive director of the public works agency or his designee at any time before issuance of the permit that maintenance of the bench or bus shelter would tend to obstruct passage along any public street, or to create a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience, the executive director of the public works agency or his designee shall consider such notice in making the determination pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. If such written notice is received by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee after the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall not be revoked but renewal thereof shall be denied on the next renewal date if the executive director of the public works agency or his designee finds in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. Any such denial or revocation of any permit shall be subject to review upon filing of a timely appeal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(f)  The city council may on its own motion, with or without a hearing, deny the issuance of a permit approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee or may revoke a permit previously issued by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee, when the city council finds that maintenance of the bench or bus shelter would tend to or does obstruct passage along any public street, create a hazard, or would or is otherwise detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. 
(g)  Any permit issued under this article for a bench location where the executive director of the public works agency or his designee subsequently authorizes installation of a bus shelter shall be automatically revoked, unless otherwise permitted by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee in conjunction with such bus shelter. 
(h)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked for failure to pay the business license tax as required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 5, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 4, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2206, § 4, adopted Oct. 4, 1993, repealed § 33-106, which pertained to advertising revenue payment and derived from Ord. No. NS-1706, § 6, adopted Dec. 5, 1983.  
Sec. 33-107. - Prohibited locations. 
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall install or maintain any bench: 
(a)  In any alley. 
(b)  At any location where the distance from the face of the curb to the nearest property line is less than seven (7) feet. 
(c)  At any location, distant more than fifty (50) feet from the nearest intersecting street; provided that this requirement may be waived by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee upon a finding that observance of this requirement would result in public inconvenience or hardship. 
(d)  At any place except a designated public carrier stop. 
(Ord. No. NS-1406, § 1, 5-15-78; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 5, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-108. - Benches; installation, maintenance. 
(a)  Each bench shall have displayed in a conspicuous place the name of the permit holder and the permit number. 
(b)  No bench shall be more than forty-two (42) inches high, nor more than thirty (30) inches wide, nor more than seven (7) feet long, unless so authorized by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(c)  No bench permit holder shall locate or maintain any bench at a point less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the curb, and each bench must be maintained parallel with the curb, except as otherwise approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee where the circumstances are unusual. 
(d)  An acceptable trash receptacle is to be permanently affixed to any permitted bus bench wherever warranted. The design of said receptacle shall be subject to the approval of the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the permit holder to maintain each bus bench including any receptacle required to be affixed to said bus bench pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, in a clean, attractive and safe condition at all times at its proper and lawful location, and to inspect each bus bench periodically. A regular schedule satisfactory to the executive director of the public works agency or his designee for emptying trash receptacles must be maintained by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 7, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 6, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-109. - Bus shelters; design, construction, maintenance, repair. 
(a)  The design of each bus shelter shall be approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee prior to issuance of a permit therefor. Approval shall be based on compliance of applicant with reasonable guidelines issued by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(b)  Bus shelters shall be constructed in conformity with the Uniform Building Code, as amended, and adopted by section 8-43 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(c)  Each bus shelter shall be illuminated for passenger safety. 
(d)  Each bus shelter shall have a trash receptacle permanently affixed to the adjacent sidewalk. The design of said trash receptacle shall be approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(e)  Bus shelters shall be maintained in a neat, attractive, safe and sanitary manner at all times. Routine maintenance, including cleaning and emptying of trash receptacles, shall be provided each bus shelter at least once per week. Damaged, defaced or defective segments of any bus shelter shall be replaced within forty-eight (48) hours of discovery thereof or notice thereof by the City of Santa Ana, whichever occurs earlier, except that any condition which, in the opinion of the executive director of the public works agency or his designee constitutes a safety hazard shall be repaired, replaced, removed or otherwise corrected immediately upon notification by the City of Santa Ana. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  Upon removal of any bus shelter, all material and wires shall be removed from the site by the permit holder and the site restored to the condition in existence prior to installation of the bus shelter, including complete restoration of any sidewalk upon which the removed bus shelter was located. A performance bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per shelter shall be posted by permit holder to insure proper site restoration. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 8, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 7, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-110. - Advertising. 
(a)  No advertising or sign shall be displayed on any bench except upon the front and rear surfaces of the back rest. 
(b)  All advertising or signs shall be affixed to the surface of each bus shelter. 
(c)  All advertising on any bench or bus shelter shall be displayed in accordance with the approved bench or bus shelter plan and specifications and such advertising shall not be displayed without prior written approval of the Executive Director of the Public Works Agency or his designee. No advertising shall be displayed which is deemed indecent, conflicting with traffic safety or otherwise injurious to the public interest as determined solely by the Executive Director of the Public Works Agency or his designee. Any unpermitted advertising shall be removed by the permit holder within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City of Santa Ana of the disapproval and need for removal pursuant to this section. 
(d)  No advertisement or sign in or on any bench or bus shelter shall be displayed which would be offensive or objectionable to the public, or which advertises competing services or products within a one-block radius of real property primarily devoted to providing such services or products. 
(e)  No advertisement or sign in or on any bench or bus shelter shall display any word, phrase, symbol or character likely to interfere with, mislead or distract traffic, or conflict with any official traffic control device. 
(f)  A minimum of ten (10) per cent of all benches in areas devoted primarily to residential uses shall be without advertisements or signs. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 9, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 8, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-111. - Removal. 
(a)  The executive director of the public works agency or his designee may cause a bench or bus shelter to be removed and stored after expiration or revocation of the permit, or when a bench or bus shelter is placed or maintained in violation of any provision of this article or any requirements set forth in the permit, if the permit holder fails to remove or correct the same after ten (10) days notice thereof by mail. 
(b)  A bench or bus shelter which is placed on the street without a permit may be removed and stored. 
(c)  All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the permit holder or owner and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(d)  The permit holder or owner may recover a bench or bus shelter which has been removed and stored during the time specified in Santa Ana Municipal Code section 2-705, by paying the actual cost of such removal and storage. Unclaimed benches or bus shelters may be disposed of pursuant to the applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 10, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 9, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-112. - Transfer. 
Whenever a bench or bus shelter for which a permit has been issued is sold, or the title or control thereof assigned or transferred, the permit holder shall report such fact to the executive director of the public works agency or his designee within ten (10) days after such sale, transfer or assignment. The new owner of the bench or bus shelter shall, within such ten-day period, either remove the bench or bus shelter or obtain a permit for its maintenance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 11, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 10, 6-15-87)  
Sec. 33-113. - Interference with benches or bus shelters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, to tamper with, injure, deface or commit acts of vandalism upon any bench or bus shelter lawfully upon a public way, pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 12, 12-5-83)  
Sec. 33-114. - Enforcement and enforcement fees. 
The executive director of the public works agency or his designee shall enforce the provisions of this article. In addition to removal of a bus bench or bus shelter as provided in section 33-111, fees for noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this article may be assessed by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of enforcement and issuing notices concerning failure of permittee to meet and maintain required city standards. 
(Ord. No. NS-1706, § 13, 12-5-83; Ord. No. NS-1914, § 11, 6-15-87)  
Secs. 33-115—33-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NEWSBOXES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, adopted June 5, 1995, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. The old Art. V, §§ 33-150—33-167, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. NS-1735, § 1, adopted July 2, 1984. 
 
Sec. 33-150. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public peace, health and safety by regulating the placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of newsboxes so as to protect against: 
(1)  The dangers of impairing the vision of motorists and pedestrians, particularly small children. 
(2)  The hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles. 
(3)  Unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or locations used for public transportation purposes. 
(4)  Neglectful servicing of newsboxes resulting in a visual blight on the city's parkways, sidewalks, and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements. 
(5)  Reduction in value of surrounding property. 
(6)  Unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage suits. 
(b)  This article shall only apply to newsboxes which are located, in whole or in part, in, on or over any part of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-151. - Definitions. 
(a)  Newsbox means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display or sale of any written or printed material, including but not limited to newspapers and news periodicals; except that cardboard, plywood or plastic boxes or crates and containers made of similar materials shall not constitute newsboxes. For purposes of this article, a newsbox shall consist of a single pedestal and case as more specifically described in section 33-161. 
(b)  Custodian means any person or persons who have the responsibility of placing, servicing or maintaining a publication vending machine by depositing and/or removing material from said machine and/or by collecting monies from said machine. 
(c)  Block shall mean the area between the curb and the property line on one (1) side of the street between the next intersecting streets or the terminus of the dedicated right-of-way of a street and an intersecting street. 
(d)  Sidewalk return. That portion of a sidewalk at a street corner bounded by the street curb, the street right-of-way line, (the property line) and the radial lines at the beginning and the end of the arc formed by the street curb. 
(e)  Public right-of-way shall include, but not be limited to the following: Street, roadway, parkway and sidewalk. 
(f)  Street shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(g)  Roadway shall mean that portion of a street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(h)  Parkway shall mean that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street and, where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
(i)  Sidewalk shall mean any surface provided for the exclusive or primary use of pedestrians. 
(j)  Director shall mean the executive director of the public works agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. NS-2731, § 3, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 33-152. - Permit and identification decals; required. 
No person shall install or maintain any newsbox without first obtaining a permit and city identification decal(s) from the director. One (1) permit shall be required for each applicant, regardless of the number of newsboxes. Each permit shall be valid for one (1) year. A city identification decal shall be required for each newsbox. The director shall approve or deny each application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the application is accepted as complete. Any application which is not denied within such time period shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-153. - Permit fees, indemnity. 
An application for a permit shall be accompanied by nonrefundable fees as established by resolution of the city council, and shall contain a written statement, signed by the applicant, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Santa Ana, its officers, agents and employees, from any loss or liability or damages, including expenses and costs, for bodily injury and property damage sustained by any person as a result of the location, installation, use, maintenance, removal or storage of applicant's newsboxes within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-154. - Insurance. 
An application for a permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance evidencing that a comprehensive liability insurance policy has been issued for the period of the identification number, naming the City of Santa Ana, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. The policy limits of said insurance shall be not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit, or equivalent. Said policy shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation, or change of coverage of insured or additional insureds shall be effective until after thirty (30) days notice thereof has been given in writing to the clerk of the council. If such insurance is cancelled at any time during the time applicant's newsboxes are installed on public property, such newsboxes shall be removed in accordance with section 33-164. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-155. - Permit location, amendment. 
The application for a permit shall describe the location(s) where newsboxes are to be placed by the applicant. In the event additional newsboxes are installed within the city or newsboxes are removed from the city subsequent to issuance of the permit, an amended application shall be filed with the director and fees for any additional newsbox locations shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-156. - Projection onto roadway. 
No person shall install, use or maintain any newsbox which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-157. - Placement. 
(a)  Newsboxes shall only be placed near a wall or a building or adjacent to the property line. Newsboxes placed adjacent to the property line shall be placed parallel to such property line and not more than four (4) inches from the property line. 
(b)  No newsbox shall be placed on any parkway. 
(c)  No placement of one (1) newsbox above another is permitted. 
(d)  Every newsbox shall be installed on a single pedestal or up to four (4) may be installed horizontally on a multiple post which shall be securely anchored to the surface and shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and secure condition, approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. NS-2731, § 4, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 33-158. - Location standards. 
Newsboxes shall not be placed, installed or maintained: 
(1)  Within ten (10) feet of the point of intersection of the edge of a marked crosswalk; 
(2)  On or within thirty (30) feet of any sidewalk return at any street corner; 
(3)  On those sidewalks that have been designated as official bike routes; 
(4)  Within twenty (20) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or police call box; 
(5)  Within ten (10) feet of any driveway; 
(6)  Within ten (10) feet of light standards, trash receptacles, traffic signal control boxes, mail boxes, water meters, gas meters, electrical pull boxes, catch basins and sewer manhole covers and sewer lines; 
(7)  Within ten (10) feet of any bus bench; 
(8)  Within ten (10) feet ahead of any sign marking a designated bus stop; 
(9)  Within ten (10) feet of any legal parking space or curb painted yellow, white or green by authorized public employees for the purpose of regulating parking; 
(10)  In any location whereby the cross space of the passageway on the sidewalk is reduced to less than five (5) feet; 
(11)  Within ten (10) feet of the imaginary lines that would be formed by extending the width of the entrance to a structure; 
(12)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a city tree; 
(13)  Within five (5) feet of a curb face. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-159. - Bolting. 
(a)  Newsboxes must be bolted down. No more than four (4) such newsboxes may be placed together in this manner and must be spaced two (2) inches apart. A space of no less than three (3) feet shall separate each group of four (4) newsboxes so placed. 
(b)  Newsboxes may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of said newsboxes shall extend more than nine (9) feet along a wall and a space of no less than three (3) feet shall separate each such group of newsboxes. 
(c)  In the case of any violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section, the director shall remove the machine and its contents after following the procedure outlined in section 33-164. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-160. - Advertising uses. 
No newsbox shall be used for commercial advertising signs or publicity purposes other than to state the name of the publication sold therein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-161. - Standards. 
All newsboxes shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Each newsbox case shall contain a plastic display window, and an automatic coin return for those newsboxes which are coin operated. In the case of a newsbox divided into two (2) compartments, there shall be two (2) display windows, one (1) for each compartment. A newsbox shall not be divided in order to display more than two (2) written or printed material. 
(2)  Each case shall be reinforced with steel angles. 
(3)  Each support frame shall be reinforced with angle iron. 
(4)  Each support frame pedestal shall contain a three-inch to six-inch width steel tube having one-quarter-inch wall thickness. 
(5)  Each support frame and pedestal shall be attached to a steel pad. 
(6)  Case dimensions shall not exceed the following: 
Height ..... 36½ inches 
Length ..... 20½ inches 
Width ..... 16¼ inches 
(7)  Support frame dimensions shall not exceed the following: 
Length ..... 20¾ inches 
Width ..... 16¼ inches 
Height ..... 1½ inches 
(8)  Steel pad dimensions shall not exceed the following: 
Length and width ..... 10 inches 
Thickness .....3/16 inch 
(9)  The height of the pedestal shall not exceed sixteen and one-half (16 ½) inches. 
(10)  The height of the entire newsbox shall not exceed fifty-two (52) inches. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95; Ord. No. NS-2731, § 5, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 33-161.5. - Prohibition against distribution of materials from containers other than newsboxes. 
No person shall place any cardboard, plywood or plastic box or crate or other container that is not a newsbox on any sidewalk or street or other public place and leave the same unattended for the purpose of causing or allowing materials within the same to be taken by members of the public. Any such container placed on any street or sidewalk in violation of this section may be summarily abated by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-162. - Maintenance and abandonment. 
(a)  Each newsbox shall be maintained so as not to become mechanically inoperable or have cracked or broken coverings or casings. The newsboxes shall be painted or covered with a protective coating so as to keep them free from rust. 
(b)  No issue or edition of any publication shall be allowed to remain in any such newsbox for a period in excess of four (4) days past the date the next issue is published or disseminated (whichever is sooner). Any issue or edition remaining in a newsbox for more than four (4) days after the date the next issue is published or disseminated (whichever is sooner) shall be summarily removed and discarded by the director. 
(c)  In the event any newsbox installed pursuant to this article is not serviced with the publication it is designed to disseminate for a period of five (5) days, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be subject to removal pursuant to section 33-164. For purposes of this section, "is not serviced" shall mean that no issue is in the newsbox for a period of five (5) days or longer; or an issue that has been followed by a more recent issue, remains in the newsbox for a period of five (5) days or longer. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-163. - Identification required. 
Every person or custodian who places or maintains a newsbox on a public sidewalk in the city shall have his name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. If the person or custodian is a corporation, then the name, address, and telephone number of the distributor, or an individual who can relate the name of the distributor, must be affixed in a place where such information can be easily seen. The city identification decal must be placed inside of the front window of the newsbox where it may be readily seen. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-164. - Removal of newsboxes. 
(a)  If any newsbox is not properly identified as to the owner or custodian thereof, or identified with a city identification decal, a copy of section 33-163 (the identification requirement) shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the publisher of the publication sold in the newsbox, and a copy of said section will be posted on said newsbox. 
(b)  If any newsbox is properly identified, but in the opinion of the director is installed, used or maintained in violation of any other provisions of this article or is abandoned, an order to correct the offending condition shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or custodian of such newsbox. Such order shall specifically describe the offending condition and recommend actions necessary to correct. 
(c)  If within five (5) working days following receipt of the notice, a newsbox is not properly identified or the offending condition is not corrected, or the owner or custodian has not requested a hearing before the director or his designated representative, the offending newsbox and its contents shall be removed and stored in a convenient location by the director. 
(d)  The director shall notify the custodian of a newsbox which has been removed and stored by the director of such removal and storage as soon thereafter as practical, but in any event no longer than five (5) days thereafter. The custodian shall be notified by certified mail and given thirty (30) days to pay the expenses of removal and storage. 
(e)  Upon failure of the owner or custodian to claim a newsbox and pay a fee as set by city council resolution for removal and storage, or appeal pursuant to section 33-166 within thirty (30) days after such removal, said newsbox and its contents shall be processed as unclaimed property and disposed of pursuant to the applicable provisions of law. 
(f)  When a newsbox has been removed and stored, the owner or custodian shall be charged a processing fee as set by city council resolution in addition to the removal fee, before the newsbox may be released. 
(g)  Upon removal of any newsbox by the owner or custodian, the owner or custodian shall remove all materials from the site and shall restore the site to the condition in existence prior to the installation of the newsbox. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-165. - Moving of newsboxes. 
In the case of violations of sections 33-156, 33-157 and 33-158, the director, as an alternative to removal under the provisions under section 33-164, may move such newsboxes in order to restore them to a legal condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-166. - Appeals. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, notice, or action taken under the provisions of this article, may appeal pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 3 of this Code, and shall be apprised of his right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
Sec. 33-167. - Violation penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same article within one (1) year; a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same article within one (1) year. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. NS-2248, § 1, 6-5-95)  
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR DINING AREAS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 33-168. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Outdoor Dining Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-169. - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose of this article is to permit outdoor dining areas in the public right-of-way by issuing outdoor dining license agreements to establishments in the Midtown, Downtown, and Museum Districts, generally bounded by Memory Lane, Broadway, Flower, First, Spurgeon, and French Streets, and further defined as that shaded area contained in Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. In these districts, licensed outdoor dining areas will revitalize and encourage business. Moreover, the licensing agreements will ensure that the public right-of-way provides adequate pedestrian circulation thus promoting the health, safety, and welfare of the residents. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-170. - Definitions. 
Downtown District means that shaded area in Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
Midtown District means that shaded area in Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
Museum District means that shaded area in Exhibit 1, attached hereto and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
Outdoor dining area means the area defined, designed, installed, and maintained, pursuant to section 33-176 of this Code, immediately adjacent to a food service establishment, where patrons may consume food and/or beverages. 
Public right-of-way means that area of the street, roadway, parkway, or sidewalk, that is owned, maintained, or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-171. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to install or maintain any outdoor dining area on any street or sidewalk within the city unless there has been issued a license therefor as provided in this article. A separate license shall be obtained for each outdoor dining area, which license shall be valid only for the location specified therein. Each license shall bear a separate number. Not more than one (1) license shall be issued for any one (1) location unless the executive director of the public works agency or his designee finds that more than one (1) outdoor dining area is reasonably necessary to accommodate persons at such locations. 
For any facility operating an outdoor dining area pursuant to a valid written agreement with the city as of May 4, 1998, the terms of such agreement may be extended up to sixty (60) months from the date of the adoption of this article by the executive director of the public works agency, subject to such other terms as may be deemed necessary or desirable. On or before the expiration of the sixty-month period, the operator shall obtain a license agreement pursuant to this article or remove the outdoor dining area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-172. - Same—Application. 
(a)  No outdoor dining area license shall be issued except upon written application, filed with, and upon a form prescribed by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee, showing the proposed location of each outdoor dining area and such other information as the executive director of the public works agency or his designee may require. The initial application for an outdoor dining area license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Detailed plans and specifications of each outdoor dining area shall be supplied by the applicant in a form as approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(c)  Each application must be signed by the owner or legal representative of the owner of the outdoor dining area for which the license is requested. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-173. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  Upon approval of an application for a new license, a one-time nonrefundable license fee for each outdoor dining area, in an amount established by resolution of the city council, shall be submitted. Each new license issued shall expire one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  The license holder may renew the license, subject to an annual renewal fee. Each license may be renewed, provided: (1) a renewal application is filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the existing license; (2) an annual renewal fee, as established by resolution of the city council, is paid; (3) all past due fees, as established by resolution of the city council, are paid; and (4) the license holder has complied with all provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 2383, § 1, 4-5-99)  
Sec. 33-174. - Same—Indemnity; insurance, security. 
Prior to issuance of any license under this article, each applicant shall: 
(a)  Enter into a license agreement, representing, stipulating, contracting and agreeing that such applicant will indemnify, defend and hold the city and its officers, agents, volunteers and employees harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the license or the placement of outdoor dining areas. A new license agreement is not required with each renewal application. 
(b)  Obtain and file with the clerk of the council, and thereafter maintain during the term of any such license: 
(1)  A comprehensive general liability insurance policy or policies, approved as to form by the city attorney, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the State of California. The city, its officers, agents, volunteers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy or policies. The policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for both bodily injury and property damage, or equivalent. 
(2)  Workers' compensation as required by the Labor Code of the State of California and employers' liability insurance with a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident. 
(3)  Property insurance for all licensee's contents, inventory, equipment, and for any improvements or betterments made by licensee to the outdoor dining area. 
The executive director of the public works agency may increase the dollar amount of coverage required under any of the policies described above, upon prior written notice to the license holder. 
(c)  A cash deposit or letter of credit, issued by a financial institution and in a form acceptable to the public works agency and the city attorney's office, in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per outdoor dining area shall be posted by the license holder to insure proper site restoration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 2383, § 2, 4-5-99)  
Sec. 33-175. - Same—Denial or revocation. 
(a)  The application for an outdoor dining area license shall be denied if it is found by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee that the maintenance of area would tend to obstruct passage along any public street, or to create a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience. 
(b)  Any license may be revoked or renewal thereof denied by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee for any violation of any of the provisions of this article, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, violation of any other chapter of this Code, failure to comply with the standards for outdoor dining areas as specified in section 33-176 of this Code, criminal activity, adverse impacts on or to adjacent land uses, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application. 
(c)  The application shall be denied if the applicant fails to deposit the license fee and accept the license within thirty (30) days after notice of the approval of the application by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(d)  Any license issued under this article shall be canceled and revoked if the license holder fails to install and use the outdoor dining area within ninety (90) days after the date of issuance of such license. 
(e)  If the owner, tenant or person in lawful possession or control of the property abutting the street at the place where the outdoor dining area is to be located gives written notice of objection to such location to the executive director of the public works agency or his designee at any time before issuance of the license that maintenance of the outdoor dining area would tend to obstruct passage along any public street, or to create a hazard, or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience, the executive director of the public works agency or his designee shall consider such notice in making the determination pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. If such written notice is received by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee after the date of issuance of the license, the license shall not be revoked but renewal thereof shall be denied on the next renewal date if the executive director of the public works agency or his designee finds in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. Any such denial or revocation of any license shall be subject to review upon filing of a timely appeal pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3 of this Code. 
(f)  Any license issued under this article may be revoked for failure to pay the business license tax as required by this Code. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the above, the executive director of the public works agency or his designee retains the right to revoke the license, at will, upon thirty (30) days written notice to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 2383, § 3, 4-5-99)  
Sec. 33-176. - Dining area; design, installation, maintenance. 
(a)  The design of each outdoor dining area shall be approved by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee prior to issuance of a license therefor. Approval shall be based on compliance of applicant with reasonable guidelines issued by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee. 
(b)  Outdoor dining areas shall be constructed in conformity with the Uniform Building Code, amended, and adopted by section 8-43 of this Code. 
(c)  Outdoor dining areas shall be maintained in a neat, attractive, safe and sanitary manner at all times. Routine maintenance, including cleaning and emptying of trash receptacles, shall be provided each dining area daily. Damaged, defaced or defective segments of any dining area shall be replaced within forty-eight (48) hours of discovery thereof or notice thereof by the city, whichever occurs earlier, except that any condition which, in the opinion of the executive director of the public works agency or his designee constitutes a safety hazard shall be repaired, replaced, removed or otherwise corrected immediately upon notification by the city. 
(d)  Upon removal of any dining area, all materials shall be removed from the site by the license holder and the site restored to the condition in existence prior to installation of the dining area, including complete restoration of any sidewalk upon which the removed dining area was located. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-177. - Removal. 
(a)  The executive director of the public works agency or his designee may cause a dining area to be removed and stored after expiration or revocation of the license, or when a dining area is placed or maintained in violation of any provision of this article or any requirements set forth in the license, if the license holder fails to remove or correct the same after ten (10) days notice thereof by mail. 
(b)  A dining area which is placed on the street without a license may be removed and stored. 
(c)  All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the license holder or owner and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law. 
(d)  The license holder or owner may recover the property which has been removed and stored during the time specified in section 2-705 of this Code, by paying the actual cost of such removal and storage. Unclaimed property may be disposed of pursuant to the applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-178. - Transfer. 
Whenever a restaurant for which a license has been issued is sold, or the title or control thereof assigned or transferred, the license holder shall report such fact to the executive director of the public works agency or his designee within ten (10) days after such sale, transfer or assignment. The new owner of the restaurant shall, within such ten-day period, either remove the outdoor dining area or obtain a license for its maintenance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-179. - Enforcement and enforcement fees. 
The executive director of the public works agency or his designee shall enforce the provisions of this article. In addition to removal of dining area as provided in section 33-177 of this Code, fees for noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this article may be assessed by the executive director of the public works agency or his designee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of enforcement and issuing notices concerning failure of licensee to meet and maintain required city standards. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
Sec. 33-180. - Appeals. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, notice, or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal pursuant to the procedures of Chapter 3 of this Code, and shall be apprised of his right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. NS-2350, § 1, 5-18-98)  
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF THE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL OF TREES 
 
Sec. 33-181. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish policies, regulations and standards necessary to ensure that the city will continue to realize the benefits provided by its urban forest. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-182. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this article. 
Median trees means trees located in the planted strip in the center of a divided highway. 
Parkway means the same as defined in section 36-8 of this Code. 
Person means the same as defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
Public trees means any and all trees owned by the city and includes, but is not limited to, median trees and street trees. 
Street trees means trees located in the public right-of-way. 
Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-183. - Creation and establishment of the environmental and transportation advisory committee. 
(a)  On December 2, 1991, the city council created and established under city council Resolution No. 91-112 the environmental and transportation advisory committee (ETAC) for the City of Santa Ana. The Environmental and Transportation Advisory Committee shall be comprised of nine (9) members who shall be qualified electors of the city. The provisions of sections 900 and 900.1 of the Charter of the City of Santa Ana shall govern the appointment, removal, and terms of members of ETAC and the existence of vacancies on ETAC. Membership in ETAC may include one (1) member who shall be nominated by the Santa Ana Chamber of Commerce and one (1) member nominated by the Santa Ana Hispanic Chamber of Commerce within the nine (9) member limit. The members nominated by the Chambers need not be qualified electors of the city. 
(b)  ETAC meetings and procedures shall be resolved and detailed in separately adopted by-laws. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2910, § 2, 1-17-17 )  
Sec. 33-184. - Duties and responsibilities of the environmental and transportation advisory committee. 
(a)  The duties of ETAC shall consist of acting in an advisory capacity to the city council in the study, review, and recommendations with regard to the removal, planting, replanting or disposition of public trees in the public right-of-way. ETAC shall review and make recommendations regarding requests for public tree removal by individual property owners, neighborhood associations, or developers. ETAC shall make recommendations on designated species for specific streets and neighborhoods. 
(b)  ETAC will assist in the dissemination of news and information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of public trees on public property to the city council and citizens of the City of Santa Ana. 
(c)  ETAC, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of the urban forest. 
(d)  The duties of ETAC shall also consist of acting in an advisory capacity to the city council, in the study, review, and recommendation related to master planning of transportation and streetscape matters, and guiding principles on Water and Wastewater matters. 
(e)  ETAC shall provide general input regarding the City's Circulation Element, the Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plans, and Citywide Complete Streets, and advice on major surface transportation programs. ETAC may also provide input on street environment, streetscape, and right-of-way aesthetics. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2910, § 3, 1-17-17 )  
Sec. 33-185. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the City of Santa Ana. Species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees with consent from the environmental and transportation advisory committee. 
	COMMON NAME 	BOTANICAL NAME 
CATEGORY I* 	•Queen Palm 
•Crape Myrtle 	•Arecastrum 
•romanzoffianum 
•Lagerstroemia indica 
CATEGORY II** 	•Australian Willow 
•New Zealand Christmas 
•Bradford Pear 
•Lavender Bloom 	•Geijera parviflora 
•Metorsiderso excelsus 
•Pyrus calleryanan 
•Tabebuia ipe 
		
CATEGORY III† 	•Peppermint Tree 
•Bottle Tree 
•Modesto Ash 
•Jacaranda 
•Magnolia-Samuel 
•Summers 
•Canary Island Pine 
•Sycamore, London 
•Plane 
•Sycamore, California 
•Oaks, Holly 
•Oaks, Coastal Live Oak 
•Brisbane Box 
•Gold Medallion Tree 	•Agonis flexuosa 
•Brachychiton populneus 
•Fraxinus velutina 
•Jacaranda mimosifolia 
•Magnolia grandiflora 
•Pinus canariensis 
•Platanus acerifolia 
•Platanus racemosa 
•Quercus ilex 
•Quercus agrifolia 
•Tristania conferta 
•Cassia leptophylla 
		
CATEGORY IV‡ 	•Camphor Trees 
•Tulip Tree 
•Chinese Elm 	•Cinnamomum camphora 
•Liriodenfron Tulipifera 
•Ulmus Parvifolia 
 
* 2½—4 Foot Parkways 
** 4—5 Foot Parkways 
† 5—8 Foot Parkways 
‡ 8 Foot or Larger Parkways 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-186. - Street tree planting standards. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the Public Works Agency Standard Plan Code Book. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-187. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, squares, parkways and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and aesthetics of such public grounds. The city may remove or cause to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric, power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or pest. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-188. - Site plan approval. 
Site plan review shall require the planting of street trees to coincide with the development, redevelopment, renovating of any tract or parcel. The site plan for development or improvement of any tract or parcel of land shall be evaluated and approved by the city's transportation and development services division and street maintenance division for the placement of street trees by the developer in accordance with SAMC sections 33-47 through 33-53 and section 34-81. The approved site plan, in addition to the usual requirements of the zoning code, contained in chapter 41 of this Code, shall show the approximate location, size, and species of all existing trees to be maintained, trees to be removed and trees required for approval of the project. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-189. - Public tree pruning. 
The City of Santa Ana shall maintain the city's urban forest on an average 4½-year trimming cycle based on species, the recommendations of a certified arborist, and the International Society of Arboricultural Tree Pruning Standards. The city shall maintain and prune any public tree with limbs or branches so that branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection so that there shall be a clear space of fourteen (14) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-190. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any public tree on public property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-191. - Damaging trees. 
No person shall post or affix to any tree or shrub, tree stake or guard, in any street in the city, any bill, poster, placard, picture, announcement, notice, advertisement or sign, or cut, paint, print or mark any of the same upon such tree or shrub, tree stake or guard, or affix or attach in any manner any other thing whatsoever, including any guy wire or rope, to any such tree or shrub, tree stake, or guard, except for the purpose of protecting it or other purpose authorized by this Code. Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees, shrubs or plants by property owners, provided the same are merely placed near a tree, shrub, or plant, for the purpose of protecting or training such trees, shrubs or plants. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 4, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-192. - Dumping harmful substances on trees. 
No person shall dump, pour or spill any oil, salt, salt water or other deleterious matter upon any tree or tree space in any street, or maintain upon any sidewalk within ten (10) feet of any such tree or tree space on any street, any receptacle from which oil or salt water leaks or drips, or pour oil or salt water onto any parking or concrete gutter, so as to injure any tree or any street. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 5, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-193. - Building materials near trees, shrubs. 
No person shall pile building material, or other material, about any tree, plant or shrub in a street in any manner that will in any way injure such tree, plant or shrub. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 6, 12-20-99)  
Sec. 33-194. - Appeals. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, notice, or action taken under the provisions of this article, may appeal the same pursuant to the procedures of chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2414, § 2, 12-20-99)  
Secs. 33-195—33-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-200. - Purposes. 
(a)  These rules and regulations for the contracting of public works construction services are to comply with section 421 of the city charter to: 
(1)  Establish efficient procedures for construction of public works; 
(2)  Distinguish between traditional public works construction and other more innovative modes of project management and project delivery which still comply with the city's charter; and 
(3)  Establish procedures to allow for the efficient and fair construction of public works without favor or prejudice. 
(b)  The city council finds that the city's charter, including but not limited to sections 200 and 421, conflict with existing state law set forth in the California Public Contract Code. Said charter provisions, this article and the administrative procedures adopted by the executive director of public works pursuant to section 33-204, are intended, and shall be interpreted, to constitute a complete statement of the city's public works construction rules and regulations. The city council declares there exists a fundamental conflict between the city's charter, ordinances, administrative rules and regulations, on the one hand, and the California Public Contract Code provisions regulating public works construction, on the other hand, both generally and specifically. This conflict infringes on the city's constitutional authority to govern its municipal affairs. The city council intends to and does hereby exempt public works construction from being subject to any provision of the California Public Contract Code, except to the extent that any such provisions may be expressly incorporated in applicable administrative procedures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 4, 7-1-02)  
Sec. 33-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2963 , § 4, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 33-201. Former § 33-201 pertained to city manager's authority and derived from Ord. No. NS-2502, adopted July 1, 2002. Similar provisions can be found in § 2-748.  
Sec. 33-202. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Construction manager shall mean an agent of the city who provides the city with professional services in the fields of technology, scheduling, ability to construct, and/or management of the fiscal aspects of a public works project. A construction manager shall be responsible for some or all of the following: 
(1)  Overseeing a public works project through completion of construction; 
(2)  Assumption of financial responsibility; 
(3)  Hiring of an architect/designer, if necessary, through a qualification process consistent with procedures established pursuant to section 2-803; and/or 
(4)  Contracting for actual construction work by award of a contract to the lowest and best bidder in conformance with section 421 of the city's charter. 
Design-build-bid shall mean a procurement process in which both the design and construction manager professional services for a public works project are procured from a single entity, while the actual construction work is awarded by the entity to the lowest and best bidder in conformance with section 421 of the city's charter. 
Professional services shall have the same meaning as in section 2-802 of this code. 
Public works shall have the same meaning as in California Labor Code sections 1720, 1720.2, 1720.3, and 1771 and as may be amended from time to time. 
Public works construction shall have the same meaning as in section 421 of the city's charter. 
Public works project shall mean the totality of a project, including both professional services and public works construction, which ultimately results in the erection or improvement of public buildings, streets, drains, sewers, parks or playgrounds. 
Purchasing manager shall have the same meaning as in section 2-802 of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 4, 7-1-02; Ord. No. NS-2875, § 1, 12-16-14)  
Sec. 33-203. - Procurement of public works construction. 
The following procedure shall apply to every contract for which final plans and specifications are available involving an expenditure of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for non-emergency public works construction: 
(a)  Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the public works construction, the place to obtain the plans and specifications, and the time and place for opening bids. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least two (2) days, the first of which shall be at least ten (10) days before the date set for opening bids. The city shall make a good faith effort to send a notice inviting bids to all businesses engaged in providing labor and materials for such construction located within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  The bid. Included with the plans and specifications for a work of public works construction shall be the following documents: Instructions to bidder, proposal, bond samples and the contract. The bidder shall execute the proposal and contract, and submit them sealed with at least a ten (10) per cent bid bond, cashier's check or certified check. 
(c)  Award of contract. Upon opening the bids at the time and place stated in the notice, the aggregate bid of each bidder shall be publicly declared. Following the determination of the lowest and best bidder, the proposal and agreement from this bidder shall be sent to the city attorney for approval as to form. The documents shall then be presented to the city council for approval and authorization for execution. If two (2) or more bids received are the same and the lowest, the council may accept the one it chooses. 
(d)  Notification of award. A notification letter, a request for bonds, when necessary, and a copy of the fully executed contract shall be delivered to the successful bidder. 
(e)  Performance bonds. To secure faithful performance of the contract, the city manager is authorized to require security in the form of cash, cashier's check, certified check or corporate faithful performance bonds, in the following percentages of the aggregate amount bid: One hundred (100) per cent bond for faithful performance, and fifty (50) per cent contractor's payment bond. 
(f)  Rejection of bids. The right to reject all bids is expressly reserved to the city council. After rejecting such bids, or if no bids are received, the city council may determine and declare that, in its opinion based on estimates submitted by the city manager, the public works construction may be performed better or more economically by the city with its own employees, and after the adoption of a motion to this effect by the affirmative votes of at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the city council, the council may proceed to have said work done in the manner stated without further observance of the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 4, 7-1-02)  
Sec. 33-204. - Procedures for alternate procurement processes for public works projects. 
The city council may choose to undertake a public works project utilizing alternative project delivery methods which may include but not be limited to the construction manager, or design-build-bid or any other project delivery method which is appropriate to the type of public works project and conforms to applicable federal, state and charter requirements. The executive director of public works is authorized and directed to promulgate and maintain administrative procedures for the management of all public works projects including alternative delivery methods. Such procedures shall conform to any applicable regulations issued pursuant to subsection 2-803(e) which relate to the award of contracts for professional services. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 4, 7-1-02)  
Sec. 33-205. - Disqualification of contractors. 
(a)  In the event that any person who has contracted with the city for the provision of labor and materials for public works construction violates any covenant or condition of said contract, then, in addition to any other right or remedy to which the city may be entitled, such person may be disqualified from bidding on city contracts for public works construction for a period of up to one year, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No person shall be disqualified under this section without having first been given notice of the charges and an opportunity to be heard on the issues. Unless an alternative hearing procedure is directed by the city council, the notice of charges and time and place of hearing shall be given to the person by the director of public works, based upon a preliminary determination that a violation calling for disqualification has occurred, and the said director, or his/her authorized representative, shall conduct such hearing and determine whether and for how long such person shall be disqualified. Any determination of disqualification may be appealed to the city council pursuant to chapter 3 of this Code. In determining whether a person should be disqualified and, if so, the duration of the disqualifications, the hearing officer and the city council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether any violation of the contract did in fact occur. 
(2)  Whether the violation caused any significant detriment to the city or to the public interest in terms of additional expense, delay in completion of the work, or noncompliance with public policy obligations. 
(3)  Whether the acts or omissions that constituted or resulted in the violation were marked by willful or reckless disregard for the duty to comply with the contract. 
(c)  No person disqualified under this section, and no person who lists any person disqualified as a subcontractor on any bid, shall be considered the best bidder on any contract for public works construction to be awarded by the city within the period of the disqualification. 
(Ord. No. NS-2502, § 4, 7-1-02)  
Sec. 33-206. - Prevailing wages required. 
Except on locally funded public works projects of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less when the project is for construction work, or fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or less when the project is for alteration, demolition, repair or maintenance work, all contractors performing work on a City public works project shall be subject to California prevailing wage law, codified at California Labor Code Section 1782, et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. The only limitation on this requirement shall be in the event federal funding requirements supersede state prevailing wage laws. 
(Ord. No. NS-2875, § 2, 12-16-14)  
Secs. 33-207—33-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 33-210. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this part shall govern the application and interpretation of this article. 
(a)  "Abandoned shopping cart" means any shopping cart that has been removed, without written consent of the owner, from the owner's business premises and is left unattended or discarded on either public or private property other than the premises of the business establishment from which the shopping cart was removed For purposes of this article, any shopping cart which is properly identified as required by this article, located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail business establishment from which such shopping cart was removed, shall be presumed to be abandoned, even if in the possession of any person unless such person in possession is either (1) the owner, employee or agent of the owner, (2) the owner, employee or agent of a shopping cart retrieval service hired to retrieve shopping carts from the city, or (3) has written permission or consent to be in possession of the shopping cart from the shopping cart's owner. 
(b)  "Shopping cart control plan" means a document submitted by the owner of the shopping cart pursuant to section 33-216 of this article. 
(c)  "Agent" means the person or persons designated in the shopping cart control plan who the owner of the shopping cart authorizes as the person(s) to perform or provide retrieval services on behalf of the owner. The agent may be the owner if so designated in the city approved shopping cart control plan. 
(d)  "Shopping cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail or commercial establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The word "shopping cart" includes laundry carts, which are shopping carts used in a laundromat or retail dry-cleaning establishment by a customer or attendant for the purpose of transporting textile goods. 
(e)  "Director" means the executive director of planning and building for the City of Santa Ana, or such other director or officer designated by the city manager to administer this article. 
(f)  "Owner" means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, owns, leases, possesses or makes a shopping cart available to customers or the public. For the purposes of this article, owner shall also include the owner's agent. 
(g)  "Plan" means the approved mandatory shopping cart control plan required by this article. 
(h)  "Premises" means the entire area owned, occupied, and/or utilized by an owner which provides shopping carts for use by customers or other persons, including any parking lot or other property provided by or on behalf of the owner for customer parking or use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-211. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the establishment's premises. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of these establishments and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen, wrecked or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property: 
(1)  Create conditions that reduce property values, and promote blight and deterioration of the city neighborhoods, tending to lead to declining property values and increases in crime; 
(2)  Obstruct the free passage along public and private streets, sidewalks, parking lots and other rights-of-way and/or interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on streets; 
(3)  Impede emergency service; and 
(4)  Clog storm drain channels reducing their ability to function properly, by trapping debris and trash and thereby creating flooding hazards, and constitute violation of the city's waste discharge requirements. 
(b)  For the above-referenced reasons, such lost, stolen, wrecked or abandoned shopping carts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this article or in any other manner provided by law. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by owners of businesses which provide shopping carts on their premises for the convenience of their customers to prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, and, when removed despite the owner's implementation of its control pan, to provide for the prompt retrieval of such shopping carts. 
(d)  The purpose and intent of this article is additionally to ensure that measures are taken by owners to prevent the removal of shopping carts from a business premises, to make removal of shopping carts a violation of the law, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts in a manner that supplements and complements state law, but is not preempted with state law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-212. - Applicability/prohibition. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all owners of business establishments or other commercial services within the city that provide more than five (5) shopping carts for customer use. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner and/or owner's agent to cause or permit any shopping cart to be abandoned upon any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city or upon any private property other than the premises owner of such shopping cart. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-213. - Shopping cart identification required. 
(a)  Every shopping cart owned or provided by any owner must have a sign permanently affixed to the shopping cart that contains all of the following information: 
(1)  Identity of owner, or owner's business establishment, or both; 
(2)  The address of the owner of the business establishment for shopping cart return and a phone number at which a person may contact the owner to retrieve the shopping cart; and, 
(3)  Notification to the public that the removal of the shopping cart from the premises is a violation of state and local law. 
(b)  Any shopping cart found abandoned that does not have the identification and information required by this section may be removed and disposed of by the city in accordance with state law. 
(c)  No owner shall provide any shopping cart for customer use that does not contain the signage required by this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-214. - Premises signage. 
Signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises, at all customer store entrances and exits, and in the parking area, warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is a prohibited by state and local law. Any and all posting of signs shall comply with the provisions of the Code, except that the number and placement of such signs may be in excess of those limits found in chapter 41. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-215. - Unauthorized removal prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(a)  To remove a shopping cart from a premises, either temporarily or permanently, which is properly marked in conformity with this article, without the written consent of the owner; or 
(b)  To be in possession of a shopping cart that has been removed from a premises, which is properly marked in conformity with this article, without the written consent of the owner; or 
(c)  To detach the sign or deface the name or address marked on a sign, which is properly marked on a shopping cart in conformity with this article. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to shopping carts removed as authorized by the owner for the purposes of repair, maintenance or disposal.  
Sec. 33-216. - Mandatory shopping cart control plan. 
(a)  Every owner subject to this article shall prepare, submit, implement and comply with the terms and conditions of a shopping cart control plan to prevent the unauthorized removal of any shopping cart from the owner's premises and, if removed, retrieval of the shopping cart within time periods set forth in subsection (b)(8). The focus of the plan shall be on means to confine shopping carts to the owner's premises. 
(b)  The shopping cart control plan shall be designed to effectively prevent the removal of all shopping carts from the premises. The owner shall have the obligation to provide demonstrable evidence to the director that the elements proposed will be effective. The plan shall include the following elements. 
(1)  Sign affixed to cart. Every shopping cart shall have a sign permanently affixed to it fully compliant with the requirements of section 33-213 of this article. 
(2)  Premises signage. Signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises, as required by section 33-214. 
(3)  Shopping cart inventory. The plan shall include a complete list of all shopping carts maintained on or in the premises. 
(4)  Community education plan. A description of a community education and outreach program to be carried out by the owner that will effectively inform customers that the removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited and is a violation of state and local law. This program may include, but is not limited to, flyers distributed at the premises, warnings on shopping bags, supplemental signage, direct mail, announcements using intercom systems at the premises, web site or other means demonstrated to be effective to the reasonable satisfaction of the director. 
(5)  Shopping cart identification. Signs and shopping cart identification requirements which conform to state and local law. 
(6)  Shopping cart containment plan. The plan shall describe the specific measures that the owner shall implement to prevent shopping cart from being removed from the premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to. 
(i)  Electronic or other disabling devices on the shopping carts so they can not be removed from the premises; or, 
(ii)  Bollards, chains or other physical barrier to prevent transporting shopping carts out of the store or off the premises; and/or, 
(iii)  Effective management practices including use of (A) courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return the shopping carts to the store, (B) security personnel assigned the responsibility to prevent removal; (C) or other measures acceptable to the director that the owner can demonstrate will effectively prevent shopping cart to be removed from the premises. 
Where physical improvements such as (i) and (ii) above are not proposed, the plan shall include justification for such omission. 
(7)  Employee training. The plan shall include a description of an annual ongoing employee training program that shall be implemented by the owner designed to educate new and existing employees on the shopping cart control plan and conditions contained therein. 
(8)  Mandatory shopping cart retrieval element. The plan shall include provisions for retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. The plan shall ensure that all of owner's shopping care removed from the premises shall be recovered within twenty-four (24) hours, or in the case of shopping carts abandoned at or around a bus stop, within twelve (12) hours. 
The retrieval element shall identify the streets and bus stops which shall be patrolled; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the owner to retrieve abandoned shopping carts, including but not limited to the number of trucks and hours of operation of retrieval activities. In addition, the retrieval element shall detail a telephone notification program, whereby persons may notify the owner of an abandoned shopping cart and request retrieval of any shopping cart properly identified as belonging to the owner; and provide that each vehicle used to retrieve shopping carts shall bear conspicuous signs identifying the name of the owner or the retail business name and, if applicable, the name of the contract shopping cart retrieval service. 
(9)  Daily cart confinement. A plan for storing shopping carts during non-business hours, for any business which is not open twenty-four (24) hours per day, to prevent theft when closed. 
(10)  Collaboration with other businesses. Two (2) or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single shopping cart control plan. 
(11)  Monthly reports. The owner shall provide a written report to the director specifying the number of abandoned shopping carts retrieved on the owner's behalf during the preceding calendar month. The report may be provided by an owner's contract shopping cart retrieval service. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-217. - Fees. 
Every owner subject to this article shall submit with its initial proposed plan and thereafter annually with its annual report a fee in the amount set forth by resolution of the city council adopted from time to time. The fee shall not exceed the city's reasonable cost to administer and manage the activities mandated by this article, and shall not include the city's cost of retrieving shopping carts, except as provided for in Business and Professions Code section 22435.7. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-218. - Plan approval or denial and penalties. 
(a)  Upon this article becoming effective, all owners shall submit a shopping cart control plan in compliance with section 33-216 to the director. For the initial plans, the director shall establish a schedule for submittal of plans. The director shall give written notice to each owner of its deadline for submittal of a plan, provided that all plans must be submitted no later than March 1, 2007 The schedule shall provide at least sixty (60) days from notice to submit a plan. The director may approve or deny the proposed plan and shall notify the owner of such decision. If approved, the shopping cart control plan shall be implemented by the owner no later than time specified in the approval, which shall not be thirty (30) days less than the date of the director's notice. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the obligations imposed by this article in sections 33-213 and 33-214 shall be fully implemented no later than ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article. 
(c)  Thereafter, each owner must amend or update its plan at the earlier of (1) any substantial modification of an owner's business or premises that would adversely affect an approved plan or (2) on the fifth (5th) anniversary of approval of its initial plan, and each fifth (5th) year thereafter. All new businesses established after January 1, 2007 must file a plan prior to issuance of a business license for that new business. 
(d)  The director may deny a plan based upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Implementation of the plan violates any provision of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provision of this code or any county, state or federal law which substantially affects public health, welfare, or safety; 
(2)  The plan fails to include all of the information required by this article; 
(3)  The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of shopping carts from the premises; 
(4)  The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to shopping cart retention and prevention efforts. 
(5)  Implementation of the plan violates a term or condition of a plan or other requirement of this Code; 
(6)  The owner knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the plan, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made. 
(e)  If the plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, the director shall indicate areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional thirty (30) days in which to resubmit a complete and adequate plan. 
(f)  An owner who fails to submit a complete plan to the satisfaction of the director, or fails to implement approved plan measures or fails to comply with the approved plan measures will be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the city, including without limitation institution of the administrative remedies process pursuant to Chapter 1. 
(g)  The director's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-219. - Plan modification and annual report. 
(a)  At any time after the director's approval of any abandoned shopping cart plan, the owner may submit to the director a modification of the previously approved plan to address a change in circumstances, address an unanticipated physical or economic impact of the plan, or modify an inadequate or ineffective plan. 
(b)  Each year, on or before the anniversary of the director's approval of the plan, each owner (or multiple businesses that have collaborated on a single approved plan) shall submit an annual report to the director (1) certifying its compliance with the approved plan and each item specified in section 33-216, (2) detailing compliance with each provision of its approved plan over the prior year, and (3) summarizing its monthly cart retrieval statistics for the prior year. The director may, based upon review of the annual report, initiate modification or revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-220. - Modification or revocation of plan. 
An approved plan may be revoked by the director, or modified in lieu of revocation in the exercise of the director's sound discretion, upon any of the following occurrences: 
(a)  The owner is operating, or is permitting operation, of the retail business in violation of one or more provisions of the plan and has failed to correct such violations for a period of at least fifteen (15) calendar days following date of receipt of written notification of such violation(s) from the city. 
(b)  The plan is inadequate to either reasonably prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises, or reasonably ensure the prompt retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. 
(c)  The owner has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The owner knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the plan, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-221. - Notice of intended decision. 
(a)  Upon determining the existence of any of the grounds for revocation of a plan in accordance with section 33-220, the director shall issue to the owner a notice of intended decision to revoke or modify the plan. 
(b)  The notice of intended decision shall state all the grounds upon which the revocation or modification is based. 
(c)  The notice of intended decision shall advise the owner that the revocation or modification shall become final unless the owner files a written request for hearing before the director within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision to revoke or modify the plan. 
(d)  The notice of intended decision shall specify the effective date of the revocation or modification of the plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-222. - Procedure for hearing before the director. 
(a)  The written request for a hearing before the director must be received by the director within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice of intended decision to revoke the plan or deny the renewal application for an exemption. 
(b)  Upon timely receipt of a written request for a hearing, the director shall schedule a hearing which shall be held no later than thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a timely request for hearing. 
(c)  The director shall serve a notice of hearing on the owner at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing before the director, or before a hearing officer at the director's option, the owner shall be given the opportunity to present witnesses and relevant documentary evidence. 
(e)  The hearing will be conducted informally and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence which the director or hearing officer deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-223. - Decision of the director. 
(a)  The director or hearing officer shall serve on the owner a written decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the director's intended decision. 
(b)  The decision by the director or hearing officer after hearing shall become final unless the owner files an appeal within the time period specified in section 33-224. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-224. - Chapter 3 appeal. 
(a)  If an owner is dissatisfied with the written decision of the director, the owner may file a written appeal to the city. 
(b)  The appeal must be in writing on a form provided by the city and must be received by clerk of the council within ten (10) calendar days of notification of the director's decision. 
(c)  The appeal, including its hearing, shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 3. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-225. - Enforcement. 
Every owner shall comply with the provisions of this article and every provision of the owner's approved shopping cart control plan. 
Any owner who violates any provision of this article or any provision of the owner's approved shopping cart control plan shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the city, including without limitation institution of administrative remedies in accordance with chapter 1. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Sec. 33-226. - Retrieval notification. 
The city may notify the owner of an abandoned shopping cart as identified on the signage information permanently affixed to the shopping cart. The city notification shall be documented and provided either by telephone or by written notice. The notification shall require that the identified shopping cart(s) be retrieved pursuant to the conditions for retrieval as set forth in the owner's abandoned shopping cart retrieval plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2725, § 2, 10-2-06)  
Secs. 33-227—33-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2954, §§ 2, 3, repealed art. X, §§ 33-230—33-254 and enacted a new art. X, §§ 33-230—33-258 as set out herein. Former art. X pertained to telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way and derived from Ord. No. NS-2816, adopted April 4, 2011. 
 
Sec. 33-230. - Purpose and intent. 
The City Council finds and determines that it is in the interest of the City of Santa Ana to establish a process that balances the need for Santa Ana residents to access wireless communications, the general welfare of Santa Ana residents, and the requirements of state and federal law, to guide applicants for wireless facilities within or along the public right-of-way. Accordingly, this Article is adopted: 
(a)  To provide uniform standards for the community desired design, placement, permitting and monitoring of wireless facilities consistent with applicable state and federal requirements. 
(b)  To manage the public right-of-way as to the time, place, and manner in which it is accessed. 
(c)  To minimize the environmental and aesthetic impacts of wireless facility installations in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  To preserve view corridors, to discourage visual blight and clutter, and to encourage aesthetic placement of wireless facilities. 
(e)  To accommodate public and City use of the public right-of-way, so as to permit maintenance of wireless facilities, and to minimize disruption to vehicular traffic and pedestrian flow and on-street parking. 
(f)  To minimize unnecessary disruption of the public right-of-way by coordinating installations so as to effectively manage use of the public right-of-way. 
(g)  To ensure the structural integrity, reliability, performance, safety, quality, ease of maintenance, and aesthetic integrity of the public right-of-way. 
(h)  To ensure that similarly-situated public right-of-way users are treated in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner while complying with applicable state and federal requirements. 
(i)  To ensure compliance with all federal, state, county, and local laws. 
(j)  To prevent hazardous conditions within and along the public right-of-way. 
(k)  To manage the long-term use of the public right-of-way. 
This Ordinance establishes standards for the siting, design, permitting, construction, operation, inspection, maintenance, repair, modification, removal and replacement of communications facilities in recognition of applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-231. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Article, the following words or phrases are defined below: 
(a)  "Accessory equipment" means any equipment serving or being used as part of a wireless facility that is not an antenna or a pole. This equipment includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets, storage sheds, shelters, vaults, or other structures. 
(b)  "Agency" means the City's Public Works Agency. 
(c)  "Antenna" means that part of a wireless facility designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals. 
(d)  "Base station" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(1), as may be amended. 
(e)  "Cell on Wheels" or "COW" means a portable self-contained wireless facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or emergency basis. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the Antenna support structure. 
(f)  "Concealment Elements" means any of the following: 
1.  Radio Frequency transparent screening. 
2.  Approved, specific colors. 
3.  Minimizing the size of the site. 
4.  Integrating the installation into existing utility infrastructure. 
5.  Installing new infrastructure that matches existing infrastructure in the area surrounding the proposed Site. 
6.  Controlling the installation location. 
(g)  "Director" means the Executive Director of the Public Works Agency or a designee. 
(h)  "Distributed Antenna System" or "DAS" means a network of spatially separated antennas (sometimes called "nodes") connected to a common source (sometimes called a "hub") by a transport medium, such as fiber optic cable, that provide wireless service within a specific geographic area. This definition includes, without limitation, DAS owned by one entity and shared by multiple providers. 
(i)  "Eligible facilities request" means an application that qualifies for approval under the criteria set forth in Section 1455 of Title 47 of the United States Code and 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001. 
(j)  "Eligible support structure" means "eligible support structure" as that term is defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(4), as may be amended. 
(k)  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
(l)  "Guidelines" means Standards and Guidelines for Wireless Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way policy promulgated by the Director of Public Works pursuant to Section 33-234, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(m)  "Laws" means any and all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, resolutions, regulations, administrative orders, or other legal requirements. 
(n)  "Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is sidewalk adjacent to the curb, that area between the sidewalk and the right-of-way line, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the curb or edge of the roadway and the right-of-way line adjacent thereto. 
(o)  "Person" means any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, entity, agency, or other organization. 
(p)  "Pole" means a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this code and the Guidelines. 
(q)  "Public right-of-way" or "PROW" or "right-of-way" means the area on, below, or above a City-owned or -controlled street or alley public right-of-way and the sidewalk and/or parkway adjacent thereto. 
(r)  "Replacement pole" means in connection with an existing pole, a pole that is installed in the same location or in the immediate vicinity of an existing pole that is removed. 
(s)  "Roadway" means that portion of a public street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
(t)  "Routine maintenance" means ensuring that a wireless facility is kept in good operating condition. Routine maintenance includes, but is not limited to inspections and testing. 
(u)  "Site" means the area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground, as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(6), or as may be amended. 
(v)  "Substantial change" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended. 
(w)  "Wireless facility" "facility" or "facilities" mean any fixed facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves using FCC-licensed or unlicensed spectrum. It includes, but is not limited to, antennas and/or other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, poles, communications monopoles or similar structures supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, and other accessory installations. 
(x)  "Work" means all labor, materials, equipment, services, and all other things necessary for a person to install a wireless facility in the public right-of-way, including without limitation any changes requested by the City, in accordance with this Article and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-232. - Permit required. 
No person shall install or maintain any wireless facility which in whole or in part rests upon the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the Director under this Article. Additional permits may still be required depending on the type of wireless facility and the scope of work required for installation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-233. - Siting preferences. 
(a)  To the extent possible, wireless facilities shall be located outside the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Whenever possible, wireless facilities shall not be located in public rights-of-way adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(c)  Whenever possible, wireless facilities shall be located on existing poles or replacement poles rather than on new poles. 
(d)  Wireless facilities should not be located immediately in front of, beside, or behind historic resources as recognized by the City pursuant to Chapter 30 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-234. - Director's guidelines. 
(a)  Each application for a wireless facility is subject to the most current Guidelines, which may be amended from time to time. The primary purpose of these Guidelines shall be to provide procedural and design guidance and specific design standards and requirements for project applicants proposing wireless facilities (categorized in different tiers) in the public right-of-way that are subject to the requirements of this Article. The Guidelines document is also intended for use and reference by City staff in reviewing and approving designs and verifying compliance with this Article. All such Guidelines will be publicly available and posted on the Public Works website. 
(b)  To the extent not preempted by applicable laws, the Director may prescribe in the Guidelines additional standards covering the location, size, and depth of excavations in public streets and sidewalks related to wireless facility installation, as the Director may deem necessary for the public safety and welfare. Where such guidelines are general in character and are designed to apply to all excavations of a certain type or nature, they shall be promulgated in writing showing the date of their enactment, and a copy thereof, duly certified to by the Director shall be kept on file where they may be made available for public inspection upon the demand of any person. All work performed under this Article shall be subject to such guidelines. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-235. - Pre-submittal requests. 
The applicant may request a pre-application consultation with the City. This consultation is for the applicant to ask questions, receive guidance on specific requirements of this Article, and receive verbal feedback on specific elements to assist in the design of their site. Multiple proposal options may be provided for the same location under one application. A pre-submittal application request is to be made on a City-approved form to the Public Works Agency and shall include any required fee as established by City Council resolution for each submittal. Once conceptual review comments have been sent to the applicant, the Public Works Agency and the applicant may communicate to address comments and resolve issues identified in advance of an application being submitted. When necessary, at the request of the applicant, city staff may conduct site visits with the applicant to address and/or resolve specific issues related to the site. The applicant may request a meeting with city staff to review and discuss conceptual review comments, subject to any applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-236. - Application required. 
Before a permit is issued, a written application must be filed with the Agency, subject to the requirements of this Section and the Guidelines. 
(a)  Where the applicant does not assert that the proposed facility is an eligible facilities request, the application shall include: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of both the applicant and the owner of the wireless facility. 
2.  The name, address and telephone number of the responsible person whom the City may contact at any time concerning the wireless facility. 
3.  A copy of the applicant's authorization to construct the proposed facilities in the public rights-of-way (e.g., a certificate of public convenience and necessity or a wireless identification registration). 
4.  If the applicant's proposed facility involves installing a replacement structure (e.g., a pole) in the public right-of-way and attaching additional facilities, or installing a facility on a pole owned by a third party, the applicant shall also provide a signed copy of the license, lease, pole attachment agreement, or whatever authorizations are required for the placement of the wireless facility at the location proposed, including proof that applicant is authorized by the owner of the structure to install and operate the proposed wireless facility on the structure. Such submissions need not disclose financial terms. 
5.  Where applicable, the pole number(s), address, and latitude/longitude GPS coordinates of the location of the pole or poles. 
6.  At the request of the Director, a photograph and model number of the wireless facility being proposed. 
7.  A project description letter containing: 
A.  A list of all facilities proposed to be installed (including antennas, associated equipment, poles, power and fiber to the facility), along with the corresponding volume of each. 
B.  The height of each, as measured from the ground. 
C.  A description of the concealment elements associated with the wireless communication facility, including but not limited to painting and shielding. 
D.  The materials that comprise the facilities. 
E.  A description of any ground disturbance necessary to complete the proposed project. 
F.  A description of the noise levels the facilities will emit. 
G.  A description of any lighting to be installed along with the facilities. 
H.  A description of any signage to be installed along with the facilities. 
I.  A description of the security plan for the site, including an emergency contact, and a description of the emergency breaker switch. 
J.  A description of three alternative sites that would also accommodate the proposed Facilities, and a brief explanation as to why the proposed site was selected (i.e., proximity to power source). 
8.  A coverage map indicating the area which will be served by the proposed wireless facility. 
9.  A construction plan and schedule, to include start and end dates and phasing, as required by the Agency. 
10.  Engineering certification 
demonstrating compliance with all existing RF emission standards. 
11.  A non-refundable application and processing fee, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to defray the City's costs to process the application and to inspect the facility. 
12.  Electronic plans (in .pdf file format and electronic GIS file format compatible with the City's geographic information system database) that include the following: 
A.  A title sheet. 
B.  A site plan, showing: 
i.  The exact location and route requested for applicant's proposed facilities, including other improvements in the area. 
ii.  If excavation is required, the plans must include the location and depth of all overhead and underground public utility, cable, water, sewer drainage, fiber optic, and other facilities in the public right-of-way along the proposed route. 
iii.  The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the facilities of any other parties. 
iv.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
13.  Verification from a California licensed professional engineer certifying that the support structure involved in the deployment is structurally and mechanically capable of supporting the proposed mounted components of the wireless facility. 
14.  Detailed plans and design drawings of all facilities proposed (and where applicable including a detailed description of any existing wireless facilities and of the modifications that are proposed to be made to it), and the dimensions (including the volume) and specific location of the wireless facility and its elements, including but not limited to any accessory equipment that will be installed. The description must include detail on any excavations and deployment outside the current site, including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
15.  Photo simulations of the facility before and after installation (including any above-ground pedestals, vents, conduit and exposed cable). 
16.  For applications involving modifications of existing facilities, the applicant shall provide the original permit and approved plans for the existing facility and any associated authorizations (e.g., related to prior modification requests). 
17.  For applications involving new poles, or wireless facilities in underground utility areas, the applicant must include information to demonstrate that the facility is necessary to avoid prohibiting or having the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II)). 
(b)  Applications for eligible facilities requests shall include: 
1.  A project description letter containing: 
A.  A list of all facilities proposed to be installed (including antennas, cabinets and other associated equipment, power and fiber to the facility), along with the corresponding volume of each. 
B.  The height of each, as measured from the ground. 
C.  A description of the concealment elements associated with the wireless facility, including but not limited to painting and shielding. 
D.  The materials that comprise the facilities. 
E.  A description of any ground disturbance necessary to complete the proposed project. 
2.  Detailed plans and design drawings of the proposed installation, including a detailed description of the existing wireless facility and of the modifications that are proposed to be made to the existing wireless facility; the exact location of the proposed facility; the dimensions (including the volume) and specific location of the wireless facility and its elements, including but not limited to any accessory equipment that will be installed. The description must include detail on any excavations and deployment outside the current site, including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
3.  A copy of all approvals and/or permits for the tower or base station that is to be modified, and any subsequent modification applications and permits, and of any required conditions (imposed by the City and/or third party) placed on the initial or subsequent permits. 
4.  A report signed by a California licensed professional engineer specializing in structural engineering, containing the following: 
A.  In the case of an attached wireless facility, documentation of the ability of the structure to accept the antennas, the proposed method of affixing the antennas, and the precise point at which the antennas shall be mounted. 
B.  In the case of a wireless facility with a support structure (e.g. monopole), documentation that the structure is capable of supporting the antennas and complies with applicable laws and codes, as well as the structure's capacity for additional collocated antennas, and the precise point at which the antennas shall be mounted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-237. - Distributed antenna system (DAS). 
Applications for wireless facilities comprising a DAS shall be submitted simultaneously and each individual location within the system shall be processed and considered for approval separately. Permitting fees will be assessed per application. Each location will be evaluated and must comply with the installation design guidelines as detailed in the Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-238. - Fees. 
(a)  Processing Fees. The fee for any permit or application required by this Article shall be set by the City Council by resolution from time to time. All fees must be paid in full before any permit shall be issued from the City. Application processing fees must be paid at the time that the application is submitted and are non-refundable. These fees are for permit processing only and are in addition to any other applicable fee or any separate payments that may be required for rent of City infrastructure. 
(b)  Independent Consultant. As reasonably required, the Applicant may be required to provide an authorization waiver to permit the City to hire an independent qualified consultant to evaluate any technical aspect of the proposed telecommunication facility. Any authorization for this purpose shall include an agreement by the applicant to reimburse the City for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-239. - Notice of application submittal. 
(a)  Excluding applications for eligible facility requests and Tier 1 facilities (as defined by the Guidelines), within ten (10) business days of acceptance of a complete application, the applicant shall give or cause notice of the submission to be given to certain members of the community, as specified below. The notice must be approved by the City. The notice shall provide: 
1.  A date of notice. 
2.  A brief description of the proposed wireless facility, including all proposed accessory equipment. 
3.  A City contact for inquiries and instructions to send any comments to a designated City address and/or email address, and a statement that the City will accept comments for twenty days following the date of notice. 
4.  Photo simulations of the proposed facility before and after installation (include any vents, conduit and exposed cable). 
5.  A radius map indicating: 
A.  For Tier 2 facilities, one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed installation site. 
B.  For Tier 3 facilities, three-hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed installation site. 
(b)  For purposes of the notice requirements below, the City will provide to the Applicant a list of names and addresses of all property owners within five (5) business days, as shown on the latest assessment roll of the county assessor. 
1.  For applications for Tier 2 facilities (as defined by the Guidelines), the applicant shall provide notice by: 
A.  Mailing notices to property owners located in residential zones and within one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed installation site. 
B.  Mailing notices to any neighborhood association representing residential property located within one-hundred and fifty (150) feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed installation site. 
C.  Posting a copy of the notice at the proposed installation site on the existing utility pole, street light or similar structure to be modified or replaced, or as close thereto as reasonably possible. 
2.  For applications for Tier 3 facilities (as defined by the Guidelines), the same notice requirements shall apply, except that notice shall be delivered to the persons listed above within a three-hundred (300) foot radius of the proposed site. 
(c)  Written comments from members of the public received by the Director shall be considered as part of the staff review. Comments shall be accepted for twenty (20) days following the date the notice is provided. 
(d)  The applicant shall work cooperatively with the City to consider or otherwise respond to comments received by the Director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-240. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  A permit for a wireless facility shall be granted, denied, or conditionally granted by the Director. In the event that an application is deemed granted by rule of law, all conditions and design guidelines as required by this ordinance for the facility are still applicable and required for the facility. 
(b)  For an eligible facilities request, the Director shall issue a permit if the Director finds that the proposed facility qualifies as an eligible facilities request and does not represent a substantial change. 
(c)  For any facility other than an eligible facilities request, the Director shall issue a permit if the Director makes all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed facility conforms to the Guidelines, including any volumetric limits, design criterion, and location restrictions detailed therein. 
2.  The proposed wireless facility is visually compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods. 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that the installation will not substantially interfere with the use of the public right-of-way and existing subterranean infrastructure, including interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near the proposed site of the wireless facility. 
4.  The applicant has demonstrated that the wireless facility will not endanger or is not reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property. 
5.  The proposed wireless facility complies with all applicable regulations of the FCC. 
6.  The applicant has coordinated the final siting location of the facility with the Director. 
7.  The applicant has posted a performance bond or other security in an amount rationally related to the cost of removal. 
8.  All notification requirements for the proposed facility have been met. 
(d)  In granting or denying an application, the Director shall make a written finding which shall specify all facts relied upon in rendering his decision. A copy of the decision shall be filed with the Public Works Agency and mailed to the applicant and to any person who has submitted a comment on the proposed application pursuant to Section 33-239. 
(e)  Permits are issued for a period of ten (10) years from the date issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-241. - Extension of permit. 
To extend a wireless facility permit for an additional five (5) year period, the applicant shall provide proof that it continues to have the legal authority to occupy and use the PROW for the purpose set forth in its permit, that its site as it exists at the time of the extension is in full compliance with the applicable City permits issued for the site, and pay the fees for extension. Additionally, the applicant must provide an affidavit confirming that the site is still in compliance with the FCC regulations. Additional procedural and substantive requirements may be detailed in the Guidelines. Failure to submit such an affidavit or proof of legal authority to occupy or use the PROW, or to meet any additional requirements regarding extension specified in the Guidelines, shall be grounds for not extending the permit. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the site complies with the requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-242. - Appeal. 
Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Director pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-243. - Revocation. 
Any wireless facility permit may be revoked or modified for cause in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
(a)  Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the Director. 
(b)  Public notice of the hearing shall be given. 
(c)  After conducting a duly-noticed public hearing, the Director or designee shall act on the proposed revocation. 
(d)  Required Findings. The Director or designee may revoke or modify the permit if the Director makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant obtained the approval by means of fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact. 
2.  The applicant substantially expanded or altered the use or structure beyond what is set forth in the permit or substantially changed the character of the facility. 
3.  The facility has not been utilized for six (6) months or more. 
4.  Failure to comply with any condition of a permit issued. 
5.  Failure to comply with this Article. 
6.  Failure to comply with the Guidelines. 
7.  A substantive change of law affecting to the applicant's rights to occupy or use the PROW or the City's ability to impose regulations relating to such occupation or use. 
8.  A facility's interference with a City project. 
9.  A facility's interference with vehicular or pedestrian use of the PROW. 
10.  Failure to make a safe and timely restoration of the PROW or failure to address damage or disrepair with respect to the wireless facility and/or its supporting structure. 
11.  Circumstances arise under which failure to revoke the permit and remove the facility would result in hazardous or dangerous conditions, or otherwise compromise the safety of the PROW. 
(e)  Notice of Action. A written determination of revocation shall be mailed to the applicant within ten (10) days of such determination. 
(f)  An applicant whose permit has been revoked may have the revocation reviewed, upon written appeal as follows: 
1.  Within fourteen (14) days of the revocation, a written appeal shall be filed with the Director. The appeal must contain a statement listing the reasons why the applicant believes that the revocation should be reviewed. The Director shall render a decision within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the statement described herein. 
2.  If the Director denies the appeal, the permittee may file a written notice of appeal with the City Council within twenty-one (21) days of notification of the Director's denial. The appeal to the City Council must contain a statement of any significant factors and/or hardships as well as alternatives explored, and a response to the findings of the Director that resulted in the denial. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-244. - Site selection guidelines and criteria. 
(a)  The Director may authorize new poles within the public rights-of-way, or wireless facilities in underground utility areas, only with a finding that such new pole or wireless facility, as applicable, is necessary to avoid prohibiting or having the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services pursuant to the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II)). 
(b)  Traffic Obstruction. The placement of the facility shall not permanently impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow, nor shall such installation violate siting regulations imposed by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(c)  No modification to above-ground or at-grade facilities, including those related to size, color and shape of the housing, may be made by the applicant without first having obtained approval of the Director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-245. - Visual impact guidelines. 
(a)  Unobtrusive Design. Wireless facilities shall be designed to be as visually unobtrusive as feasible. Colors and designs must be visually neutral, integrated and compatible with surrounding buildings and/or uses in the area. Facilities shall be sited to avoid or minimize obstruction of views from adjacent properties and otherwise preserve the aesthetic integrity of the public right-of-way. 
(b)  No component of a wireless facility shall extend seven (7) feet beyond the top of a pole. However, no facility located within one-hundred and forty (140) feet of a residential property shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Additionally, no facility shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height from the ground level as measured from the nearest street curb. The Director may waive these requirements if necessary to accommodate General Order 95 of the California Public Utilities Commission or a design permitted by the Guidelines. 
(c)  No facility shall be illuminated unless specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency for security or clearance purposes. 
(d)  Signs and Advertising. No advertising signage or identifying logos shall be displayed on any facility except for small identification, address, warnings, and other similar information plates. Such information plates shall be identified in the application and shall be subject to approval by the Director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-246. - Noise. 
Wireless facilities and all accessory equipment and transmission equipment must comply with all noise regulations pursuant to Article VI of Chapter 18 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-247. - Public safety guidelines. 
(a)  Arterial Highway Pedestrian Passage. In public rights-of-way that are designated in the Circulation Element of the City's General Plan as "arterial" streets or highways, and which have an existing sidewalk, the facility should be located on the sidewalk or parkway such that there is a minimum of six feet (6') of unobstructed distance between the edge of the facility and any private property, in order to provide sufficient clearance for pedestrians and wheelchairs. If the paved sidewalk is less than six feet (6') wide, the applicant may propose to construct additional sidewalk to meet this requirement; provided, however, that a sufficient length of sidewalk shall be constructed to meet the six-foot (6') standard described in this subsection. The facility shall be installed in the public right-of-way with a minimum of eighteen inches (18") of unobstructed distance maintained between the edge of the facility and the edge of the curb face. 
(b)  Non-Arterial Highway Pedestrian Passage. In public rights-of-way that are not designated in the Circulation Element of the City's General Plan as "arterial" streets or highways, and which have an existing sidewalk, the facility shall be located on the sidewalk or parkway such that there is a minimum four feet (4') unobstructed distance between the edge of the facility and any private property line, in order to provide sufficient clearance for pedestrians and wheelchairs. If the paved sidewalk is less than four feet (4') wide, the applicant may propose to construct additional sidewalk to meet this requirement if possible; provided, however, that a sufficient length of sidewalk shall be constructed to leave no discontinuities in the new path of access. The facility shall be installed in the public right-of-way with a minimum of eighteen inches (18") of unobstructed distance maintained between the edge of the facility and the edge of the curb face. 
(c)  Unpaved Sidewalks. In public rights-of-way with no existing sidewalk pavement, the facility shall be located in the parkway such that there is a minimum four feet (4') unobstructed distance between the edge of the facility and any private property line, in order to provide sufficient clearance for pedestrians and wheelchairs by one of the following methods: 
1.  Where there is no curb face, the facility shall be installed in the public right-of-way with a minimum of four feet (4') of unobstructed distance between the edge of the facility and the edge of the paved street. 
2.  Where there is a curb face, the facility shall be installed in the public right-of-way with a minimum of eighteen inches (18") of unobstructed distance between the edge of the facility and the edge of the curb face. 
(d)  Vehicular Line of Sight and Sight Distance. The facility shall not be located in the "visibility triangle," defined as that portion of both public and private property located at any corner and bounded by the curb line or edge of roadway of the intersecting streets and a line joining the points on the curb or edge of the roadway of the intersection streets forty-five feet (45') from the point of intersection of the extended curb lines or edges of roadway. The facility shall not be located adjacent to street intersections, driveways and alley intersections where they would reduce the sight distance for existing vehicular traffic to less than the distance required by City standards on file with the Public Works Agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-248. - Cell on wheels (COW). 
(a)  The Director of Public Works will direct the applicant as to what permit(s) are required to place a COW in the PROW, on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  The setup location requested for the COW will be reviewed and at the discretion of the Director or designee may be modified to ensure public health and safety. 
(c)  The duration of a permit for a COW will be no longer than is necessary to establish the network and provide the temporary coverage required by the event or emergency. 
(d)  At the discretion of the Director or his or her designee, the permit may be revoked or modified when in the best interest of the City. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-249. - Maintenance standards. 
All wireless facilities subject to this section shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Inspection and Reporting. The owner of the facility when directed by the City, must perform an inspection of the facility and submit a report to the Public Works Agency. Additionally, as the City performs maintenance on City infrastructure, additional maintenance concerns regarding the facility may be identified. These will be reported to the owner of the facility. The City shall give the applicant thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance concerns after which the City reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary to rectify the issue, which could include revocation of the permit, and applicant shall reimburse the City for all expenses associated with that ameliorative action. The burden is on the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed facility complies with the requirements herein and the Guidelines. 
(b)  Safety and Maintenance. The applicant shall keep the site, which includes without limitation any and all improvements, equipment, structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean and safe condition in accordance with the approved site plans, the Guidelines, this Section, and all conditions in the permit. The applicant shall keep the site area free from all litter and debris at all times. The applicant, at no cost to the City, shall remove and remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within forty-eight (48) hours after the applicant receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or other vandalism occurred. The applicant shall provide on-going maintenance of its facilities, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of: 
1.  General dirt and grease. 
2.  Chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint. 
3.  Rust and corrosion. 
4.  Cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration. 
5.  Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, etc. 
6.  Broken and misshapen structural parts. 
(c)  If an applicant discontinues use or abandons any facility for a period of six (6) months or more, the applicant shall immediately notify the Director, remove the equipment and restore the site to the condition it existed prior to installation of the facility in a manner approved by the Director. 
(d)  Facilities shall be replaced, in kind, within forty-five (45) days, if routine or emergency maintenance is not sufficient to return the equipment to the condition at the time of installation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-250. - Compliance with applicable law and regulations. 
This Article is not intended to be the exclusive means of regulating installation of wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way and nothing herein is intended to waive any other applicable City requirements, including but not limited to building permit, storm water runoff, business license, excavation and undergrounding regulations. The applicant shall obtain all permits, licenses, and similar authorizations that are required by other governmental entities for the installation of its wireless facilities. The applicant must also comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders, and decisions issued by any federal, state or local governmental body or agency, including without limitation those issued by the California Public Utilities Commission and the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-251. - Nonexclusive use of public rights-of-way. 
All permits to construct or place wireless facilities in the public right-of-way shall be nonexclusive. The granting of a permit under this Article by the City does not provide any permittee with an exclusive use of the public right-of-way. All facilities permitted by this Article shall, upon the reasonable demand of the Director, be relocated if required by the City to avoid potential conflicts with a proper governmental use of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. All expenses incurred in relocating shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-252. - Submittals. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit, each Applicant shall provide the Agency with evidence that it has obtained all applicable business licenses, state permits, and other licenses, as well as insurance in an amount and form specified by the Agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-253. - Indemnity; insurance. 
(a)  As a condition of permit issuance under this Article, each applicant shall: 
1.  Indemnify and hold harmless and defend the City of Santa Ana, its officers and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind for any and all claims for damage to property, or injury to, or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the placement of the facility, except to the extent any damage or injury is due to the negligence or willful misconduct of the City, its officers or employees. 
2.  Obtain and file with the Clerk of the Council, and thereafter maintain during the term of any such permit, certificates evidencing commercial general liability insurance policy or policies, approved as to form by the City, issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the State of California. The City of Santa Ana, its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy or policies. Unless the Guidelines specify otherwise, the policy limits of said insurance policy or policies shall be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for both bodily injury and property damage, or equivalent. Said policy or policies shall also contain a provision that no termination, cancellation, or change of coverage of insured or additional insured shall be effective until after twenty (20) days' notice thereof has been given in writing to the Clerk of the Council. 
(b)  Applicants who self-insure shall so state and attest in writing in the Application, which self-insurance in an amount equal to the amount required by this Article or the Guidelines, whichever is higher, shall be subject to approval by the City. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-254. - Coordination with other projects in public rights-of-way. 
To the maximum extent possible and as permitted by law, an applicant shall design and schedule its Work so as to coordinate its Work with other persons installing, constructing, or maintaining wireless facilities and other infrastructure in the public right-of-way and with the City. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-255. - Provisions for underground utility districts. 
If a wireless facility is placed on a utility pole or other structure that becomes an underground utility district, adopted by resolution of the City Council, the wireless facility must be relocated to another structure at the owner's expense. Relocation of the wireless facility is subject to this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-256. - Protection of urban forest. 
The applicant may be required to retain, at its own cost, a certified arborist to advise the applicant's contractor doing underground work in the public right-of-way as to appropriate locations for underground vaults, conduits and other equipment and root pruning techniques, if needed, so as to ensure minimal impact to existing trees and other landscaping materials that are a part of the City's urban forest. The applicant's arborist shall coordinate their work with city staff. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-257. - Non-compliance; no waivers. 
No permittee shall be excused from complying with any of the provisions of this Article by any failure of the City on any one or more occasions to seek, or insist upon, compliance with any requirements or provisions of this Code. Regardless of the City's failure to seek compliance on any occasion, such action shall not be considered a waiver of any requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Sec. 33-258. - Future changes in the law. 
The City's rights under this Article are coextensive with the City's rights under state law with regard to the use of the public right-of-way by telephone corporations (as defined by the Public Utilities Code). If future changes to state or federal law authorize the City to regulate telephone corporation activity within the City and the public rights-of-way to a greater degree than is now authorized by this Article, nothing in this Article will be deemed to limit, restrict in any way, or to modify the City's exercise of that regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-2954, § 3, 9-18-18)  
Chapter 34 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-350 et seq.; floodplain management regulations, Ch. 7; buildings and structures, Ch. 8; fire protection and prevention, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 27; streets, sidewalks and public works, Ch. 33; water and sewers, Ch. 39; zoning, Ch. 41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter, and any rules, regulations and specifications adopted pursuant thereto, is to control and regulate the division of land within the city and such land as may be annexed to the city. This chapter and the various sections thereof are supplemental to and are enacted pursuant to Section 11 of Article IX of the Constitution of the State of California, the charter of the city and the statutes of the state including the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Code 1952, § 9300; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-2. - Administrative fees. 
Fees for the processing of tentative, final and parcel maps, parcel map waiver applications and requests for certificates of compliance and any other procedure required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter may be established by resolution of the city council, and payment of such fees shall be required at the time of initial filing of such map, application or request. 
(Ord. No. NS-1390, § 1, 11-21-77) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ord. No. NS-1390, § 1, § 34-2 provided that compliance with Ch. 34 would be a prerequisite to the sale or offer for sale of lots and was derived from Code 1952, § 9380; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954; and Ord. No. NS-1229, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1975.  
Sec. 34-3. - Procedure for waiver of technical errors. 
No map shall be approved unless there has been compliance with all the requirements and conditions imposed by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, except when noncompliance is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the city engineer, does not materially affect the validity of the map. Any subdivider aggrieved by the refusal of the city engineer to waive noncompliance may request the city council to review the city engineer's determination. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse any determination of waiver by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1390, § 2, 11-21-77; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 3, 12-3-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1390, § 2, amended § 34-3 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment said section established certain limitations on property use and was derived from Code 1952, § 9380.1, and Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954.  
Sec. 34-4. - Consistency with the county hazardous waste management plan. 
All applicable subdivision decisions shall be consistent with the portions of the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2172, § 1, 8-17-92)  
Secs. 34-5—34-9. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 34-10. - References to Subdivision Map Act. 
All references in this chapter to the Subdivision Map Act are references to Division 2 (commencing with Section 66410) of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California, as operative on March 1, 1975, and as it may thereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-1253, § 1, 3-10-75)  
Sec. 34-11. - Terms not specifically defined herein. 
Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter as though fully set forth in full herein unless the context clearly indicates a different intent. 
(Code 1952, § 9310; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-1253, § 2, 3-10-75; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 3, 11-21-77)  
Sec. 34-12. - Advisory agency. 
Except as noted herein "advisory agency" shall mean the zoning administrator for tentative parcel maps; the planning commission for all other tentative maps; and city engineer for all final maps. The advisory agency is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions. 
(Code 1952, § 9311; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 4, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-12.5. - Tentative parcel map. 
A tentative map for a parcel map or parcel map waiver. 
(Ord. No. NS-2482, § 5, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-13. - Block. 
"Block" shall mean an area of land within a subdivision which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys; or by streets, highways or ways, except alleys and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9312; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-13.5. - Common interest development. 
"Common interest development" has the meaning specified in section 1351 of the Civil Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-1496, § 1, 10-1-79; Ord. No. 2265, § 1, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-13.6. - Conversion project. 
"Conversion project" means a subdivision which consists of conversion of existing buildings into a common interest development. 
(Ord. No. NS-1496, § 2, 10-1-79; Ord. No. 2265, § 2, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-13.7. - Investment apartments. 
"Investment apartments" means a conversion project having five (5) or more dwelling units and a density not exceeding thirty-five (35) dwelling units per acre, in which the dwelling units are reserved for rental occupancy only, in accordance with a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions approved by the city pursuant to section 34-363. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 1, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-14. - Key lot. 
"Key lot" shall mean a lot, the side line of which adjoins the rear line of one (1) or more adjoining lots. 
(Code 1952, § 9313; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-15. - Map act. 
"Map act" shall mean the Subdivision Map Act of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 9314; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54) 
State Law reference— The Subdivision Map Act is codified as § 11500 et seq., Bus. and P. Code.  
Sec. 34-16. - Alley. 
"Alley" shall mean a public or private way for pedestrian or vehicle use which affords only secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
(Code 1952, § 9315; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-17. - Walkway. 
"Walkway" shall mean a passage way intended for pedestrian use only. 
(Code 1952, § 9316; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-18. - Dead-end street. 
"Dead-end street" shall mean any street or way having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1952, § 9317; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-19. - Street. 
"Street" shall mean a public or private way which provides for abutting properties a primary means of access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1952, § 9318; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-20. - Private street. 
"Private street" shall mean any parcel of land not dedicated as a public street but used or intended to be used for ingress to or egress from a lot or lots which may or may not have frontage on a public street. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-21. - Service road. 
"Service road" shall mean a street adjacent to a freeway or primary street and separated therefrom by a dividing strip which provides the primary means of access for vehicular and pedestrian use to abutting properties. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-22. - Freeway. 
"Freeway" shall mean a street designated as a "freeway" by the state division of highways or other governmental agency. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.3 ; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-23. - Local street. 
"Local street" shall mean a street intended wholly or principally for traffic originating or terminating at residential properties within the immediate vicinity of said street. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.4; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-24. - Primary street. 
"Primary street" shall mean a street intended for the movement of major volumes of traffic through the city or serving to collect traffic from two (2) or more intersecting secondary streets. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.5; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-25. - Secondary street. 
"Secondary street" shall mean a street intended for the movement of traffic from one area of the city to another area and serving to collect traffic from two (2) or more intersecting streets of lesser classification. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.6; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-26. - Commercial street. 
"Commercial street" shall mean a street primarily intended for pedestrian and vehicular access to abutting properties used for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.7; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-27. - Industrial street. 
"Industrial street" shall mean a street primarily intended for pedestrians and vehicular access to abutting properties used for industrial purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 9318.8; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-28. - Final map. 
A final map shall not be deemed received by the city engineer until it has been technically checked by the public works agency for adherence to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2482, § 6, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-29. - Common area. 
"Common area" means the entire area within the common interest development except the separate interests therein, and also includes any mutual or reciprocal easement rights appurtenant to the separate interests. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 6, 8-6-07)  
Secs. 34-30—34-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 34-34. - Conformity. 
Each subdivision of land and the map thereof shall be in conformity to the design standards as set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-35. - Street and alley arrangement. 
The street and alley arrangement shall be such as the planning director will determine to cause no undue hardship to owners of adjoining property when they subdivide their land, and he shall require that adequate and convenient access be provided to adjoining properties. All streets, as far as practicable, shall be required to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets or their proper projections and shall be in general conformity with the most advantageous development of the area affected by such subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9321; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-36. - Effect of master plan on street alignment. 
Whenever a proposed subdivision or other division of land shall include within its boundaries any portion of a street which has been designated on a master plan of streets and highways approved by the city council, such street shall conform in width, alignment and other improvement and design standards as designated on the master plan. If no master plan of streets and highways has been adopted by the city council, the provisions of this section shall apply to any map showing proposed street development as adopted by the city council or to any proceedings affecting the subdivision which may have been initiated by the city council or approved by the council upon initiation by other legally constituted bodies of the city, county or state governments. 
(Code 1952, § 9321.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-37. - Inclusion of easements and rights-of-way. 
The subdivision shall include within its boundaries, all easements and rights-of-way for which the reversionary interest goes to properties within the subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9321.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-38. - Local street width. 
Each local street as defined in this chapter shall have a width of not less than sixty feet (60'); provided that where the proposed street is less than four (4) blocks in length or thirteen hundred feet (1300'), whichever is the shorter distance, is in a proposed or existing residential district, and will project by direct alignment into an existing street of lesser width, the planning director may permit a lesser width but not less than fifty-four feet (54'); provided further, a local street in any steep hillside subdivision where topographical features eliminate abutting lots from one side of the street, may have a lesser width but not less than forty feet (40'). 
(Code 1952, § 9322; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-39. - Service road width. 
When the front of any lot borders upon a freeway, the subdivider shall dedicate a service road for ingress to and egress from said lot. Service roads shall have a width of not less than forty feet (40'). 
(Code 1952, § 9322.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-40. - Turn-arounds on dead-end streets; width. 
Whenever a turn-around shall be required on a dead-end street, such turn-around shall have a minimum radii for forty-five feet (45'). 
(Code 1952, § 9322.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-41. - Alleys; width. 
Alleys shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width. 
(Code 1952, § 9322.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-42. - Boundary line street; width. 
Any land adjacent to a boundary line of a subdivision and not a part of a proposed full width street but intended to be a part of the ultimate width of a highway or street, or any reservation therefor, shall have a width not less than one-half (½) of the full width required for such street by the provisions of this chapter unless special conditions of alignment require a greater or lesser width. 
(Code 1952, § 9322.4; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-43. - Dead-end streets. 
Whenever necessary to give access to a portion of the proposed subdivision or to permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, streets may extend to the boundary of the subdivision and the resulting dead-end streets may be approved without turn-around; provided however, the length of such street shall be governed by the provisions of this article pertaining to block length. 
(Code 1952, § 9322.5; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-44. - Private streets. 
Whenever such intent does not contradict the provision of this chapter as it relates to the master plan for streets and highways of the city or the protection of opportunities for reasonable development of surrounding land adjacent to the proposed subdivision, a street which is intended to be kept continuously closed to public travel or at all times posted as a private street may be shown as a private street, and then only on conditions which guarantee reasonable maintenance thereof. In any such instance, the final map shall contain a continuing offer of dedication of such private street, available for acceptance by the city engineer at such time as the street shall have ceased to remain so physically closed or posted or shall have been opened to public travel for a period of one year or more. Such private streets shall comply in all respects to requirements as set forth in this chapter, and a plan and profile of such street as required by this chapter must accompany the final map. The side lines of private streets shall be shown in broken lines and the area of said private streets shall be shown as a part of the lots adjacent to said private streets. 
(Code 1952, § 9323; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 7, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-45. - Posting of private streets. 
All private streets within the city must be posted at all times as private streets. 
(Code 1952, § 9323.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-46. - Provisions for alleys when indicated on master plan. 
Alleys shall be required where so indicated on any adopted element of the master plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-36, 5-5-54; Ord. No. NS-554, § 1, 12-18-61)  
Sec. 34-47. - Provisions for alleys on lots on primary streets. 
Alleys shall be required in the rear of lots fronting directly upon any street designated as a primary street on the streets and highways map of the streets and highways element of the master plan. 
(Code 1952, § 9324.1; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-554, § 1, 12-18-61)  
Sec. 34-48. - Access to alleys. 
An alley required by this chapter shall be, upon its improvement, immediately accessible from a public street or a private street constructed to city standard. 
(Code 1952, § 9324.2; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-554, § 1, 12-18-61)  
Sec. 34-49. - Exception to alley provisions. 
The city engineer may waive any alley requirements provided for in sections 34-46 through 34-48, if, in the opinion of the city engineer, said requirement is impractical and unreasonable due to such factors as the existing development adjacent to the property being subdivided, flood control channels or ditches, railroad tracks, or topographic conditions such as abrupt changes in the elevation, any one of which precludes the logical and practical extension of such required alley. If the owner proposes that a required alley be waived, said proposal shall be in writing and submitted at the time the preliminary map or tentative tract map is submitted to the planning department for processing and shall stipulate therein the reasons said alley requirement should not be imposed. The planning director shall, in his formal letter to the city engineer, recommend adherence to or the waiving of such required alley. 
(Code 1952, § 9324.3; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-554, § 1, 12-18-61; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 8, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-50. - Reserved strips. 
Reserved strips controlling the access to streets or other public rights-of-way from adjoining property will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights and in each instance the control and disposal of the land comprising such strips must be placed definitely within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1952, § 9325; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-51. - Easements; identification. 
The sidelines of all easements shall be shown by fine, dotted lines. If any easement already of record cannot be definitely located, a statement of the existence, the nature thereof, and its recorded reference must appear on the title sheet. Distances and bearings on the sidelines of lots which are cut by an easement must be arrowed or so shown that the map will indicate clearly, the actual length of the lot lines. The width of all easements and sufficient ties thereto definitely to locate the same with respect to the subdivision must be shown. All easements must be clearly labeled and identified; if an easement shown on the map is already of record, its recorded reference must be given. If an easement is being dedicated, it shall be set out in the owner's certificate of dedication. All notes and figures pertaining to easements shall be considerably smaller and lighter than those relating to the subdivision itself. 
(Code 1952, § 9326.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-52. - Block lengths—Generally. 
Blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred feet (1,300') in length between street lines, except where topographical condition or division of land into acre parcels or larger justify or require a variation from the requirement. 
(Code 1952, § 9327; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-53. - Same—Acre or large lot subdivision; shape; division. 
Where a parcel is first subdivided into small farms or acre tracts, the block shall be of such size and shape and be so divided as to provide for the opening of primary and secondary streets, and for the extension and opening of streets and alleys at such intervals as will permit a subsequent division of any parcel into lots of normal size. 
(Code 1952, § 9327.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-54. - Same—Dead-end streets. 
A dead-end street on which future extension is not intended or possible, shall not be longer than five hundred feet (500') from the nearest intersecting street line and in no instance shall serve more than twenty (20) present or potential building sites fronting on the dead-end street. 
(Code 1952, § 9327.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-55. - Block width. 
The width of each block shall be sufficient for an ultimate layout of two (2) tiers of lots therein of a size required by the provisions of this chapter unless the arrangement of an immediately adjacent approved subdivision, lines of ownership, or topographical conditions make necessary a variation from this requirement. 
(Code 1952, § 9327.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-56. - Lot frontage. 
Every lot must have frontage on a public or private street. 
(Code 1952, § 9328; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2111, § 55, adopted Apr. 1, 1991, repealed § 34-57, which pertained to districting for minimum lot sizes and derived from § 9328.1 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954; Ord. No. NS-1124, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 1972; and Ord. No. NS-1828, § 1, adopted Mar. 3, 1986.  
Sec. 34-58. - Planned single-family developments. 
In order to make possible greater flexibility in the design and arrangement of single-family lots within single-family subdivisions; to provide a potentially more desirable living environment than may be possible through the application of the traditional zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations requirements; to allow developers to use a more creative approach in the development of single-family neighborhoods; to encourage a potentially more desirable and efficient use of open land; and to encourage variety in the physical development pattern of the city, certain exceptions to this chapter may be approved in conjunction with the development of land within the framework of the planned development suffix provided for in chapter 41. 
In the event a conditional use permit is approved as provided in section 41-355 for a planned single-family development, the following exceptions to this chapter may be approved: 
(1)  An exception to the requirement that each residential lot have frontage on a public or private street, provided pedestrian ingress and egress is assured for each residential lot and vehicular ingress and egress is assured for each vehicular parking space, both by the appropriate agency of the city. 
(2)  An exception to the minimum lot width. 
(3)  Where more than half the lots in a development do not have frontage on a public or private street, an exception to the minimum six thousand (6,000) square foot lot area, provided there is sufficient area in common greens and recreational open spaces, held in undivided interest by the fee titleholders of the residential units and lots, equivalent to the difference between the size of the lot and six thousand (6,000) square feet, for each residential lot within the planned single-family development tract. 
(4)  Where more than half the lots in a development have frontage on a public or private street, an exception to the minimum six thousand (6,000) square foot lot area, provided that at least one-fourth (¼) of the difference in area is substituted as provided for in (3) and the equivalent of the remaining difference is available in publicly owned, freely accessible green and recreational open spaces located no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of a mile from each lot in the development. 
(5)  An exception to the minimum street total right-of-way width prescribed in section 34-38, provided that in no case shall the total right-of-way width be less than forty-six (46) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9328.2; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-745, § 2, 8-3-64; Ord. No. NS-893, § 1, 8-21-67)  
Sec. 34-59. - Newly annexed areas. 
All land hereafter annexed to the city shall become a part of the most restricted minimum lot area district in the city until otherwise zoned or classified by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9328.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-60. - Divided lots. 
No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line, nor any boundary line between registered (Torrens Title) and unregistered land, nor any boundary line between parcels of registered land under separate ownership. Each such boundary line shall be made a lot line. 
(Code 1952, § 9328.4; Ord. No. NS-36 § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-61. - Double frontage lots. 
Double frontage lots having a depth of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet will not be approved except where topographical conditions permit no other reasonable form of platting. Where land abuts a primary or secondary street, double frontage lots may be permitted when the planning director and the city engineer deem it to be reasonable due to such controlling factors as traffic, safety, appearance and setback. 
(Code 1952, § 9328.5; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-62. - Lot lines. 
The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the street which the lot faces, or radial or approximately radial if the street is curved. 
(Code 1952, § 9328.6; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-63. - Intersection angle and block cutoff. 
Any street intersecting any other street shall intersect at an angle as near a right angle as is practicable. In no instance may the angle be less than forty-five (45) degrees. At each intersection of two (2) arterial streets there shall be a street dedication of a twenty-five-foot by twenty-five-foot triangular cutoff at each corner. At all other street intersections there shall be a street dedication of a seventeen-foot by seventeen-foot triangular cutoff at each corner. At intersections of alleys with streets there shall be a street dedication of a ten-foot by ten-foot triangular cutoff at each corner. Streets intersecting at an angle other than ninety (90) degrees shall have sufficient radii or cutoffs to provide the same results as to traffic movement, visibility and design as provided by the foregoing requirements of this section. 
(Code 1952, § 9329; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-2187, § 2, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 34-64. - Center line curve radius. 
The center line curve radii on all streets shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to approval by the city engineer; provided, however, in no instance shall the radius on any street be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9329.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-65. - Street grades. 
No street shall have a grade of more than six (6) percent, or less than fifteen hundredths of one (0.15) percent unless, because of topographical conditions or other exceptional circumstances the city engineer determines that a grade in excess or less than the above requirements is necessary. Such recommendation by the city engineer must be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 9329.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-66. - Street names. 
In the case of any subdivision in which the dedication and/or improvement of a new street or extension of a street (but excluding widenings of existing streets) is proposed or required, the proposed name of such street, as designated on the tentative map or otherwise, shall be submitted for approval pursuant to sections 33-5 through 33-8 of this Code. The name of the street as designated on the parcel map or final map shall conform to the name approved pursuant to said sections, notwithstanding any other designation on a previously approved tentative map. 
(Code 1952, § 9329.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-1683, § 5, 6-20-83)  
Sec. 34-67. - Conformity with zoning and building laws. 
No map shall be approved for any subdivision which, if subdivided, developed, or used in the manner proposed, would result in a violation of Chapter 8 or Chapter 41 of this Code; provided, however, a tentative map may be approved subject to conditions that the subdivider obtain permits, variances, or waivers, or modify the proposed subdivision, as necessary to obtain conformity with the requirements of said chapters. 
(Ord. No. NS-1496, § 3, 10-1-79)  
Sec. 34-68. - Planned development units. 
No unit of separate or common ownership within a planned development, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, shall be deemed to be a separate lot or parcel for purposes of the design regulations of this article or Chapter 41 of this Code. The entire planned development shall be deemed a single lot or parcel for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1496, § 4, 10-1-79)  
Secs. 34-69—34-77. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-78. - Dedication. 
All streets, ways, alleys, walkways, improvements, and parcels of land shown on the final map or appurtenant thereto and intended for any public use shall be offered for dedication for public use. 
(Code 1952, § 9330; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-79. - Installation standards for improvements. 
All improvements required in section 34-81 herein shall be installed to permanent line and grade and as to location to the satisfaction of the city engineer, in accordance with procedures and standards established by pertinent chapters of this Code of Ordinances and the design standards and specifications adopted by the city council pertaining thereto, on file in the office of the clerk of the council, the planning director and the city engineer. 
(Code 1952, § 9331; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-80. - Cost of improvements. 
The cost of all improvements enumerated as required in section 34-81 herein shall be borne by the subdivider, except as to such improvements of a type, size or quality over and above the standards required to service the subdivision and where the city council has enacted, in sections of this Code of Ordinances or appurtenant rules and regulations thereto, provisions for the city to bear that portion of the costs for such installations required in order to serve additional areas. 
(Code 1952, § 9332; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-81. - List of minimum improvements. 
The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final subdivision map by the city engineer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Grading and surfacing of streets, highways, ways, and alleys; 
(2)  Combination concrete curbs and gutters and crossgutters; 
(3)  Sidewalks, except where the construction of sidewalks would not be advantageous due to the lack of sidewalks, on contiguous improved streets the city engineer may, at its option, omit this requirement 
(4)  Installations for drainage of the subdivision lots, streets, ways, highways, and alleys including the provisions of storm drains, culverts, bridges, and appurtenant structures where required by the city engineer; 
(5)  Distribution and service lines for domestic water supply to each lot and connections to the city's water distribution system; 
(6)  Sewer lines connected to the main collecting sewer lines of the city and stub-offs from the secondary collection lines to a point one (1) foot outside the public right-of-way at each potential building site; 
(7)  Fire hydrants at locations designated by the city engineer; 
(8)  Monuments; 
(9)  Two (2) street name signs at each intersection; 
(10)  Street trees; 
(11)  Signing and striping; 
(12)  Marbelite street lights with underground service at locations designated by the city engineer; 
(13)  Other installations of public utilities; 
(14)  A six-foot (6) high chainlink fence entirely along any lot line abutting a river, creek, open storm drain or similar water channel or its appurtenant works, except that at the subdividers option he may substitute a fence of equal or greater quality and security as approved by the city engineer; 
(15)  Remove the trees, brush, structures or other obstructions or debris lying within an easement or right-of-way, for drainage, streets or other public use. 
(Code 1952, § 9333; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54, Ord. No. NS-337, § 1, 8-4-58; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 9, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-82. - Underground utilities—Required. 
Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground within any new, revised, or reactivated residential subdivision. The subdivider is responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the involved utility companies for the installation of such facilities. For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground outside the street right-of-way. A utility line, the main purpose of which is not within the original boundaries of the subdivision, and those utility lines which were in service in the area covered by the tentative map prior to the filing of the tentative map, may be placed aboveground. 
(Code 1952, § 9334; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-864, § 1, 1-16-67) 
Cross reference— Zoning requirements re underground utility installation, § 41-626; underground utility districts, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 34-83. - Same—To be installed prior to street improvement. 
Underground utility lines which cross underneath the right-of-way of any street, alley, or way shall be installed prior to the improvement of any such street, alley, or way in the subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9335; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-864, § 1, 1-16-67)  
Sec. 34-84. - Same—Waiver may be granted. 
The requirements of section 34-82 or section 34-83 may be waived by the granting of a minor exception for such purpose pursuant to Article V of Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 9336; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-864, § 1, 1-16-67; Ord. No. NS-1955, § 2, 4-18-88)  
Sec. 34-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 34-85, which pertained to application for waiver from the requirements of § 34-82 or § 34-83 and derived from the 1952 Code, § 9337, Ord. No. NS-36, adopted May 3, 1954, and Ord. No. NS-864, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1967, was repealed by § 3 of Ord. No. NS-1955, adopted Apr. 18, 1988.  
Sec. 34-86. - Temporary aboveground installation of utility lines. 
Aboveground installation of utilities may be permitted on a temporary basis when such utilities are reasonably required during construction; provided, however, such utilities shall be removed or placed underground prior to the final exoneration of required subdivision bonds. 
(Code 1952, § 9338; Ord. No. NS-36, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-864, § 1, 1-16-67)  
Secs. 34-87—34-89. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-90. - Release and reduction of security. 
Whenever a subdivider has furnished security for the performance of any act or agreement required or entered into in connection with the approval of a subdivision map, including security for labor and materials, the executive director of the public works agency or his designated representative may release or reduce such security on behalf of the city in accordance with Section 66499.7 of the Government Code of the State of California. Upon the release or reduction of security pursuant to this section, the executive director of public works or his designated representative shall send written notification of such action to the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2168, § 2, 7-20-92)  
Secs. 34-91—34-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARCEL MAP[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971, amended Ch. 34 of this Code by repealing former Art. IV, §§ 34-98—34-118, relative to small subdivisions, derived from Code 1952, § 9340.1, 9341—9348 and Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954, and enacting in lieu thereof a new Art. IV, §§ 34-98—34-118, as herein set out. 
 
Secs. 34-98, 34-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1390, § 11, enacted Nov. 21, 1977, repealed §§ 34-98, 34-99, 34-101—34-104, and 34-107—34-109. Said sections specified areas excluded and included under Art. IV, and pertained to the preliminary parcel map, additional information to be furnished, assurance of improvement completion, penalties and appeal, and were derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971, and Ord. No. NS-1253, § 4, adopted March 10, 1975.  
Sec. 34-100. - Other provisions to apply. 
Subdivisions requiring a parcel map or parcel map waiver are subject to the same design regulations and requirements for dedications and improvements as subdivisions requiring a final map, provided that completion of required improvements in any division of land which is not a subdivision of five (5) or more lots shall be governed by section 64411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 4, 11-21-77)  
Secs. 34-101—34-104. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 34-98.  
Sec. 34-105. - Parcel map. 
Parcel maps shall be processed and approved by the city engineer in the same manner as final maps. No parcel map shall be approved if it fails to conform to a previously approved and unexpired tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1253, § 3, 3-10-75; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 5, 11-21-77; Ord. No. NS-1698, § 1,10-10-83; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 10, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-106. - Parcel map waiver procedure. 
(a)  The director of planning shall waive the requirement that a parcel map be filed and approved for any particular proposed subdivision as to which a parcel map would otherwise be required, provided he finds that: 
(1)  Any and all required dedications and improvements have been completed; 
(2)  The design of the proposed subdivision is in conformity with an approved and unexpired tentative map; and 
(3)  The proposed subdivision complies with all such other requirements as may have been established pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the ordinances of the City of Santa Ana, including requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection. 
(b)  A subdivider may apply for waiver of the parcel map requirement by submitting a written request for such waiver to the director of planning, together with legal descriptions of the parcel to be subdivided and each parcel proposed to result from the subdivision and together with such application fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of such application, the director of planning shall, together with the city engineer, review the proposed subdivision for compliance with subsection (a) hereinabove. 
(c)  In the event that the director of planning determines that the proposed subdivision does not comply with subsection (a), he shall notify the subdivider in writing of the reasons for such determination. If the subdivider, within sixty (60) days thereafter, demonstrates that he has taken such action as is necessary to bring the proposed subdivision into compliance with subsection (a) above, the director of planning shall issue the waiver without requiring the subdivider to make new application therefor. 
(d)  In the event that the director of planning determines the proposed subdivision to be in compliance with subsection (a), he shall execute a written waiver of the parcel map requirement and transmit it to the subdivider, identifying the proposed subdivision both by the legal descriptions as submitted by the subdivider and by reference to the approved tentative map, and stating that he finds that the proposed subdivision complies with all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and the ordinances of the City of Santa Ana and that the requirement of a parcel map is therefore waived. 
(e)  The director of planning shall maintain on file in his office a copy of each waiver issued pursuant to this section, together with the tentative map upon which such waiver is based. 
(Ord. No. NS-1390, § 6, 11-21-77) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1390, § 6, amended § 34-106 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment said § 31-106 was derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971, and provided that property covered by the provisions of Art. V could not be conveyed prior to the filing of a parcel map.  
Secs. 34-107—34-109. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note at § 34-98.  
Secs. 34-110—34-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TENTATIVE MAP[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1073 adopted March 15, 1971 amended Ch. 34 of this Code by repealing Art. V, §§ 34-119—34-144, derived from Code 1952, §§ 9350—9357 and Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954, and enacting in lieu thereof a new Art. V, §§ 34-119—34-144, as herein set out pertaining to the same subject matter. 
 
Sec. 34-119. - Filing map and data. 
A tentative map is required for every subdivision for which a parcel map, parcel map waiver, or final map is required. The subdivider shall file with the planning director white copies of the tentative map, which copies shall be accompanied by an owner's statement and accompanying data as required and made in accordance with the provisions of this article. The time of filing of a tentative map shall be construed to be the time at which the same, together with required data, is received by the planning director. The planning director shall indicate the date of filing upon all copies of the tentative map and accompanying data and thereafter shall transmit one copy of the map to each of the following: 
(1)  The city engineer; 
(2)  Each governmental agency entitled to review the tentative map pursuant to Chapter 3, Article 3 of the Subdivision Map Act; 
(3)  Any city officer, governmental agency, or public utility company which the planning director determines may provide information or recommendations helpful in review of the map. 
One copy of the accompanying data, if any, shall be forwarded to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 7, 11-21-77)  
Sec. 34-120. - Preparation by qualified person; compliance with law. 
The subdivider shall cause the tentative map of land proposed to be subdivided to be prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor and such tentative map shall be in full compliance with this article and the Subdivision Map Act, except that a tentative map for a subdivision for which a parcel map or parcel map waiver is required need not comply with sections 34-121 and 34-122, provided, however, such a tentative map shall show the location and dimensions of the proposed lots, and the planning director may require the subdivider to furnish any of the additional information or data described in section 34-122 whenever he shall determine that such information or data is necessary to insure the safe and reasonable development of the neighborhood in conformance with the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 8, 11-21-77)  
Sec. 34-121. - Form of map. 
The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The minimum dimensions of the map shall be eighteen inches (18?) by twenty-six inches (26?). The scale of the map shall be large enough to show clearly all details thereof, and in no instance shall it be smaller than one inch (1?) equals one hundred feet (100'). 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-122. - Data to be shown. 
The tentative map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The tract name; 
(2)  The tract number as secured from the county surveyor; 
(3)  Sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed subdivision; 
(4)  The name and address of record owners; 
(5)  The name and address of the subdivider; 
(6)  The name, business address and registered engineer's number or licensed land surveyor's number of the person preparing the map; 
(7)  The approximate acreage of the subdivision; 
(8)  The locations, names and existing widths of adjacent streets, alleys and ways and their approximate grades; 
(9)  The locations, names and widths of all existing or proposed streets, alleys and ways in the subdivision and their approximate grades; 
(10)  The center lines of existing streets whenever such have been officially designated by the city engineer or county officials; 
(11)  The approximate widths and locations of all existing or proposed easements for drainage, sewage and public utilities; 
(12)  Approximate radius of each curve; 
(13)  Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot; 
(14)  The size of the smallest lot in the tract; 
(15)  Approximate dimensions of reservations; 
(16)  Location of required or proposed setback lines; 
(17)  The location, width and directional flow of all watercourses and the approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow; 
(18)  Plan and easements for drainage and for handling storm water; 
(19)  Existing use or uses of the property and, to scale, the outline of any existing structures and their locations in relation to proposed street and lot lines. 
(20)  Statement of the present use zone and the proposed use or uses of the property; 
(21)  Location of the nearest source of water supply from the city's water distribution system; 
(22)  Provision for sewerage and the location of the nearest usable city sewer main; 
(23)  Lands and parks to be dedicated for public use, if any; 
(24)  Contours at five foot (5') intervals if slope greater than ten (10) perent; 
(25)  Contours at two foot (2') intervals if slope less than ten (10) percent; 
(26)  Statement of the improvements and public utilities proposed to be made or installed; plus tabulation showing the total lineal feet and sizes of sewer main; number of sewer laterals; lineal feet and sizes of water mains; number of water services; lineal feet of curb and gutter; lineal feet of sidewalk, exclusive of landings; number of curb returns; and square feet of pavement; 
(27)  Approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-way or easements; 
(28)  Tract numbers of adjoining subdivisions; 
(29)  Existing use of property immediately surrounding the subdivision; 
(30)  In a subdivision which may reasonably be expected to be resubdivided in whole or in part at some future time, there shall be shown in dotted lines on tentative map, a plan of future street extensions with special consideration given to drainage; 
(31)  Type and locations of street lights to be installed; 
(32)  Date, north arrow and scale. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-123. - Owner's statement. 
Such of the information required in section 34-122 as may not practicably be shown on the map shall be contained in owner's written statement accompanying the same. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-124. - Index map. 
When the area to be subdivided is not shown on one sheet of the required size, the planning director may require the submission of a map showing the entire area and indicating street and lot lines only. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-125. - Assistance from planning director. 
The planning director shall advise with the subdivider and supply whatever information is available which can be of assistance in the development of an efficient and beneficial residential, commercial or industrial area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-126. - Approval of tentative parcel maps by the zoning administrator. 
(a)  Within a period of not more than fourteen (14) days from the receipt of a copy of any tentative parcel map, each city officer or department to which such copy shall have been transmitted shall file with the zoning administrator his or its approval or disapproval of such tentative parcel map or a report showing what changes are necessary or desirable to make such tentative parcel map conform to the requirements of this chapter coming within the jurisdiction of such officer or department. Failure to file the report shall indicate approval of the map by such officer or department. 
(b)  At a duly noticed public hearing, the zoning administrator shall review the recommendations of said departments and officers and, if satisfied that the design of the subdivision conforms to the requirements of this chapter, shall approve the map within thirty (30) days after the filing of such map, unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the zoning administrator finds that the map does not conform, or if substantive objections or recommendations for changes have been made in the reports from city officers or departments, the zoning administrator shall disapprove or conditionally approve the map. The zoning administrator shall thereupon notify the subdivider of his or her decision in writing. 
(c)  If no appeal to the planning commission is filed by the subdivider as provided for in section 34-129, the zoning administrator shall, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the tentative parcel map by the subdivider, transmit a copy of the map, the accompanying data, reports and recommendations made by the city officials and a written statement of his or her decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2482, § 11, 12-3-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2482, § 11, adopted December 3, 2001, amended § 34-126 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 34-126 pertained to consideration of tentative map and derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-127. - Approval of other tentative maps by planning commission. 
(a)  Within a period of not more than fourteen (14) days from the receipt of a copy of any tentative map, except a tentative parcel map, each city officer or department to which such copy shall have been transmitted shall file with the planning commission his or its approval or disapproval of such tentative map or a report showing what changes are necessary or desirable to make such tentative map conform to the requirements of this chapter coming within the jurisdiction of such officer or department. Failure to file the report shall indicate approval of the map by such officer or department. 
(b)  At a duly noticed public hearing, the planning commission shall review the recommendations of said departments and officers and, if satisfied that the design of the subdivision conforms to the requirements of this chapter, shall approve the map within thirty (30) days after the filing of such map, unless such time is extended by agreement with the subdivider. If the planning commission finds that the map does not conform, or if substantive objections or recommendations for changes have been made in the reports from city officers or departments, the planning commission shall disapprove or conditionally approve the map. The planning commission shall thereupon notify the subdivider of its decision in writing. 
(c)  The planning commission shall, within thirty (30) days of the filing of the tentative map by the subdivider, transmit a copy of the map, the accompanying data, reports and recommendations made by the city officials and a written statement of its decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2482, § 12, 12-3-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2482, § 12, adopted December 3, 2001, amended § 34-127 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 34-127 pertained to action on map by planning director and derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2482, § 13, adopted December 3, 2001, repealed § 34-128, which pertained to transmittal to city council and derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-129. - Appeal to planning commission. 
If a subdivider is dissatisfied with the decision made by the zoning administrator under this article, he may, within ten (10) days after such notification, file a written notice of appeal to be heard by the planning commission of the city. Such written notice of appeal shall contain a specific statement of the point or points of disagreement between the subdivider and the zoning administrator and shall set out specifically the points of approval or removal of conditions established by the zoning administrator, desired by the subdivider, and the reasons and justifications therefor. Such written request for hearing must contain a statement by the subdivider of willingness to extend the time of approval of the map for a period of an additional thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 14, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-130. - Hearing of appeal by the planning commission. 
Such appeal from the zoning administrator as provided in section 34-129 shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission for its next regular meeting, at which time the planning commission shall declare that a public hearing on the matter will be held at its next subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. The intervening time may be used by the planning commission for further investigation of the matters in question. 
(Ord. No. 1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 15, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-131. - Decision of appeal by planning commission. 
(a)  At the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting set for hearing of the appeal as provided in section 34-129, the commission shall consider the request for reconsideration made by the subdivider and shall seek such additional testimony or advice as they may feel desirable to assist in reaching a decision. The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove of the decisions rendered by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Immediately following the rendering of a decision by the planning commission on the hearing of appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator, a copy of the map, accompanying data, reports and recommendations made by city officials and a copy of the decisions made by the zoning administrator and planning commission shall be transmitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 16, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-132. - Appeal to city council. 
(a)  The subdivider may appeal the decision of the planning commission made pursuant to section 34-127 or 34-131 to the City Council within ten (10) days after receiving notification of such decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. Such written notice of appeal shall contain a specific statement of the point or points of disagreement between the subdivider and planning commission and shall set out specifically the points of disagreement or removal of conditions established by the planning commission, and the reasons and justifications therefor. Such written request for hearing must contain a statement by the subdivider of willingness to extend the time of approval of the map for a period of an additional thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for its next regular meeting, at which time the city council shall declare that a public hearing on the matter will be held at its next subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. The intervening time may be used by the city council for further investigation of the matters in question. 
(c)  At the regularly scheduled city council meeting set for public hearing of the appeal, the city council shall consider the appeal made by the subdivider de novo and shall seek such additional testimony or advice as they may feel desirable to assist in reaching a decision. The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the public hearing, and make written findings supporting its decision as may required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. NS-2482, § 17, 12-3-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2482, § 17, adopted December 3, 2001, amended § 34-132 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 34-132 pertained to record of decision to city council and derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2482, § 18, adopted December 3, 2001, repealed § 34-133 in its entirety, which pertained to action by city council and derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-134. - Extension of expiration date. 
Any application for an extension of the expiration date of a tentative map shall be filed with the director of planning and development services on such forms as may be provided by him for such purposes. The director may grant or deny such extension, the director may require compliance with additional conditions or requirements to the same extent as if a new tentative map had been filed, provided, however, in such event the extension shall be submitted to the city council and the additional conditions or requirements shall be subject to appeal by the subdivider in the same manner as a tentative map under sections 34-128 through 34-132 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1698, § 2, 10-10-83; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 19, 12-3-01)  
Secs. 34-135—34-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FORM AND CONTENT OF FINAL MAP 
 
Sec. 34-145. - Conformance to requirements. 
The final map shall be in strict conformance to all the requirements of this article and in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map of the subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9360; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-146. - Size, material and scale. 
The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof India ink upon good tracing cloth, but affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. Signatures shall be in opaque black ink. The size of each sheet of said map shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches (18? × 26?). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1?). The scale of the map shall be large enough, (not smaller than one inch (1?) equals one hundred feet (100') ), to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and the relation of each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed, that good, legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. 
(Code 1952, § 9361; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-147. - Index sheet. 
If more than three (3) sheets are used, an index showing the entire subdivision of lots numbered consecutively shall be included. 
(Code 1952, § 9361.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-148. - Title of map. 
The title of each such final map shall consist of a name or a tract number as secured from the county surveyor, conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet, followed by the words "consisting of _____ sheets" (showing the number thereof), followed by the words "in the City of Santa Ana" or "partly in the City of Santa Ana and partly in unincorporated territory" or "partly in the City of Santa Ana and partly in the City of _______" (naming the city) as the case may be. 
(Code 1952, § 9362; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-149. - Description of property. 
Below the title shall appear a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property being subdivided, by reference to such maps of the property shown thereon as shall have been previously recorded or filed in the county recorder's office or shall have been previously filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or shall have been previously filed in the office of the county recorder under authority of section 11655 of the Business and Professions Code, or by reference to the plat of any United States survey. Each reference in such description, to any tract or subdivision, shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original record thereof and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of said county. The description shall also include reference to any vacated area with the number of the ordinance of vacation thereof. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-150. - Map for reversion to acreage. 
A map filed for the purpose of showing as acreage land previously subdivided into parcels or lots or blocks, shall be conspicuously so designated under the title by the words "reversion to acreage of _______" (inserting a legal description as required in section 34-149). 
(Code 1952, § 9362.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-151. - Delineating boundaries. 
The boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated by a border of Prussian blue water color or blue India ink approximately one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch wide applied on the reverse side of the tracing and outside such boundary line. Such water color shall be of such density as to be transferred to a white print of said map and not obliterate any line, figure or other data appearing thereon. All lines shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision itself, shall be clearly distinguishable from those lines which are a part of the subdivision, and any area enclosed by such lines shall be labeled, "not a part of this subdivision." City boundaries which cross or adjoin the subdivision shall be clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block lines. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-152. - Basic survey data. 
Upon such title sheet, below the subtitle, the name of the surveyor, together with the date of the survey and the scale of the map, shall be set forth. There shall also be shown on the map proper the basis of bearings, making reference to some recorded subdivision map, county surveyor's map or other record acceptable to said county surveyor, or to a solar or polaris observation, said basis of bearings not to be in close proximity to the north arrow. Every sheet of the map proper shall bear the title (but not subtitle), scale, north arrow, sheet number and the number of each adjoining sheet in its proper location. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.4; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-153. - Certificates required. 
The following certificates and acknowledgments must appear on the title sheet of a final map: 
(1)  Owner's certificate and acknowledgment and offer of dedication, if any; 
(2)  Certification of approval by the city engineer and acceptance of offer of dedication; 
(3)  Certificate of engineer with his registered and engineer's number or of surveyor with his licensed land surveyor's number. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.5; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 20, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-154. - Procurement of certificates. 
Forms for certificates required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter may be secured from the county surveyor and the city engineer. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.6; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-155. - Other forms required. 
Said title sheet mentioned in section 34-153 shall also contain such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, and notarial seals as are required by law and by this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9362.7; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-156. - Established center lines. 
Whenever the city engineer or county surveyor has established the center line of a street, alley or easement, that data shall be considered in making the surveys and preparing the final map, and all monuments found shall be indicated and proper references made to field books and maps of public record relating thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 9363; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-157. - Existing monuments. 
Said final map shall show fully and clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence to determine the boundaries of the subdivision were found on the ground; and each adjacent corner of each adjoining subdivision or portion thereof, by lot and block numbers, tract name and place of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation, shall be shown and identified on the map. 
(Code 1952, § 9364; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-158. - New monuments. 
In making the survey for the subdivision, the surveyor shall set the new monuments required herein; and he shall show on the map, the location, size and depth of all new monuments placed, and if any points were reset by ties, that fact shall be stated. Requirements for monuments are as follows: 
(1)  Permanent iron pipe monuments of a type approved by the city engineer shall be set at each boundary corner of the subdivision, at the beginning and end of property line curves, at all block corners and at any other points as may be required by the city engineer. 
(2)  After all street improvements have been completed, the center lines of all shall be accurately reestablished according to the bearings and distances shown on the plans. 
The intersections of all street center lines shall be marked with a P. K. nail. P. K. nails shall also mark the beginning and end of all curves. Where the point of intersection of the semitangents to a curve falls in pavement, this point also shall be marked with a P. K. nail. Should the P. I. fall on sidewalk or curb, the point shall be marked with a cross chiselled in the concrete. Should the P. I. face on natural ground in an available spot, it shall be marked by an iron pipe with the engineer's registration tab attached. The top of the pipe shall be one foot (1) below the surface of the ground. 
Should any center line point herein required to be marked, fall upon a manhole or other surface obstruction, four (4) straddle points shall be set, using P. K. nails, twenty-four inches (24) each direction from the true point, so that lines drawn across two (2) opposite points will be at approximately right angles to each other. 
(3)  Any monument or bench mark, as required by this chapter, that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements shall be replaced by the subdivider. 
(4)  Monuments and bench marks shall be set before submission of the final map for the city engineer's approval unless exception is recommended by the city engineer. 
(Code 1952, § 9365; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 21, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-159. - Survey and map data—General. 
The final map shall show all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii and arc lengths for all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate, all lots; all streets, alleys, easements or other parcels offered for dedication for any purpose and any private streets with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or easements shall be designated by number. All streets shall be designated by name, and private streets shall have inserted within the limits thereof, the words "not a public street." Sufficient linear, angular and curve data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of the subdivision, and of the boundary lines of every block, lot and parcel which is a part thereof. All lots and, wherever practicable, blocks in their entirety shall be shown on one sheet. Arc lengths, radii, and total delta or radial bearings of each curve shall be shown. Where lot corners are rounded at street intersections, the tangents shall be shown. Dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot. 
(Code 1952, § 9366; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-160. - Same—Survey data for lots. 
Dimensions of lots shall be the net dimensions. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show net acreage to nearest hundredth ( 1/100 ). 
(Code 1952, § 9366.1; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-161. - Same—Record of easements. 
The final map shall show the center line data; width and side lines of the lots which are cut by an easement shall be so shown as to indicate clearly the actual lengths of the lot lines. The width of the easements and the lengths and the bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties to locate the casement definitely with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. The easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and if already of record proper reference to the records given. If the easement is not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet. Utility easements shall not be dedicated to the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9366.2; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-162. - Same—Delineation of surface water levels. 
The final map shall show the line of high water in case the subdivision is adjacent to a natural stream, channel or any body of water and shall also show all areas, if any, subject to periodic inundation by water. 
(Code 1952, § 9366.3; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-163. - Filing of traverse. 
A complete traverse, showing closure errors, if any, on the boundaries of the tract and all blocks and lots therein, shall be submitted to the city engineer. Remington-Rand machine traverse or equivalent is recommended. Such traverse shall close within a limit of error of one foot (1') in ten thousand feet (10,000'). 
(Code 1952, § 9367; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-164. - Lot numbering. 
The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the numeral "1", with no omissions or duplications; provided, that where the subdivision is a continuation of or an addition to an existing subdivision, the lot numbers may commence with the number immediately following the last or highest number of such existing subdivision. 
(Code 1952, § 9368; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, 5-3-54)  
Sec. 34-165. - Private street standards for planned residential development. 
(1)  Private streets will be allowed in new developments where their use is logically consistent with a desire for neighborhood identification and control of access, and where special overall design concepts may be involved. The use of private streets will be subject to review and approval by the planning commission and the city council. 
(2)  Private streets shall be identified as "private vehicle access ways" rather than bear a street connotation and should be known as "commons." 
(3)  Private streets will be permitted only where a satisfactory means of providing for their maintenance and operation is demonstrated. 
(4)  The homeowners' association shall be required to contract with the city whereby the city can maintain the access way, and collect the cost thereof in the event the association does not maintain them adequately. 
(5)  The homeowners' association constitution, by-laws or covenants-conditions-restrictions shall include acknowledgment of the ownership and maintenance responsibility of these private facilities. 
(6)  The use of private streets as a device for permitting inadequate design will not be allowed. 
(7)  The entire width of the access way should be dedicated to the city as a public utilities easement. 
(8)  The use of private streets is limited to cul-de-sacs and to minor local streets not carrying through traffic. Curvilinear or loop street configurations are encouraged. 
(9)  The design of all private streets shall be in accordance with city standards and shall be reviewed by and subject to the approval of the city engineer and the construction shall be inspected by the public works department, with a standard inspection fee to be paid. 
(10)  The following design standards shall be used. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Where streets other than minor local streets (alley or driveway type) are proposed to be private, the design shall conform in all respects to the requirements established for public streets, except as may be otherwise permitted under number two below. 
(2)  Where special circumstances exist, deviations from the standards will be subject to approval by the city engineer individual review. 
(3)  Streets shall be designed to provide for adequate lane delineation, street sweeping and drainage control. Normally a standard crown section with concrete curb and gutter on both sides will be required; however, other means of providing similar functional characteristics may be considered. 
(4)  Depressed approaches shall be used at all driveways where streets have curb and gutter. 
(5)  Concrete sidewalks shall be provided reasonably adjacent to the roadway unless other means of accommodating pedestrian traffic are provided in the development. 
(6)  Lighting adequate for pedestrian and vehicle safety and sufficient to minimize police problems shall be provided. The level of illumination for pedestrian and vehicular safety shall be as approved by the public works department. All lighting power costs shall be borne by the homeowners' association. 
(7)  All area and street lighting shall have underground service. 
(8)  Adequate provision for public and private utilities shall be made in accordance with current approved standard plan for private streets. A separate document dedicating exclusive public utility easements to the city shall be provided when required, in order to eliminate any conflict of rights between city utilities and other public utilities. 
(9)  Where it is proposed to reduce street widths by the elimination of curbside parking, equivalent parking shall be provided by other means, subject to approval by the city. 
(10)  Provision shall be made for trash pick-up vehicles and emergency vehicle access as required by the department of public works. 
(11)  Signs, subject to the approval of the city, shall be provided and maintained at all entrances to private streets clearly designating the private status of such streets and the street names. 
(b)  Minimum widths. 
(1)  With parking on both sides: Thirty-six (36) feet curb to curb. 
(2)  With parking on one side only: Thirty-two (32) feet curb to curb. 
(3)  Without parking: Twenty-eight (28) feet curb to curb. 
(c)  Grades. 
(1)  Desirable maximum: Six (6) percent. 
(2)  Maximum: Six (6) percent for special circumstances with approval by the public works department. 
(3)  Minimum: Two-tenths (0.2) percent. 
(4)  Provide vertical curves for grade breaks over one (1) percent. 
(d)  Alignment. 
(1)  Streets shall normally intersect at right angles and shall have at least twenty (20) feet of tangent adjacent to intersections. The tangent length shall be increased where short radius curves are used near the intersections. 
(2)  Culs-de-sac shall not ordinarily exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. Curb radius at the turnaround shall be at least forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Center line radius shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet minimum. Where right angles bends are used in the street pattern in lieu of the minimum radii required above, widening sufficient to accommodate truck turning movements shall be provided by use of knuckles or other appropriate means. 
(4)  Curb return radius shall be twenty-five (25) feet minimum. 
(5)  No more than one turn shall be utilized in dead-ended access ways. 
(e)  Structural section. 
(1)  The minimum structural section shall ordinarily be six (6) of asphalt concrete over ninety five (95) percent compacted subgrade. The section shall be required by accepted standards of engineering design in accordance with the results of soil tests on the native subgrade material. 
(11)  The city will assume no responsibility for enforcement of traffic control unless specifically requested and approved by resolution of the city council. 
(12)  The policies and standards are to be reviewed and revised as needed based on continuing experience with the use of private streets. 
(13)  Private streets shall be monumented by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer in the same manner as would be required for the development of a public street. 
(14)  Street names for private streets shall be submitted for approval by the planning commission in order to prevent duplication of any existing street names. 
(15)  The design of all private streets shall be in accordance with the City standard and shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The construction shall be inspected by the Public Works Agency and all standard inspection fees shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. NS-1113, § 1, 4-3-72; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 22, 12-3-01) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-1113, § 1, amended this Code by adding § 34-165.  
Secs. 34-166—34-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI.I. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, the provisions formerly housed in article VI.I, §§ 34-170—34-175, which pertained to voluntary merger of parcels, have been redesignated as article XI, §§ 34-366—34-371. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
 
Secs. 34-170—34-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FILING FINAL MAP[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1073 adopted March 15, 1971, amended Ch. 34 of this Code by repealing former Art. VII, §§ 34-176—34-195, and enacting in lieu thereof a new Art. VII, §§ 34-176—34-195, as herein set out pertaining to the same subject matter. Former Art. VII, §§ 34-176—34-195, was derived from Code 1952, §§ 9370—9375.1, 9377—9378.4; Ord. No. NS-36, § 2, adopted May 3, 1954; Ord. No. NS-570, § 1, adopted March 5, 1962; Ord. No. NS-841, § 2, adopted April 18, 1966 and Ord. No. NS-1067, § 1, adopted March 1, 1971. 
 
Sec. 34-176. - Filing. 
A final map for a subdivision shall be filed with the city engineer prior to the expiration of the tentative map approved for such subdivision. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 9, 11-21-77; Ord. No. NS-1698, § 3, 10-10-83)  
Sec. 34-177. - Material and number of maps. 
The subdivider shall file the original and a duplicate tracing thereof made on tracing cloth of good quality and two (2) white copies of the final map, and the original and a duplicate tracing thereof and two (2) white copies of the title sheet. The city engineer shall indicate the date of filing on all copies of the final map and accompanying data. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-178. - Certificates of dedication. 
In the event any dedication is to be made for public use the subdivider shall file a certificate of title, subdivision guarantee, or a dedication letter, in the name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit and protection of the city by a title company authorized by the laws of the state to write the same, showing all parties whose consent is necessary to pass clear title to the land being subdivided, together with the nature of their interest therein, except where the land contained in such subdivision is registered under the Land Registration Act (Torrens Act) in which latter case a certified copy of the certificate of title shall be furnished. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-179. - Location of special fills. 
A drawing and report shall be submitted showing all fills of twelve inches (12?) or more. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-180. - Filing of improvement plans. 
The subdivider shall file, either at the time of filing the final map or at a later date as hereinafter provided, detailed plans, profiles and specifications of the improvements to be installed as required by the provisions of this chapter and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, on, over, or under any street or right-of-way, easement or parcel of land dedicated by the map including the estimated cost thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-181. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1390, § 11, enacted Nov. 21, 1977, repealed § 34-181 relative to the fee for checking the final map. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971, and Ord. No. NS-1291, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 1976.  
Sec. 34-182. - Consideration by planning director. 
On receipt of the final map, the city engineer shall immediately submit one copy of the final map to the planning director. The planning director shall examine said map and if it complies with the approved tentative map and any requirements imposed as a condition to the acceptance of said map, he shall so notify the city engineer by a written statement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-183. - Certification and approval by city engineer. 
(a)  After the city engineer receives the final map, he shall notify the city council at its next regular meeting that he is reviewing the map for final approval. Prior to such meeting, the city clerk shall provide notice of any pending approval or disapproval by the city engineer, which notice shall be attached and posted with the city council's regular agenda and mailed to interested parties who request said notice. 
(b)  The city engineer shall check the final map as to correctness of surveying data, plans, profiles and specifications of improvements, certificates of dedication, acceptance of dedications and acknowledgments and such other matters as require checking to insure compliance with the provisions of the law and the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  If the final map is in the correct form prescribed by the map act and this chapter and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map and the map shall be approved by the city engineer in the form prescribed by the map act and this chapter. The city engineer shall approve or disapprove the final map within ten days following the meeting of the city council. He shall thereupon transmit said map together with said other materials to the clerk of the council for certification pursuant to this chapter. The city engineer shall notify the applicant or any interested party by certified mail of the approval or disapproval of the final map. The date of the certified letter shall constitute the date of the decision by the city engineer. 
(d)  Any interested party, individual or group may appeal the decision of the city engineer made pursuant to this section to the City Council within ten (10) days after receiving notification of such decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. Further, such appeal period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following such date of the decision by the city engineer. If such tenth calendar day ends on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the ten-day period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the next regular business day. Approval of the final map by the city engineer shall become effective on the day following the ten-day appeal period, unless the city council holds a public hearing on the matter, then the decision of the city council will become effective on the day following the hearing and decision by the city council. 
The written notice of appeal shall contain a specific statement of the point or points of disagreement and shall set out specifically the points of disagreement or removal of conditions established by the city engineer, and the reasons and justifications therefor. Such written request for hearing must contain a statement of willingness to extend the time of approval of the map for a period of an additional thirty (30) days. 
Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for its next regular meeting, at which time the city council shall declare that a public hearing on the matter will be held at its next subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. The intervening time may be used by the city council for further investigation of the matters in question. 
At the regularly scheduled city council meeting set for public hearing of the appeal, the city council shall consider the appeal de novo and shall seek such additional testimony or advice as they may feel desirable to assist in reaching a decision. The city council shall approve or disapprove the final map within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the public hearing, and make written findings supporting its decision as may required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(e)  The city council shall periodically review the delegation of authority to the city engineer to approve or disapprove of final maps. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 23, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-184. - Improvement plans and profiles. 
The plans and profiles of all improvements required by the provisions of this article, as well as of other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, over or under any street, alley, way, easement or parcel of land where improvements are required or proposed shall be filed with the city engineer. If all details, plans and profiles of improvements are not filed with the city engineer at the time of filing of the final map, the agreement for completion of improvements shall include a guarantee that the remaining plans and profiles will be prepared in accordance with the requirement of the city engineer. In all cases where topography controls the design, all details, plans and profiles of improvements required by the city engineer must be submitted at the time of filing of final map. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1390, § 10, 11-21-77)  
Secs. 34-185—34-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1390, § 11, enacted Nov. 21, 1977, repealed §§ 34-185—34-190, relative to completion of improvements, bond to assure completion of surveys and improvements, certificate on taxes or assessments, bond of subdividers against assessments, action by the city council on the final subdivision map, and continuing offer of dedication of streets. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971.  
Sec. 34-191. - Drainage areas—Established. 
The city is divided into six (6) local drainage areas established by ordinance of the city council. Development of property within said local drainage areas will require construction of additional drainage facilities, as identified periodically by resolution of the city council, because such development will increase runoff by coverage of absorption areas and will increase demand for protection from storm waters. The fee for drainage facilities established pursuant to this chapter for development of any property within any local drainage area will not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total estimated cost of all drainage facilities within the local drainage area which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on all property in such local drainage area on a per acreage basis. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2254, § 1, 6-19-95)  
Sec. 34-192. - Same—Accounting and disbursement of fees. 
Fees paid under the requirements of section 34-193 shall be placed in a special fund to be known as "Planned Local Drainage Facilities Fund" and shall carry an area designation. A separate fund is established and shall be maintained for each local drainage area and shall be established as an accounting fund upon the receipt of the first fees paid for each of said local drainage areas. Moneys in each such fund shall be expended solely for the construction, or reimbursement for construction, of local drainage facilities within the planned local drainage area from which the fees comprising the fund were collected. By special agreement with the city council, the city may accept rights-of-way or other consideration necessary to the completion of the drainage facilities within the local drainage areas in lieu of cash payment of the amount of the fee provided. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71)  
Sec. 34-193. - Same—Fees established. 
The six (6) local drainage areas shall be known, respectively, as "Local Drainage Area No. I" through "Local Drainage Area No. VI," inclusive. 
No final subdivision map or parcel map shall be approved nor any building permit for new development issued in any of the local drainage areas until the fee hereinbelow provided for has been paid in cash or by other and equal consideration as provided for in section 34-192. 
Subject to section 34-194, the fee to be paid for any land being subdivided or developed in any of the local drainage areas shall be specified by resolution of the city council, and may be changed from time to time as the cost of construction of said local drainage facilities changes. Said fees shall be stated in any such resolution for each gross acre of land being subdivided or developed, and said figure shall be proportionately reduced, for any fraction of an acre being subdivided or developed on an exact percentage basis. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1116, § 1, 4-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1168, § 1, 6-25-73; Ord. No. NS-1220, § 1, 7-15-74; Ord. No. NS-1249, § 1, 3-17-75; Ord. No. NS-1303, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-76; Ord. No. NS-2254, § 2, 6-19-95)  
Sec. 34-194. - Credit for previous fee payments. 
With regard to any unit of real property for which payment of a drainage area fee is due, the amount specified in the resolution adopted pursuant to section 34-193 shall be reduced by the amount of any drainage area fee previously paid with regard to such property or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1073, § 1, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-2254, § 3, 6-19-95)  
Sec. 34-195. - Expiration of vested rights associated with vesting tentative map following filing of final map. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer upon the subdivider those rights specified in Chapter 4.5, of the California Subdivision Map Act (Development Rights), commencing with Government Code section 66498.1, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved and recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final map is recorded, these rights shall last for twelve (12) months. Where several maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this twelve (12) month period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
(c)  The initial time period set forth in subsection (b) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed. 
(d)  A subdivider may apply to the planning department, on such forms as may be provide for such purpose, for a one (1) year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (b) expires. 
(e)  Upon such application, at a duly noticed public hearing the zoning administrator shall approve or deny the extension. In determining whether to grant an extension the zoning administrator may take into account, but is not limited to, any of the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the project is consistent with the general plan; 
(2)  Whether the project is consistent with any applicable specific plan; 
(3)  Whether the project is consistent with the applicable zoning, 
(4)  Whether the project is consistent with all applicable ordinances, policies and standards of the city; and 
(5)  Whether the project is consistent with any proposed ordinances, policies, and standards for which the city has met the requirements of Government Code section 66474.2. 
(f)  The zoning administrator shall notify the subdivider in writing of the decision. 
(g)  If the subdivider is dissatisfied with the decision made by the zoning administrator, the subdivider may, within fifteen (15) days after such notification by the zoning administrator, file a written notice of appeal to be heard by the city council of the city. Such written notice of appeal shall contain a specific statement of the point or points of disagreement between the subdivider and zoning administrator. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for its next regular meeting, at which time the city council shall declare that a public hearing on the matter will be held at its next subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. At a regularly scheduled city council meeting set for public hearing of the appeal, the city council shall consider the appeal made by the subdivider de novo and shall seek such additional testimony or advice, as they may feel desirable to assist in reaching a decision. The city council shall approve or disapprove the extension within ten working (10) days following the conclusion of the public hearing. 
(h)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the period of time specified in subsection (b) or any city approved extension thereof, the rights specified in subsection (a) shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit granted by the city. 
(i)  Any subdivider who recorded a final map, prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map, whose final map was recorded more than one (1) year ago, but less than two (2) years from the date of effectiveness of this section shall have thirty (30) days from the date of effectiveness of this section in which to apply for an extension of their final map, during which period the rights vested in the subdivider shall be maintained. Any extension granted of the rights vested by the subdivider shall be until the second (2nd) year anniversary of the recordation of the final map, or thirty (30) days from approval, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. NS-2507, §§ 3, 4, 8-19-02)  
Secs. 34-196—34-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - REGULATIONS FOR DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK OR RECREATIONAL PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 34-200. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Subdivision Map Act, for the purpose of requiring the dedication of land for park and recreational element of the general plan of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1253, § 5, 3-10-75; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 7, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 34-201. - Requirements. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map for any subdivision containing more than fifty (50) parcels proposed for residential use, the subdivider may be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes at the time of approval of such final map according to the standards contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 8, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 34-202. - Standards. 
Dedication of land shall be required under this article if the city council finds and determines that the park or recreational facilities which the dedication is to provide are in accordance with definite principles and standards contained in the recreational element of the general plan of the City of Santa Ana, and that the amount and location of the land to be dedicated bears a reasonable relationship to the use of the park or recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. Such findings, if made, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council at the time of approval of the tentative map, which resolution shall also contain a schedule specifying how and when the city will use the land to develop park or recreational facilities. 
The requirement for dedication of land pursuant to this article is found to be necessary to promote the general standard of providing two (2) acres of property devoted to parks and recreational purposes for each thousand (1,000) persons residing within the City of Santa Ana. The standards set forth in section 34-204 shall determine the maximum proportion of any single subdivision which may be required to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes when such requirement is otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 9, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 34-203. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the term "recreational element of the general plan of the City of Santa Ana" shall mean either of the following: 
(i)  The open space element, as included in the "Land Use and Arterial Streets" portion of the general plan of the City of Santa Ana. Any requirement for dedication of land pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be in accordance with definite principles and standards contained therein, if such land is designated therein for "parks, recreational, and open space" use. 
(ii)  Such other definite principles and standards for the locations and proposed development of parks, parkways, playgrounds, and other recreation areas as may be included in the general plan of the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  For purposes of section 34-204, the term "dwelling unit" means any single-family dwelling or any separate occupancy unit within a duplex, multifamily building, or apartment complex, or separate ownership parcels within a mobile home park. Only the increase in the number of dwelling units on the land included within a subdivision shall be counted in determining the amount of land to be dedicated. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 10, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 34-204. - Standards and formula for dedication of land. 
The formula for determining land to be dedicated shall be as follows: 
	Assumed 	Assumed 	Land to be Dedicated 
Dwelling Unit 
Type 	Density 
per Acre 	Persons 
per Unit 	Per Dwelling Unit 
			Acres 	Square Feet 
Single-family 	3 to 7.3 	4.0 	.008 	348.5 
Duplexes 	8.14 	3.0 	.006 	261.4 
Multifamily 	variable 	2.4 	.005 	209.1 
 
The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units shall be the maximum number of units permitted by the city on the property included in the subdivision, exclusive of parts to be dedicated, as of the time of filing of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 11, 4-21-80)  
Secs. 34-205—34-209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1526, § 12, enacted April 21, 1980, repealed §§ 34-205—34-209 containing provisions relative to the formula for fees in lieu of land dedication, criteria for requiring both dedication and fee, determination of the amount of fee in lieu of land dedication, procedure where the subdivision was not within the general plan, and the criteria for determining whether the council would accept land dedication or require payment of a fee in lieu of such dedication. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, adopted March 11, 1974.  
Sec. 34-210. - Partial credit for private open space. 
Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent may be given against the requirement of land dedication if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
(a)  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
(b)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions; and 
(c)  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs in the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; and 
(d)  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, topography, geology, access, and location; and 
(e)  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the open space element of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 13, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 34-211. - Procedure. 
At the time of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall determine the land required to be dedicated, if any, by the subdivider. 
At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate the land as previously determined by the city engineer. The city engineer may accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject such dedications or offers of dedication. The city clerk shall certify or state on the map the action of the city engineer. 
Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map. 
Any interested party, individual or group may appeal the decision of the city engineer made pursuant to this section to the city council within ten (10) days after receiving notification of such decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the city clerk. Further, such appeal period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following such date of the decision by the city engineer. If such tenth calendar day ends on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the ten-day period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the next regular business day. The determination of the city engineer shall become effective on the day following the ten-day appeal period, unless the city council holds a public hearing on the matter, then the decision of the city council will become effective on the day following the hearing and decision by the city council. 
The written notice of appeal shall contain a specific statement of the point or points of disagreement and shall set out specifically the points of disagreement and the reasons and justifications therefor. Such written request for hearing must contain a statement of willingness to extend the time of approval of the map for a period of an additional thirty (30) days. 
Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for its next regular meeting, at which time the city council shall declare that a public hearing on the matter will be held at its next subsequent regularly scheduled meeting. The intervening time may be used by the city council for further investigation of the matters in question. 
At the regularly scheduled city council meeting set for public hearing of the appeal, the city council shall consider the appeal de novo and shall seek such additional testimony or advice as they may feel desirable to assist in reaching a decision. The city council shall accept, accept subject to improvement or reject the offer of dedication within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the public hearing, and make written findings supporting its decision as may required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 14, 4-21-80; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 24, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 34-212. - Commencement of development. 
At the time of the approval of the final subdivision map the city engineer shall specify when development of the park or recreational facilities shall be commenced. 
(Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, 3-11-74; Ord. No. NS-2482, § 25, 12-3-01)  
Secs. 34-213, 34-214. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 34-213, relative to refunds of fees, and § 34-214, providing that Art. VIII would not apply to industrial subdivisions, were repealed by Ord. No. NS-1526, § 15, enacted April 21, 1980. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1195, § 1, adopted March 11, 1974.  
Secs. 34-215—34-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS AND CONVERSION PROJECTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2265, § 3, adopted Nov. 6, 1995, set out provisions repealing the old Art. IX (§§ 34-301—34-303, §§ 34-311—34-319, §§ 34-331—34-336, §§ 34-341—34-348, §§ 34-351—34-353) which pertained to "Specific Plan For Common Ownership Projects and Conversion Projects" and derived from Ord. No. NS-1496, § 5, adopted Oct. 1, 1979; Ord. No. NS-1548, §§ 1—3, adopted June 15, 1981; Ord. No. NS-1674, § 1, adopted March 21, 1983; and Ord. No. NS-2088, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 1991. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-301. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these provisions is to establish standards for the development of common interest developments; to establish standards for the conversion of buildings, including rental apartment buildings, into common interest developments; to protect the public from the potential blighting effects of deteriorated or undercapitalized conversion projects; to provide adequate off-street parking; and to mitigate the hardships caused by the mass displacement of tenants attendant to conversion projects. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2755, § 5, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-302. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article applies only to common ownership projects for which a final map is required by the State Subdivision Map Act. As used herein, "final map" includes any parcel map required by Section 66426 of the said act. 
(b)  This article does not apply to investment apartments. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided the provisions of division 1 of this article apply to all common interest developments, including conversion projects. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2755, § 5, 8-6-07)  
Secs. 34-303—34-311. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-312. - Information to be submitted at the time of filing of a tentative map. 
In addition to the information required by other applicable sections of this Code, plans and documents, certified as to accuracy by a licensed engineer or architect, showing the following information shall be submitted at the time of filing of the tentative map: 
(a)  Site plan, including buildings, structures, yards, open space, landscaped areas, vehicular travel and parking areas, driveway approaches, recreational facilities, placement and design of trash facilities and utility services. 
(b)  Parking plan, disclosing the location of all parking spaces, the dimensions thereof, the status as a garage, carport or uncovered space, dimensions of aisles and driveways, locations of columns, walls, and other possible obstruction, the designation of each space as assigned to a particular unit or as guest parking, and the location of each unit to which a space is assigned in a manner such that the walking distance between each unit and its assigned spaces may be readily determined. 
(c)  A storage area plan, showing the location and dimensions at storage areas, as required by section 34-313(c). 
(d)  If a recreational vehicle storage area is to be provided, the site plan shall disclose the location and dimensions of such area. 
(e)  A television antenna plan showing the proposed location of all permitted fixed transmitting and receiving antenna/satellite dish equipment. 
No tentative map shall be deemed filed until the applicant has complied with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-313. - Specific requirements for the approval of tentative maps. 
No tentative map shall be approved unless the project complies with the following requirements: 
(a)  Electric power, gas and water services must be separately metered for each dwelling unit. 
(b)  In addition to clothes, linen and food pantry closets and shelving customarily provided, each unit within the project shall have at least eighty (80) cubic feet of enclosed, weatherproof and lockable private storage space at a single location. 
(c)  If the storage of boats, trailers, recreational vehicles and similar vehicles is to be permitted within the complex, an area shall be specifically designated for such storage and shall be screened from adjacent areas by a combination of a six-foot masonry wall and appropriate landscaping. 
(d)  Nonscreened signal transmitting and receiving equipment, including cables, for individual dwelling units shall not be permitted. 
(e)  Common area utilities must be metered separately from dwelling unit utilities. Meters providing such separation may be either municipally owned or, subject to the approval of the director of public works as to type, owned by the associated owners in common. 
(f)  All utility service lines must be installed underground. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-314. - Discretionary disapproval. 
(a)  A tentative map for a new common interest development may be disapproved if it is determined that the common interest development, although otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 41, would nevertheless be significantly detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of future residents of the project or to surrounding property or to the public generally due to features of design or improvement of the common interest development as proposed. In such event findings shall be issued setting forth the basis for such determination with particularity. 
(b)  Any determination of disapproval pursuant to this section may be made in the first instance by either the advisory agency or the council. If made by the advisory agency, such disapproval shall be appealable in the same manner as other tentative map decisions. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-315. - Conditions. 
If a common interest development may be modified in a manner to avoid disapproval under section 34-313 or 34-314, the tentative map may be approved subject to conditions requiring such modifications; provided, however, that the tentative map shall be disapproved unless the applicant signs a written waiver of the time limits set forth in Sections 66452.1, 66452.2, and 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act, so as to allow such time as may be necessary for the revision of the plans and documents specified in section 34-312 in accordance with such modifications prior to any action to approve or disapprove the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-316. - Filing of plans. 
(a)  Plans and related documents which comply with the requirements of this article shall be filed with the planning manager for approval. 
(b)  No tentative map shall be approved except upon that condition that the common interest development be designed and improved in accordance with the approved plans and related documents on file with the planning manager. 
(c)  In the case of common interest developments other than conversion projects, no building permit or utility release shall be approved for any development except in accordance with the plans and related documents on file with the planning manager. 
(d)  In the case of a conversion project, no final map shall be approved unless the project has been brought into conformity with the approved plans and related documents on file with the planning manager and the other conditions of approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-317. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-318. - Declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
No tentative map shall be approved except upon the condition that a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions be approved by the planning manager and the city attorney prior to the approval of the final map, providing for the following: 
(a)  Perpetual maintenance by the associated owners, in good, sanitary and attractive conditions of all common areas and improvements, including landscaped areas, walls, driveways, parking areas, trash areas and buildings, in accordance with plans and documents on file in the office of the planning manager of the City of Santa Ana. 
(b)  Prohibition of the parking or storage of trailers, boats and recreational vehicles, except in such area reserved for the storage thereof as may be provided in the plans and documents on file with the planning manager. 
(c)  As to the above requirements, a power of enforcement to the City of Santa Ana, exercisable in the discretion of the council, and a prohibition against any relinquishment, amendment, or deletion of such requirements without the consent of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-319—34-330. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION PROJECTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2755, § 6, adopted August 6, 2007, changed the title of division 2 from "Conversion Projects" to "Residential Conversion Projects." 
 
Sec. 34-331. - Applicability. 
In addition to complying with the requirements of division 1, all residential conversion projects must comply with the requirements of this division in order for the final map to be approved. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2755, § 6, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-332. - General standards for preexisting buildings. 
Except as upgrading requirements are required by this division, the buildings must comply with all requirements of Chapter 8 of this Code and all requirements of state laws and regulations pertaining to building structure and safety under the standards therein made applicable to such preexisting buildings. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-333. - Conversion plan. 
An application for a conversion project shall be accompanied by a conversion plan which sets forth a comprehensive representation and scheduling of the conversion process including but not limited to the following components: 
(a)  The improvement plan referenced in section 34-362 shall provide for upgrading the complex to the standards then in effect for construction of new buildings, to the extent financially and practically feasible, with regard to the following matters: sound transmission, energy efficiency, open space and landscaping. The improvement plan shall also provide for all existing onsite facilities which are to be retained to be brought into reasonably sound and attractive condition. 
(b)  Notice of submission of application for public report which includes improvement plans and capital reserves. 
(c)  Tenant notifications of proposed conversion in compliance with Section 66427.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(d)  Phasing plan to reflect unit sales and tenant relocation agreements. 
(e)  A preliminary report by the building official or his authorized representative, certifying the building to be in compliance with Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code. 
(f)  A tenant assistance plan conforming to section 34-334(a). 
(g)  Compliance of the water delivery system with the city's fire flow requirements as applicable to new construction. 
(h)  Compliance with the building security regulations set forth in Chapter 8, Article II, Division 3 of this Code as applicable to new buildings. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-334. - Tenant assistance. 
(a)  A tenant assistance plan must contain the following components: 
(1)  A listing of tenants by name and apartment address. 
(2)  A schedule of rents for each unit showing any changes occurring in the previous six-month period. 
(3)  A statement of method by which tenants will be assisted by the subdivider or his agents in finding comparable replacement rental housing within the area of the conversion. 
(4)  A statement of the method by which the subdivider will comply with the requirements of Section 66427.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act. Such method must provide that no tenant shall be required to move from his or her apartment due to the proposed conversion until the expiration of the two-month period for exercise by the tenant of his or her right of first refusal pursuant to Section 66427.1(b) of the State Subdivision Map Act. Said two-month period shall not commence as to any tenant until such tenant has received written notification of issuance of the final public report of the department of real estate and such tenant's right to contract for the purchase of his or her unit at a specified purchase price for sixty (60) days following the date of such notification. 
(5)  A statement of a method by which the subdivider or his agents will reimburse each tenant for costs actually incurred in moving from his apartment due to the planned conversion to a common ownership unit, up to a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per unit. 
(6)  A statement of a method by which the subdivider will assure that each tenant who attends, or whose spouse or dependent child attends, or whose spouse or dependent child attends, school at the time that the notice of termination of tenancy (as required by Section 66427.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act) is given, will be granted an extension of tenancy as necessary to permit such person to complete the school year, semester, or quarter (whichever is the minimum school term) as he or she is enrolled in at such time. As used herein, "school" includes any public or private elementary or secondary school, college, community college, university, or vocational school. 
(b)  No tentative map shall be approved except upon the condition that a secured, written agreement satisfactory to the planning manager be entered into between the city and the subdivider for the benefit of each tenant, by which the subdivider covenants to carry out the terms of a tenant assistance plan, as finally approved by the planning manager. Such agreement must be secured by a bond or bonds by one (1) or more duly authorized corporate sureties in a total amount equal to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) multiplied by the number of units, and the total amount of said bond or bonds shall be security for each and every obligation to any tenant undertaken by the subdivider in such agreement. 
(c)  The security specified in subsection (b) of this section shall not be released except with the consent of the planning manager on behalf of the city. Such consent shall be given upon proof that the conversion has been completed except for partial early releases as hereinafter authorized. 
(d)  Partial early releases may be granted, not more than once in each six-month period following approval of the final map, upon the submission of proof of entitlement to the planning manager, in proportion to the number of units in which the tenants have either: 
(1)  Vacated; 
(2)  Purchased without vacating; 
(3)  Waived their rights. 
(e)  The rights of a tenant pursuant to the contract executed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall not apply if knowingly waived by a tenant as follows: 
(1)  A written agreement, signed by both the tenant and the subdivider or his agent, is executed by which the specifically described rights are expressly waived in return for such specifically described consideration as may be mutually agreed upon between the parties. 
(2)  The agreement between the subdivider and the tenant is executed subsequent to the section 34-343 agreement and specifically states that the tenant has read that agreement and is aware of his rights thereunder. 
(3)  A copy of the executed agreement is promptly filed with the planning manager. 
(f)  The subdivider or his agent shall file an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury including the following: 
(1)  A current listing of tenants and rents for each unit. 
(2)  A listing of special agreements pursuant to subsection (e) of this section or a statement that no such agreements have been executed. 
(3)  An explanation of rent increases occurring since the filing of the tentative map, or a statement that no such increases have occurred. 
(4)  A listing and explanation of any termination of tenancies for reasons other than the conversion, or a statement that no such terminations have occurred. 
(5)  A statement of the time and manner in which notice of the conversion was given or will be given pursuant to Section 66427.1(a) of the State Subdivision Map Act, and in which notice of a right of first refusal has been given or will be given pursuant to Section 66427.1(b) of said act. 
(g)  The findings required by Section 66427.1 of the State Subdivision Map Act shall not be made if, based on the subdivider's declaration and such other evidence as may be presented to the council, the council determines that the subdivider or his agents has engaged in any pattern or practice designed to avoid his obligation to the tenants under said section. 
(h)  Tenant listings as required under this division shall include all persons, other than dependent children, shown on any lease, rental agreement, or other evidence of rental occupancy customarily maintained for the apartment building, as an occupant for rent as of the date of filing of the tentative map or thereafter, except that no person who acquires such occupancy after approval of the final map with knowledge that his occupancy will be terminated because of the conversion to condominiums shall be considered a tenant for purposes of this division or any tenant assistance plan. Discharge by the subdivider or his agent of any obligation pursuant to this division as to any such listed tenant shall constitute discharge of such obligation to all persons concurrently residing in the same unit, unless otherwise provided in the agreement executed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-335. - Management plan. 
An application for a conversion project shall be accompanied by a management plan which sets forth a comprehensive representation of the project governance process, including but not limited to the following components: 
(a)  A maintenance plan which includes a long-term project maintenance schedule and operations standards. 
(b)  Draft CC&R provisions setting forth the rules of project governance and management, including the establishment of a board of directors (duties, powers, election and replacement). 
(c)  A statement governing the management of vacant and/or unsold units. 
(d)  A current structural pest control inspection report issued by a licensed structural pest control operator, showing the subject premises to be free of evidence of termite, dry-rot, fungi and/or damage therefrom. Such a report shall be deemed current for a period of not more than ninety (90) days following the date of inspection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Sec. 34-336. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-337. - Discretionary denial of conversion projects. 
(a)  A tentative map may be denied if it is determined that the conversion project, although otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 41, would nevertheless be detrimental to the welfare of future residents of the project or to surrounding property or to the public generally. The evaluation of such projects should be based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Completeness and quality of the submitted conversion/management plans. 
(2)  Compliance with current development standards in this chapter and Chapter 41. 
(3)  Community need for larger number of bedroom units. 
(4)  Reservation of twenty (20) percent affordable units within the conversion proposal. 
(5)  Exceeding code requirements by providing project amenities. 
(6)  Determination that vacancy rates are below the guidelines set forth in the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Secs. 34-338—34-350. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-351. - Off-street parking requirement for conversion projects. 
(a)  All conversion projects must provide off-street parking spaces in accordance with the current standards in Chapter 41 of this Code, except as specified in this section. 
(b)  A parking waiver may only be considered if a finding can be made that strict compliance with the parking requirement will not benefit the site and its surrounding area. The applicant must indicate how the project will operate adequately without complying with the parking requirement. This assessment must be based on a fully occupied project. 
(c)  Parking waivers shall be granted by the planning commission, subject to appeal by any interested person to the city council and subject to review and modification by the council on its own initiative. The procedural, public hearing and administrative fee requirements for a parking waiver shall be the same as those for a variance as set forth in Chapter 41 of this Code. 
(d)  Any application for a parking waiver shall be filed and decided prior to the filing of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2265, § 4, 11-6-95)  
Secs. 34-352—34-359. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - INVESTMENT APARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-360. - Application and purpose. 
This article applies to investment apartments. It is the purpose of this article to allow a form of ownership of rental multiple family housing combining separate ownership of rental dwelling units with common ownership by the associated unit owners of the land and buildings where such units are located, in the expectation that such form of ownership will promote a higher degree of ownership concern for property maintenance than is commonly associated with multifamily rental housing. It is further the purpose of this article to assure that, prior to their conversion to investment apartments, rental multifamily developments are, to the extent feasible, upgraded to zoning and building code standards applicable to new construction in order to promote future maintenance of such developments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-361. - Application of the general plan. 
Because the conversion of apartments to investment apartments does not result in a reduction in the city's supply of rental housing, any provision in the general plan of the city which is designed to restrict the conversion of apartments to condominiums or other form of common ownership project shall be deemed not to apply to investment apartments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-362. - Tentative map requirements. 
(a)  Any application for approval of a tentative map for investment apartments shall be accompanied by a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions approved in accordance with section 34-363 and an improvements plan approved in accordance with section 34-364. Any application for approval of a tentative map for a conversion project which is not accompanied by such documents shall be subject to Article IX of this chapter. 
(b)  Every tentative map for investment apartments shall be subject to the condition that the following actions be completed prior to approval of the final map: 
(1)  The improvement of the subject property in accordance with the improvement plan approved by the city in accordance with section 34-364. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining inspections of the subject property by personnel of the planning and building agency as necessary to determine compliance with this requirement. 
(2)  The filing with the planning and building agency of a current structural pest control report issued by a licensed structural pest control operator, showing the subject property to be free of termites, dry rot, fungi, and damage therefrom. Such a report shall be deemed current for no more than ninety (90) days following the date of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-363. - Requirement of an approved declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
(a)  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions for investment apartments shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No owner of a dwelling unit shall be permitted to reside in that unit, and no person shall be permitted to own fewer than two (2) units. 
(2)  The associated owners shall collectively be responsible for maintenance and management expenses of all grounds, buildings and structures on the project site, excluding only the interiors of the dwelling units and the interiors of any attached garages. As used herein, an "attached garage" means garage space which is immediately adjacent to and accessible from a dwelling unit and which is separately owned by the owner of that dwelling unit. All parking areas other than attached garages shall be owned by the associated owners collectively, although parking spaces may be assigned to the occupants of designated dwelling units. 
(3)  Provision shall be made for professional management of the investment apartment complex. This shall include provision for an on-site office staffed on a full-time basis during normal business hours. The associated owners shall be required to maintain the name and mailing address of the manager continuously on file with the planning director of the city. Provision shall be included that the service of any notice, order or summons by the city or by any court of competent jurisdiction on the manager on record with the city, or on any person actually serving as manager or on any one (1) of the associated owners, shall be valid and binding on all of the associated owners, with respect to the enforcement by the city of the subject covenants, conditions and restrictions, or of the improvement plan specified in section 34-364, or of any applicable law or regulation of the city. 
(4)  As to the above requirements, a power of enforcement to the city, exercisable in the discretion of the council, and a prohibition against any relinquishment, amendment or deletion of such requirements without the consent of the council. 
(b)  No declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be deemed adequate for the purpose of processing a tentative map for investment apartments until approved as complying with this section by the executive director of planning and building safety or his or her designated representative. The said executive director shall cooperate with the department of real estate of the state to assure the covenants, conditions and restrictions as finally recorded are consistent with those approved by the said executive director with regard to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-364. - Improvement plan. 
(a)  The improvement plan referenced in section 34-362 shall provide for upgrading the proposed investment apartment complex to the standards then in effect for construction of new buildings, to the extent financially and practically feasible, with regard to the following matters: fire safety, building security, sound transmission, energy efficiency, off-street parking, open space and landscaping. The improvement plan shall also provide for all existing on-site facilities which are to be retained to be brought into reasonably sound and attractive condition. 
(b)  Any application for approval of an investment plan shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing all existing and proposed structures, including walls and fences, landscaping, irrigation systems and driveways and parking areas. 
(2)  A statement of the current and proposed ownership of the subject property and its current and proposed use. 
(3)  A description of the property, including acreage, number of existing and proposed dwelling units categorized by the number of bedrooms in each unit. 
(4)  A statement of the current and proposed management program, including structural maintenance and parking assignments. 
(5)  A statement of current and projected rents extending to twelve (12) months after conversion to investment apartments. 
(6)  A statement of proposed assessments and fees to be charged to owners of dwelling units after conversion to investment apartments. 
(c)  No improvement plan shall be deemed adequate for purposes of processing a tentative map for investment apartments until approved by the executive director of planning and building safety or his or her designated representatives as complying with the requirements of this section. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining an inspection of the subject property by appropriate personnel in the planning and building agency of the city as necessary to determine the improvements to be required on the subject property. In approving any improvement plan, the executive director may impose such requirements and conditions as he or she deems appropriate to render such improvement plan consistent with the requirements of this section. Any such requirements or conditions may be appealed by the applicant to the planning commission, which may modify them as such commission deems appropriate, and the decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
Sec. 34-365. - Inspections. 
As a condition to obtaining the inspections of the subject property required by this article, the applicant shall pay such inspection fees as may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2088, § 3, 1-7-91)  
ARTICLE XI. - VOLUNTARY MERGER OF PARCELS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, the provisions formerly housed in article VI.I, §§ 34-170—34-175, which pertained to voluntary merger of parcels, have been redesignated as article XI, §§ 34-366—34-371. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
 
Sec. 34-366. - Voluntary merger of parcels. 
Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code section 66499.20¾, a merger and certificate of merger of existing adjoining parcels of real property may be authorized by the executive director of planning and building ("executive director"), and filed for record by the county recorder only where the executive director makes all of the following findings, after consultation with the public works agency: 
(a)  The merger will not affect any fees, grants, easements, agreements, conditions, dedications, offers to dedicate or security provided in connection with any city approvals of divisions of real property or lot line adjustments. 
(b)  The boundaries of the parcels to be merged are contiguous, well-defined in existing recorded documents or filed maps and were legally created or have certificates of compliance issued on them. If the finding under subsection (b) cannot be made, the executive director may nevertheless authorize the merger of two or more parcels of land of which at least one was not created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and/or local ordinances as an alternative to the issuance of a conditional certificate of compliance. 
(c)  The merger will not alter the exterior boundary of the parcels to be merged. 
(d)  The document used to effect the merger contains an accurate description of the exterior boundaries of the resulting parcel. 
(e)  The parcels to be merged are under common ownership. 
(f)  All parties having any record title interest in the real property affected have consented to the merger upon a form and in a manner approved by the city, excepting all those interests that are excepted from the requirement to consent to the preparation and recordation of final maps under the provisions of California Government Code section 66436 and according to the terms, provisions, reservations and restrictions provided therein for such consent. 
(g)  The parcels, if merged, would be consistent with the city's general plan and chapter 41. 
(h)  The merger, if approved, would not deprive the merged parcel nor any other, adjacent parcel, of access as required by this chapter. 
(i)  All necessary fees and requirements, including a fee for recording the documents, have been provided. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
Sec. 34-367. - Appeal of executive director's decision. 
The executive director's decision to grant or deny an application for a voluntary merger of parcels may be appealed to the planning commission by any interested party within ten (10) calendar days of the executive director's decision. The decision of the planning commission, which shall be made pursuant to section 34-366, shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
Sec. 34-368. - Concurrent filing of record of survey. 
Where a record of survey is deemed to be necessary by the executive director or the applicant in order to monument and define the boundaries of the merged parcel, such record of survey, otherwise in compliance with all requirements of this article, may be filed with the county recorder at the same time as the merger and certificate of merger. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
Sec. 34-369. - Effect of voluntary merger. 
The filing of said merger and certificate of merger for record shall constitute a merger of the separate parcels into one parcel for the purpose of the Subdivision Map Act and local ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, and the parcels shall thereafter be treated in all respects as a single parcel. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
Sec. 34-370. - Recording of merger without approval prohibited. 
No person shall record a document merging separate legal parcels into a single parcel for the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and local ordinances enacted pursuant thereto except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
Sec. 34-371. - Application fees. 
The city council shall establish by ordinance or resolution such fees as may be required for the review and processing of a proposal for voluntary merger. 
(Ord. No. NS-2697, § 2, 10-3-05)  
ARTICLE XII. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, adopted August 6, 2007, enacted provisions intended for use as article XII, §§ 34-180—34-185. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the direction of the city, said provisions have been redesignated as article XII, §§ 34-372—34-377. 
 
Sec. 34-372. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted to establish requirements and procedures for the evaluation of commercial and industrial common interest development projects. Such regulation is necessary to provide for the adequate maintenance of common areas, facilities and amenities, such as buildings, parking, ingress and egress, subjacent support, utilities and the like, in commercial and industrial common area interest development projects in order to support the continuing viability of such common interest projects and avoid conditions of neglect and blight. Additionally, such regulation is necessary to the support of a healthy local economy by preserving opportunities for large-scale commercial and industrial uses to avoid the conversion, fragmentation and diminution of large commercial and industrial buildings and lands within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-373. - Application. 
The provisions of this article apply to all commercial and industrial common interest development projects. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-374. - Tentative map requirement. 
All commercial and industrial common interest development projects shall require application for and issuance of a tentative map. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-375. - Conditions of approval. 
No tentative map for a commercial or industrial common interest development shall be issued unless all of the following conditions have been met and the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all of these conditions: 
(a)  The applicant, at its sole cost, shall prepare, submit for prior review and approval by the city, and record concurrently with the final map, governing documents for the common interest development that include sufficient provisions for governance, funding and capitalization, and enforcement mechanisms, including enforcement by the city, to ensure that the common areas shall be adequately and safely maintained and repaired for the life of the common interest development and that such common area shall be retained for the use of all owners within the development. Prior to approval of the final map by the city, the applicant shall submit the proposed governing documents to the city for review, and approval as to form by the city attorney, for compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  The applicant shall, at its sole cost, prepare grant deeds or reservations for all mutual or reciprocal easement rights which shall be reviewed by the city for compliance with the terms of this chapter, and shall upon city approval be recorded concurrently with the approved parcel or final map. 
(c)  Any other condition imposed by the planning commission or city council to accomplish the purposes of this chapter or for the preservation of public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-376. - Management plan. 
An application for a tentative map for a commercial or industrial common interest development shall be accompanied by a management plan which sets forth a comprehensive representation of the project governance process, including but not limited to the following components: 
(a)  A maintenance plan which includes a long-term project maintenance schedule and operations standards to ensure maintenance of the site to a high standard. 
(b)  Proposed CC&R provisions setting forth the rules of project governance and management, including the establishment of a board of directors (duties, powers, election and replacement). 
(c)  A statement of the means of governing the management of vacant and/or unsold units. 
(d)  All ingress and egress easements, drainage easements, and reciprocal parking agreements, if necessary, between owners of the units, shall be included in the proposed CC&R's. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 34-377. - Conversion project special use permit required. 
No tentative map or final map for a commercial or industrial conversion project (as that term is defined in this chapter) shall be approved unless a special use permit has been issued by the city in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this article and the procedures and provisions of chapter 41 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 3, 8-6-07)  
Chapter 35 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; business license taxes, §§ 21-71, 21-72. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Ad valorem property tax; assessed and collected by county. 
All duties of assessing property and collecting taxes thereon provided to be performed by the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of the County of Orange, State of California, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51519 inclusive, of the Government Code, State of California, as the same now exists, may be amended, added to or reenacted. 
(Code 1952, § 2430; Ord. No. NS-164, § 1, 3-5-56) 
Charter reference— For authority, see § 600. 
State Law reference— For authority, see §§ 51542, 51544.1, Gov. Code.  
Secs. 35-2—35-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1187, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 1, 1973, repealed former Art. II, §§ 35-50—35-56, pertaining to sales and use tax, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. II, §§ 35-50—35-66, as herein set out. Former Art. II was derived from Code 1952, §§ 2420, 2421, 2423—2426, 2428; Ord. No. NS-160, adopted Feb. 27, 1956; and Ord. No. NS-548, adopted Nov. 20, 1961. 
 
Sec. 35-50. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-51. - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this article shall be one (1) percent. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-52. - Operative date. 
This article shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-53. - Purpose. 
The city council hereby declares that this article is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(a)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(b)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(c)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
(d)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-54. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-55. - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in section 35-51 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-56. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-57. - Use tax. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in section 35-51 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-58. - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-59. - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, the state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitutions shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-60. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-61. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73; Ord. No. NS-1709, § 1, 12-19-83)  
Sec. 35-62. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(d)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally 
outside the city in which the sale is made, and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(f)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73; Ord. No. NS-1709, § 2, 12-19-83)  
Sec. 35-63. - Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  Section 35-61 of this article shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
(b)  Section 35-62 of this article shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73; Ord. No NS-1709, § 3, 12-19-83)  
Sec. 35-64. - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-65. - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 35-66. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1187, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Secs. 35-67—35-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX 
 
Sec. 35-98. - Short title; authority. 
This article shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City". It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the revenue and taxation code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 2440; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-99. - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this article in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the state revenue and taxation code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 2448 ; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-100. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchasers, or any other persons, by their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1952, § 2441; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-101. - Persons subject to tax. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 35-100 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. 
(Code 1952, § 2442; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-102. - Security instruments excluded. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Code 1952, § 2443; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-103. - Governmental agencies exempt. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this article when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Code 1952, § 2444; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67; Ord. No. NS-987, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-69) 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-987, §§ 1 and 2, amended § 2444 of the 1952 Code, § 35-103 herein, by substituting provisions exempting the document, for provisions exempting governmental agencies and providing the tax may be collected from any other party liable.  
Sec. 35-104. - Exempt transactions—Under the bankruptcy act. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment as follows: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected. 
Subsections (1) to (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change. 
(Code 1952, § 2445; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-105. - Same—Effecting orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Code 1952, § 2446 ; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-106. - Same—Transfer of partnership interest. 
(a)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise in the event the following conditions obtain: 
(1)  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this article, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(c)  No more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of a termination described in subsection (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Code 1952, § 2447; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
Sec. 35-107. - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this article shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 5 (commencing with section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the revenue and taxation code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 2449; Ord. No. NS-901, § 1, 12-4-67)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Amendment note —Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, enacted May 18, 1970, amended Ch. 35 by adding Art. IV, §§ 35-108—35-112. 
 
Sec. 35-108. - Purpose. 
(a)  Development of parks within the city will require the construction of park and recreation facilities sufficient to provide two (2) acres of such facilities per one thousand (1,000) population in the city. 
(b)  Fees paid under the requirements of section 35-110 shall be placed in a special fund to be known as the "Park Acquisition and Development Fund". Moneys in such fund shall be expended for the acquisition, construction and renovation of park and recreation facilities. In the event the city meets the standard of two (2) acres of such facilities per one thousand (1,000) population, and will meet such criterion following all developments for which fees have been collected, any moneys remaining in such fund may be used for renovation of the city's existing parks. 
(Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1923, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 35-109. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the words defined in this section shall have the meanings assigned to them: 
Residential development : The addition of net residential units or the conversion of apartments to condominiums. 
Residential unit : Any single-family home, any separate occupancy unit in a two-family or multifamily dwelling building, any other structure designed for human occupancy which contains a kitchen, and any space in a mobile home park designed or intended for a house trailer, mobile home, camper, or similar vehicle; but excluding any building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes, such as sleeping rooms in hotels and motels without kitchens or kitchen facilities. 
Net residential unit : Any increase in the number of residential units constructed on any given piece of real property. 
Mobile home park : Any area where one or more lots or spaces are held out for rent or purchase to be occupied by a house trailer, mobile home, camper, or similar vehicle. 
Condominium : A residential unit in any of the following: 
(i)  A condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code of the State of California. 
(ii)  A community apartment project, a planned development, or a stock cooperative, as defined in Sections 11003 through 11004 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. 
Apartment : A residential unit in a two-family or multifamily dwelling building which is not a condominium. 
(Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 1, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 35-110. - Fees. 
Any person adding net residential units or converting apartments to condominiums in the City of Santa Ana shall pay to the city fees in such amounts as shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
The fees hereby imposed are imposed under the police power to regulate residential development of the City of Santa Ana, for the purpose of preserving an appropriate balance between the demand by residents for use of park and recreational facilities and the availability of such park and recreational facilities and to preclude residential development which would create an excess demand on such facilities. The distinctions in fees with respect to types of residential units are hereby found to reflect significant differences in the demand for use of public park and recreation facilities by the occupants thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 1, 4-21-80; Ord. No. NS-1923, § 2, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-1968, § 1, 8-1-88)  
Sec. 35-111. - Payment of fees. 
The fees prescribed in section 35-110 for addition of net residential units shall be due and payable prior to the issuance of a building permit for any construction which adds net residential units. No building permit shall be issued until such fees are paid. 
The fees prescribed in section 35-110 for conversion of apartments to condominiums shall be due and payable at the time of filing of the final or parcel map required for such conversion. No such map shall be approved until such fees are paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 3, 4-21-80; Ord. No. NS-1968, § 2, 8-1-88)  
Sec. 35-112. - Refunds. 
Any fees paid to the city under this chapter for any residential unit which is not thereafter added or converted shall be refunded upon application of the fee payer and a showing to the satisfaction of the director of finance that the proposed addition or conversion has been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. NS-1018, § 2, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1526, § 4, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 35-113. - Exemption. 
Any person otherwise subject to payment of fees pursuant to section 35-110 with respect to the residential development of a specific area of land, shall be exempt from such payment if the owner thereof offers to dedicate a portion thereof to the city for park or recreational purposes, and if the city council determines to accept such dedication; provided, however, that, at any time prior to the acceptance of such an offer of dedication, the city and such person may enter into an agreement providing for payment of a stipulated monetary contribution to the appropriate park acquisition and development fund in addition to such dedication, in which case the exemption granted by this section shall be conditional upon such person's compliance with the terms and conditions of such agreement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1526, § 5, 4-21-80)  
Sec. 35-114. - Residential development tax. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the privilege of engaging in residential development in the city. Such tax is imposed on the same persons and the same activities, in the same amounts, and subject to the same terms and conditions as established for residential development fees in sections 35-109 through 35-112 of this article, except that the amount of said tax due from any person for a particular residential development shall be reduced by the amount of the fees paid by or on behalf of such person for the same development pursuant to said sections. Any tax revenues collected pursuant to this section shall not be subject to section 35-108, but shall rather be general fund revenues of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1923, § 3, 7-20-87)  
Secs. 35-115—35-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL VISTORS' TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2648, § 2, adopted April 5, 2004, changed the title of article V from "Transient Occupancy Tax" to "Hotel Visitors Tax." 
 
Sec. 35-125. - Title. 
This article shall be known as "The Hotel Visitors Tax Ordinance of the City of Santa Ana." 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 2, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-126. - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this article: 
(a)  Person. The term "person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(b)  Hotel. The term "hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by hotel visitors for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
(c)  Occupancy. The term "occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(d)  Hotel visitors. The term "hotel visitors" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a hotel visitors until after the 30th consecutive day of such occupancy and said tax shall continue to be due upon all rent collected or accruing prior to said 30th day of occupancy unless such occupancy is pursuant to a qualifying rental agreement as defined in this article. In determining whether a person is a hotel visitors, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this article may be considered. 
(e)  Rent. The term "rent" means the total consideration charged to the hotel visitors as shown on the guest receipt for the occupancy of space in a hotel, including charges for equipment (such as rollaway beds, cribs and television set, etc.), and in-room services (such as movies and other services not subject to state taxes), valued in money, whether received or to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It shall include all receipts, cash, credit, property and services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. The costs of additional goods and services, which are not "rent," but which may be sold as a package with the room (such as meals, excursions, and recreational services), must be accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the finance director. 
(f)  Operator. The term "operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
(g)  Qualifying rental agreement. The term "qualifying rental agreement" means and shall be limited to a written contract signed by both the landlord and tenant, legally enforceable by either party thereto, and for a rental period of not less than thirty (30) consecutive days. Notwithstanding any other provision thereof, the term "qualifying rental agreement" as used in this article shall expressly exclude: 
(1)  Any agreement regardless of rental term which is terminated for any reason by either party thereto, or by mutual consent, prior to the 30th consecutive day of tenancy, or 
(2)  Any agreement regardless of length of rental term which would be unlawful or constitute a violation of any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 3, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-127. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eleven (11) per cent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the city that is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the finance director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the finance director. 
(b)  In the event that a qualifying rental agreement exists between the hotel and any person for occupancy, as hereinabove defined, for a period in excess of thirty (30) days and in the event that such person allows occupancy by another person as subtenant, guest, licensee or permittee, the person who has made the agreement with the hotel as aforesaid shall be subject to and shall pay the tax provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-1694, § 1, 8-15-83; Ord. No. NS-1921, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 4, 4-5-04; Ord. No. NS-2673, § 1, 11-2-04; Ord. No. NS-2673, § 1, 11-2-04)  
Sec. 35-128. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
(a)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
(b)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty; 
(c)  Any federal or state officer or employee while on official business only and when payment for such occupancy is made directly to the operator by duly authorized voucher payment from a governmental accounting office. This exemption does not exempt a hotel visitors who is employed by the United States government or the state or their respective instrumentalities from payment of the tax when the payment is later to be reimbursed by the United States government or the state or their respective instrumentalities. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 5, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-129. - Operator's duties. 
(a)  Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every hotel visitors. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each hotel visitors shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. Each operator shall account separately for and maintain separate monthly summary totals for taxable and nontaxable rents and for taxes collected. 
(b)  The operator shall maintain its financial and accounting records in accordance with established accounting principles acceptable to the finance director. In the event the operator offers paid packages or complementary services to guests, the charges shall be accounted for in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the finance director. 
(c)  The tax required to be collected (any amount unreturned to the hotel visitors which is not tax but was collected under the representation that it was tax) constitutes a debt owed by the operator to the city and shall be paid to the city with the monthly remittance. 
(d)  Whenever an operator who has collected any sum under the representation that it was a tax, which sum is not required to be collected as a tax, remits said sum to the city and thereafter refunds such sum to such person in whole or part, such operator may take the amount of such refund as a credit against future taxes only upon submitting to the finance director a statement under penalty of perjury specifying the reasons for the credit and providing proof of payment of such refund. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to authorize as a credit against taxes owed any amount returned by the operator to any tour promoter, travel agent, or third party other than the hotel visitors. Travel agent commissions are an expense of the operator and may not be deducted from the rent. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 6, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-130. - Registration. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after commencing business each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to hotel visitors shall register said hotel with the finance director and obtain from him a hotel visitors registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(1)  The name of the operator; 
(2)  The address of the hotel; 
(3)  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
(4)  The words: 
"This Hotel Visitors registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform Hotel Visitors tax ordinance by registering with the finance director for the purpose of collecting from Hotel Visitors the Hotel Visitors tax and remitting said tax to the finance director. The certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a Hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(b)  No hotel visitors registration certificate issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable or assignable; provided, that where a person holding a certificate issued under the provisions of this article changes the name of the business, such person shall upon changing the name make a written application to the finance director to have said certificate amended to reflect the change in name; and provided further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. 
(c)  Whenever, upon the sale or transfer of an existing hotel, a hotel visitors registration certificate is applied for, the finance director shall require that the succeeding operator produce a certificate of nonliability or other receipt issued by the finance director establishing that no unsatisfied liability for hotel visitors taxes exists. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate a hotel without a valid hotel visitors registration certificate or to fail to post the certificate issued in a conspicuous place at all times. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 7, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-131. - Reporting and remitting. 
All operators shall report and remit monthly the full amount of hotel visitors taxes collected for the previous month upon the appropriate approved form available from the finance director. Hotel visitors taxes shall be deemed to be collected at that time at which the rent is earned if the operator uses the accrual basis of accounting or the time at which rent is received if the operator uses the cash basis of accounting. The same basis of accounting used for keeping the books and records shall be used for reporting and remitting hotel visitors taxes. The finance director may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the finance director. 
(a)  Calendar month reporting period. Each operator reporting on a calendar month basis shall, on or before the last day of the following month, make a return to the finance director on approved forms of the total taxable rents charged and the full amount of hotel visitors taxes collected for the previous month. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the finance director. 
(b)  Timely returns. Returns and taxes remitted monthly and actually received by the finance director on or before the last day of the following month shall be deemed to be timely filed and remitted; otherwise, the taxes are delinquent and subject to the penalties imposed pursuant to section 35-132. Provided, however, that when the last day upon which a return may be filed and taxes remitted falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city, state, or national holiday, a timely filing and remittance may be made upon the first following working day. Returns filed and taxes remitted by mail shall be deemed to be timely filed only if the envelope or similar container enclosing the returns and taxes is addressed to the finance director, has sufficient postage and bears a United States postmark or a postage meter imprint prior to midnight on the last day for reporting and remitting without a penalty, if the last day for reporting and remitting said tax falls on a weekend or holiday, a filing shall be deemed to be timely filed if mailed prior to midnight of the first following working day. If such envelope or other container bears a postage meter imprint as well as a United States Post Office cancellation mark, the latter shall govern in determining whether the filing and remittance are timely. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 8, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-132. - Penalties and interest; audit deficiency. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay an additional delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of sixty (60) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay an additional delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed together with the additional ten (10) percent penalty imposed. 
(c)  Audit deficiency. If, upon audit by the city, an operator is found to be deficient in either its return or its remittance or both, the finance director shall immediately assess the operator the amount of the net deficiency plus an audit deficiency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the net deficiency. If said operator's remittance was deficient for a period of greater than thirty (30) days following the date on which remittance was first delinquent, said operator shall pay an additional audit deficiency penalty of ten (10) percent of the net deficiency and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. If said operator's remittance was deficient for a period of greater than sixty (60) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, said operator shall pay an additional audit deficiency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed together with the additional ten (10) percent penalty imposed. In addition thereto, the finance director shall assess interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month or fraction thereto on the amount of the net deficiency for each month or portion thereof for which said operator's remittance was deficient. 
(d)  Fraud. If the finance director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 
(e)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(f)  Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 35-133. - Failure to collect and report tax. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this article, the finance director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the finance director shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this article. In case such determination is made, the finance director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the finance director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the finance director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the finance director shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the finance director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 35-134. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 35-134. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the finance director or designee with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal within fifteen (15) days pursuant to chapter 3 of this Code. In the event no appeal is filed within the time prescribed, the decision of the finance director or designee shall become final and conclusive and shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall further act as a waiver against future action. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this article or any other provision contained in this Code to the contrary, any operator tendering payment of any tax, interest or penalties to the city pursuant to any provision of this article shall for all purposes thereafter be precluded and barred from appealing, contesting or otherwise challenging the validity or amount of any such tax, interest or penalties pursuant to any otherwise available procedure set forth in this article, or otherwise available by law, unless said payment is made under written protest to the city. Said written protest shall be deemed made for the purposes of this article only by one (1) of the following methods: (1) a written notation set forth on the check, draft, money order, or other negotiable instrument by which payment is tendered, indicating that such payment is made under protest; or (2) a written notice addressed and delivered to the finance director at the time of payment indicating that such payment is made under protest. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 14, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. 2792, § 16, 8-17-09)  
Sec. 35-135. - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for the period of the current calendar year and for the prior period of the three (3) calendar years immediately preceding, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the finance director shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(b)  Each operator within the city is hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes aforesaid at a location within the City of Santa Ana. In the event such books and records cannot be made available within the City of Santa Ana, the operator is hereby required to reimburse the city for the cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, portal to portal travel time, and other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the city in obtaining said audit. 
(c)  The information furnished or secured pursuant to this article shall be confidential to the extent allowed by law; provided, however, this section shall not apply to any disclosures made in connection with any appeal proceeding pursuant to this article, or any civil action relating to the recovery of such taxes, interest or penalties, or any prosecution of any person for violation of any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 35-136. - Refunds. 
(a)  When made. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article it may be refunded as provided in subparagraph (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefore, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance director within one (1) year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the finance director. 
(b)  Refund to hotel visitors. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the finance director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a hotel visitors; provided however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the hotel visitors or credited to rent subsequently payable by the hotel visitors to the operator. 
(c)  Hotel visitors recourse. A hotel visitors may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subparagraph (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the hotel visitors directly to the finance director, or when the hotel visitors having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the finance director that the hotel visitors has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  Written records. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 9, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-137. - Actions to collect taxes; recording and enforcement of liens; cumulative remedies. 
(a)  Actions to collect. Any tax required to be paid by any hotel visitors under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient hotel visitors to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such tax, penalties, interest, and administrative costs incurred in connection therewith, including attorney fees. 
(b)  Recording of a certificate of lien. If any amount required to be paid under this article is not paid when due, the finance director or his designated agent may record in the office of the county recorder(s) of such counties as the finance director may determine a certificate which specifies the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address of the operator liable for the same, a statement that the finance director has complied with all provisions of this article in the determination of the amount required to be paid, and a legal description of the real property owned by the operator. From the time of the recording of the certificate, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon all real property in the county owned by the operator or thereafter acquired before the lien expires. The lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a tax lien and shall continue for ten (10) years from the filing of a certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
(c)  Warrant for collection of tax. At any time within three (3) years after the recording of a certificate of lien, the finance director or his designated agent may issue a warrant directed to any sheriff or marshal for the enforcement of the lien and the collection of any taxes, penalties and interest required to be paid to the city under this article. The warrant shall have the same effect as a writ of execution and be executed in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy and sale pursuant to a writ of execution. 
(d)  Seizure and sale. In lieu of issuing a warrant under subsection (c), at any time within three (3) years after an assessment was issued or a certificate of lien was recorded under subsection (b), the finance director or his designated agent may collect the delinquent amount by seizing or causing to be seized any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell any non-cash or nonnegotiable property or a sufficient part of it at public auction to pay the amount of tax due together with any penalties and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect taxes due shall only be of property of the operator not exempt from execution under provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 9, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-138. - Violations. 
(a)  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, is punishable as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. Each day any such violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this article to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(c)  Any operator violating any of the other mandatory provisions of this article shall be guilty of misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. The commencement of criminal proceedings shall neither preclude nor abate administrative or civil actions to collect taxes due under this article. 
(d)  It shall not be a defense to violations of this article that the operator, including a resident manager, had forwarded any return due or taxes collected to its principal or corporate headquarters, nor that any failure to file or remit taxes was based on the direction or inaction of such principal or corporate headquarters. 
(Ord. No. NS-1091, § 1, 8-16-71; Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92)  
Sec. 35-139. - Security for collection of the tax. 
(a)  To ensure compliance with hotel visitors tax payment requirements, the finance director shall require each new operator subject to such requirements to deposit with the city within one (1) year after the effective date of this article, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, such security in a form acceptable to the finance director in the amount not greater than the person's estimated average liability for the first period for which a return must be filed or the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is the lesser. To recover hotel visitors taxes, including penalties and interest, remittable by the depositor, the finance director may apply the security deposited with the finance director. 
(b)  At least fifteen (15) days prior to the application of a security deposit, the finance director shall serve upon the depositing operator notice of intent to apply the security deposit. Service of notice may be made by placing the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the depositing operator at his hotel. Any portion of the security remaining after satisfaction of outstanding hotel visitors taxes, penalties, interest and costs of sale may be retained by the finance director for security or may be paid over by him to the depositing operator. 
(c)  In the case of the transfer or cessation of business by the depositor, the finance director shall refund or release the security amount required pursuant to this section, upon depositor's presentation to the finance director of either a receipt from the finance director showing that all hotel visitors taxes, including any penalty, interest or other charges or costs outstanding, have been paid or a certificate of nonliability stating the nonliability of the depositor for payment of hotel visitors tax as hereunder provided in section 35-140. 
(Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 9, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-140. - Transfer or cessation of business; operator's duty to notify; remitting and reporting requirements; closeout audit; successor's duty to notify; successor's liability; certificate of nonliability. 
(a)  Operator's duty to notify. An operator who is transferring, selling or terminating his business shall notify the finance director in writing of such sale, transfer or termination and the name and address of the purchaser or transferee at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the transfer, sale or termination, unless the decision to sell, transfer or terminate was made within less than a thirty-day period prior to the transfer, sale or termination, in which case the operator shall then immediately notify the purchaser or transferee of their responsibility for unpaid taxes as set forth in subsections (c) and (d) below, and further certify in writing to the finance director that the transferee or purchaser was notified of the requirements of this article regarding its responsibility for unpaid collected taxes. 
(b)  Remitting and reporting requirements. Each operator upon the transfer or cessation of business for any reason shall, on or before the last day of the next month following the transfer or cessation of business, make a return to the finance director on approved forms of the total taxable rents charged, the amount of tax collected for the reporting period, remittances made, if any, and the balance of the tax due, if any, shall be remitted to the finance director. 
(c)  Closeout audit. After filing the final return and remitting the balance due, the operator shall make his records of account available for a closeout audit by the finance director or duly authorized employee or agent of the city. If, upon audit by the city, the operator transferring or quitting his business is found to have satisfied all hotel visitors liability, the finance director shall issue to such operator a certificate of nonliability stating the nonliability of the operator for payment of hotel visitors taxes. If, upon audit by the city, the operator transferring or quitting his business is deficient in either his return or his remittance or both, the finance director shall immediately assess such operator the amount of the net deficiency in accordance with section 35-132 above. Upon such operator's remittance of the deficient amount plus any penalty and interest assessed, the finance director shall issue a certificate of nonliability. 
(d)  Successor's duty to notify. If an operator who is liable for any hotel visitors taxes, penalties or interest under this article sells or otherwise transfers his business, his assignee or successor in interest shall notify the finance director of the date of the sale or transfer at least thirty (30) days before the date of the sale or transfer. If the decision to sell or transfer was made within less than a thirty-day period prior to the sale or transfer, the assignee or successor in interest shall notify the finance director immediately and shall withhold an amount equal to the accrued or outstanding hotel visitors tax liability of the operator until the transferring operator produces either a receipt from the finance director showing that the tax, including any penalty, interest or other charge or cost outstanding, has been paid or a certificate of nonliability stating the nonliability of the operator for payment of hotel visitors tax. If the transferor does not present a receipt or notice of nonliability within thirty (30) days after such sale or transfer after such assignee or successor commences to conduct business, the assignee or successor shall deposit the withheld amount with the finance director pending settlement of the account of the transferor. 
(e)  Successor's liability. If the assignee or successor in interest fails to withhold the amount required to satisfy the tax liability, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges as set forth in section 35-132. 
(f)  Certificate of nonliability. Within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the application of any operator for a certificate of nonliability for the payment of hotel visitors taxes, the finance director after conducting an audit therefore shall issue the certificate if the operator's tax liability has been satisfied to the date of the application. If tax has accrued to that date, the finance director shall give notice to the operator of the amount which must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. 
(Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 10, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 35-141. - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator, etc. 
(a)  The finance director shall have the power and duty to enforce this article and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the finance director shall be maintained on file in the offices of the finance director. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this article or its application to a specific hotel, operator or hotel visitors, the finance director shall determine the intent of the provision. Such determination shall take the form of a written memorandum of intent. A copy of all such memoranda issued by the finance director shall be maintained on file in the offices of the finance director. 
(b)  The finance director shall have the further power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required report and remitting any taxes collected for thirty (30) days; and shall have the further power, for good cause shown, to waive or release any cash deposit, bond, bankshare, lien, or other security required and to compromise any claim as to any penalty imposed or charge demanded. 
(c)  The finance director may with the consent and approval of the city attorney enter into written agreements with persons liable for the payment of delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, in monthly installments, or more often, extending over a period not exceeding one (1) year. In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed the city and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid, principal together with interest, shall become immediately due and payable. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including attorney fees. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties and interest on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties or additional interest shall accrue as hereinafter provided on account of taxes included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such operator shall not be in breach of the agreement. The execution of such an agreement shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall constitute a waiver against future action. 
(d)  In addition to all other authority conferred upon him, the finance director, upon the concurrence of the city attorney, shall have the authority to discontinue the collection of any claim if it appears that further proceedings would be without merit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2162, § 1, 6-15-92; Ord. No. NS-2648, § 10, 4-5-04)  
Secs. 35-142—35-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY USERS TAX CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, adopted August 4, 2000, essentially re-enacted Article VI of this chapter by repealing the provisions of §§ 35-151—35-168 and replacing them with the similar provisions found in §§ 35-151—35-177 as currently set out herein. For a detailed history of former §§ 35-151—35-168, please refer to the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 35-151. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Utility Users Tax Ordinance of the City of Santa Ana." The word "ordinance," "code" or "article" as used in this article shall mean the "Utility Users Tax Ordinance" unless otherwise so indicated. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2860, § 1, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-152. - Purpose. 
This article is required for the purpose of fixing the rate of taxation for the utility users' tax, and for the purpose of providing a tax levy for the usual and current expenses of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00; Ord. No. NS-2860, § 2, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-153. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall be construed as defined in this section, unless otherwise indicated. 
(a)  "Ancillary telecommunication services" means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services: 
(1)  "Conference bridging service" means an ancillary service that links two (2) or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge. 
(2)  "Detailed telecommunications billing service" means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing statement. 
(3)  "Directory assistance" means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information. 
(4)  "Vertical service" means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one (1) or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services. 
(5)  "Voice mail service" means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service. 
(b)  "Billing address" shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
(c)  "City" shall mean the City of Santa Ana. 
(d)  "Day" shall mean a calendar day. 
(e)  "Gas" shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel that may be substituted therefore. 
(f)  "Mobile telecommunications service" shall mean commercial mobile radio service, as defined in Section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder. 
(g)  "Month" shall mean a calendar month. 
(h)  "Non-utility service supplier" means: 
(1)  A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include but is not limited to any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a), municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity; 
(2)  An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a provider of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; and 
(3)  A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the city. 
(i)  "Paging service" means a "telecommunications service" that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds. 
(j)  "Person" shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and non-profit), joint power agency, municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city), cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
(k)  "Place of primary use" means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. 
(l)  "Post-paid telecommunication service" means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service. 
(m)  "Prepaid telecommunication service" (including prepaid mobile telecommunication service) shall mean the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed. 
(n)  "Private telecommunication service" means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i. e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications). 
(o)  "Service address" means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. For a telecommunication service user, "service address" means either: 
(1)  The location of the service user's telecommunication equipment from which the telecommunication originates or terminates, regardless of where the telecommunication is billed or paid; or 
(2)  If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user's place of primary use. 
(3)  For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the point of sale of the services where the point of sale is within the city, or if unknown, the known address of the service user (e.g., billing address or location associated with the service number), which locations shall be presumed to be the place of primary use. 
(p)  "Service supplier" shall mean any entity or person, including the city that provides, sells, or resells a utility service to a user of such service within the city. 
(q)  "Service user" shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(r)  "State" shall mean the State of California. 
(s)  "Streamlined sales and use tax agreement" means the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the streamlined sales and use tax agreement, as it is amended from time to time. 
(t)  "Tax administrator" shall mean the finance director, or his or her designee. 
(u)  "Telecommunications service" means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term "telecommunications services" includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with "telecommunication services." "Telecommunications services" include, but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service). The term "telecommunication services" shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory or administrative fees, charges or surcharges, including charges or surcharges for programs imposed by state or federal law (whether such charges or surcharges are imposed on the service supplier or the customer); local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. "Telecommunication services" shall not include digital downloads that are not "ancillary telecommunication services," such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products. 
(v)  "VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol)" means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network. 
(w)  "800 Service" means a "telecommunications service" that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name "800," "855," "866," "877," and "888" toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(x)  "900 Service" means an inbound toll "telecommunications service" purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber's customers to call in to the subscriber's prerecorded announcement or live service. "900 service" does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the "telecommunications services" to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber's customer. The service is typically marketed under the name "900" service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00; Ord. No. 2721, § 2, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2723, § 2, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2860, § 3, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-154. - Constitutional exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this code shall be construed as imposing a tax upon: 
(1)  Any person or service when imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or that of the State of California; and 
(2)  The city. 
(b)  Any service user that is exempt from the taxes imposed by this code pursuant to subsection (a) shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a service user of telephone communication services that has received a federal excise tax exemption certificate for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service providers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service providers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service provider of the service user's tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. With respect to a service user of telephone communication service, a service supplier of such telephone communication services doing business in the city shall, upon the request of the tax administrator, provide a copy of the federal exemption for each exempt customer within the city that is served by such service supplier. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-155. - Telephone users tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using telecommunication services. The tax imposed by this Section shall be at the rate of five and one-half (5½) percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the telecommunication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that telecommunication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this section. There is also a rebuttable presumption that prepaid telecommunication services sold within the city are used, in whole or in part, within the city and are therefore subject to taxation under this section. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services. 
(b)  "Mobile telecommunications service" shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this article, sourcing rules for the taxation of other telecommunication services, including but not limited to post-paid telecommunication services, prepaid telecommunication services, VoIP, and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi jurisdictional taxation (e.g., streamlined sales and use tax agreement). 
(c)  The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this article, an administrative ruling identifying those telecommunication services, or charges therefore, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  To prevent actual multi jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section. 
(e)  The tax on telecommunication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of the following month. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00; Ord. No. 2721, § 3, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2723, § 3, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2860, § 4, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-155.1. - Bundling taxable items. 
If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 5, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-155.2. - Substantial nexus/minimum contact. 
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this article, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users' tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any telecommunication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this article. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent, affiliate, or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier's ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of utility services that are subject to a tax under this article (e.g., an affiliated person engaging in activities in the city that inure to the benefit of the service supplier in its development or maintenance of a market for its services in the city). 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 6, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-156. - Electricity users tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City of Santa Ana using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six (6) percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include but is not limited to, the following charges: 
(1)  Energy charges; 
(2)  Distribution or transmission charges; 
(3)  Metering charges; 
(4)  Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar minimum charges for services; 
(5)  Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and 
(6)  Charges, fees or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the utility users tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(d)  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electrical retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) above. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "using electricity" shall not be construed to include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; or the use of such electricity in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency. 
(f)  The tax on electricity provided by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this code shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 35-158 of this code. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month in accordance with section 35-163 of this code; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month in accordance with section 35-163 of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-156.1. - Reduction in rate. 
The electricity users tax imposed under section 35-156 shall be reduced from six (6) percent to five and one-half (5½) percent. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 7, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-157. - Gas user tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City of Santa Ana, other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using gas in the city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at a rate of six (6) percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas, and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
(1)  The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system; 
(2)  Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges); 
(3)  Storage charges; provided, however, that the service provider shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service provider cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service provider and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction; and 
(4)  Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service, and 
(5)  Charges, fees or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the utility users tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(d)  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection (a) above. 
(e)  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: 
(1)  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system; 
(2)  Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electricity or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency; and 
(3)  Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities. 
(f)  The tax that is calculated on charges for gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this code shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 35-158 of this code. All other taxes imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month in accordance with section 35-163 of this code; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month in accordance with section 35-163 of this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-157.1. - Reduction in rate. 
The gas user tax imposed under section 35-157 shall be reduced from six (6) percent to five and one-half (5½) percent. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 8, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-158. - Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
(a)  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by section 35-156 or by section 35-157 of this Code, which produces gas or electricity for self-use, or which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this ordinance, or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, in the city, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty (60) days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. 
(b)  The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its non-utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion of the tax administrator is excessive, the tax administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the primary provider of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-159. - Water user tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City of Santa Ana using water in the city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six (6) percent of the charges made for such water and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier, or its billing agent. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall apply to all services, components and items that are: i) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; or, ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term "charges" shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges: 
(1)  Water commodity charges (potable and non-potable); 
(2)  Distribution or transmission charges; 
(3)  Metering charges; 
(4)  Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; and 
(5)  Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services. If a non-taxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier can reasonably identify charges not subject to the utility users tax based upon its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, which shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(d)  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. 
(e)  The tax on water service imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month in accordance with section 35-163 of this Code. 
(f)  Notwithstanding subsection (e), above, the city, when acting as the service supplier or billing agent, may remit the amount of tax collected to the tax administrator in accordance with any administrative rules established by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-159.1. - Reduction in rate. 
The water user tax imposed under section 35-159 shall be reduced from six (6) percent to five and one-half (5½) percent. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 9, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-160. - Decisions on amounts imposed. 
If any tax, penalty, or interest charge imposed by this code is for any reason held to be discriminatory or invalid in amount, by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of a lesser amount imposed by the tax administrator with the concurrence of the city attorney. The city council hereby declares that it would have imposed a valid utility users tax, penalty, or interest charge of the maximum nondiscriminatory amount permitted by law, up to but not exceeding, the amount provided under this code on the person or persons in question, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more of the taxes, penalties, or interest charges imposed herein may be declared discriminatory or invalid in amount. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-161. - Duty to collect; procedures. 
The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this code shall be performed as follows: 
(a)  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. 
(b)  In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, section 35-167(b) of this code shall apply. 
(c)  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on or after the operative date of this code. Where a person receives more than one (1) billing for different periods, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
(d)  Whenever a service supplier negligently fails in its duty to determine and collect the required tax from a service user, any other amount collected by the service supplier from the service user shall then be subject to a constructive trust in the favor of the city for the full amount of the uncollected tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-162. - Duty to remit—Procedures. 
(a)  Each person required by this code to remit a tax shall file a return with the tax administrator on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date in accordance with section 35-163 of this code. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied and collected in accordance with this code. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to state Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7284.6 as amended from time to time, the tax administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information not subject to the Public Records Act. 
(b)  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: i) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and, ii) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-163. - Timely filing and remittance. 
Returns and taxes may be filed and remitted by the following means: i) in person, ii) by United States Mail, iii) by express carrier, and iv) by electronic means. Returns filed and/or taxes remitted monthly, and actually received by the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this code shall be deemed to be timely filed and/or remitted; otherwise, the taxes are delinquent and subject to the penalties imposed pursuant to section 35-164. Provided, however, that when the last day upon which a return may be filed or a tax remitted falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city, state, or national holiday, a timely filing and remittance may be made upon the first following working day. 
A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this code shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due dates provided in this code, and settles into the city's account on the following business day. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-164. - Penalty and interest; delinquencies and deficiencies in collection and remittance. 
(a)  Taxes collected but not remitted by due date—delinquencies in remittance. If taxes collected by a service supplier from a service user, or self collected by a service user subject to section 35-158 of this code are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this code, such taxes shall be delinquent. The tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies in remittance at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total delinquent amount due. 
(b)  Taxes not collected—delinquencies in collection. If a service supplier required to collect any tax hereunder fails to collect such tax, or, if a service user required to self-collect and remit the tax pursuant to section 35-158 of this code, fails to self collect the tax, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies in collection at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax amount that is determined to be due. 
(c)  Taxes not fully collected—deficiencies in collection. If a service supplier required to collect and remit any tax hereunder fails to collect the full amount of the tax, or, if a service user subject to section 35-158 of this code fails to properly self-collect the full amount of the tax, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such deficiencies in collection at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax amount that is determined to be due. 
(d)  Taxes not fully remitted—deficiencies in remittance. If a service supplier required to collect and remit any tax hereunder fails to remit the full amount of the tax collected, or, if a service user subject to section 35-158 of this code fails to properly remit the full amount of the tax self-collected, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such deficiencies in remittance at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the total tax amount that is determined to be due. 
(e)  Fraud or gross negligence—additional penalties. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any delinquency or deficiency due by any service supplier, or service user required to self-collect and remit the tax pursuant to section 35-158 of this code, is due to fraud or gross negligence, the tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon such persons at the rate of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of the remittance due. 
(f)  Penalties—maximum amount. The cumulative amount of all applicable penalties imposed under this code shall not exceed an amount equal to the amount of the tax originally owed. 
(g)  Interest—due from date of delinquency. Any person subject to any penalty imposed hereinabove in this section, shall also pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (¾) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount subject to penalty, from the date on which the remittance of such amount first became delinquent or deficient until paid. 
(h)  Penalties and interest. All penalties and all interest imposed under this code shall be subject to the same actions to collect and the same provisions for enforcement as the tax imposed by this code. 
(i)  Penalties, interest, delinquencies and deficiencies owed. All penalties and interest imposed under this code together with all delinquencies and deficiencies owed shall be due and payable as of the date of notification which shall be given in the same manner as administrative assessments in accordance with section 35-167 of this code. Any person assessed any amount as delinquency, or deficiency, or penalty, or interest shall have the same right of appeal as provided in the case of administrative assessments in accordance with section 35-167 of this code and shall be governed by the same provisions as set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-165. - Actions to collect. 
Any tax, penalty, or interest required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this code shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user together with any penalties or interest due thereon which have not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the service supplier required to collect and remit. The amount of any tax required to be collected from a service user by a service supplier which is held in constructive trust in the favor of the city shall be a debt owed by the service supplier to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this code shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount plus related costs incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-166. - Tax administrator, ex officio collector of utility users taxes; additional powers and duties of tax administrator, etc. 
(a)  The tax administrator shall be ex officio utility users tax collector. 
(b)  The tax administrator shall have the power and authority to enforce all of the provisions of this code. 
(c)  The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules, regulations, and guidelines, or make administrative agreements consistent with the intent of the provisions of this code for the purpose of administering the provisions herein regarding the payment, collection and remittance of said taxes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-167. - Assessment; administrative remedy. 
The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not collected and/or not remitted or paid by any person required to collect and/or remit or pay. 
(a)  Service supplier or service user—failure to collect and/or remit tax. If any service supplier, or any service user subject to section 35-158 of this code, (hereinafter "service supplier" in this subsection) required to collect and/or remit the tax imposed by this code shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this code, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this code, the tax administrator shall make a determination of the tax due (tax, interest and penalties hereinafter "amount assessed" in this subsection). The tax administrator shall give a written notice of the amount assessed by personal service or by depositing it in the United States mail, addressed to the service supplier at the service supplier's last known address. The service supplier may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed in accordance with section 35-173 of this code. If application by the service supplier for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the amount assessed shall become final and immediately due and payable. 
(b)  Service user—failure to pay tax. Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts remitted to a service supplier required to collect the tax, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax to such service supplier for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this code from such service users for specified billing periods. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names, account numbers, billing and service addresses, and other required information of such non-paying service users together with the amounts owed under the provisions of this code and the specified billing periods for which they are owed. The tax administrator shall give written notice to the non-paying service user that he or she has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal service or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00), along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent (¾) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-168. - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this code to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this code, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. The tax administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to state Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The tax administrator may request from any person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the city, a list of the names, billing and service addresses, quantities of gas or electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to section 6354(e) of the state Public Utilities Code, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or any designated agent of the tax administrator, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by this code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-169. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this code, it may be refunded as provided in this section. No refund will be considered by the tax administrator for a period in excess of twelve (12) months prior to the date application is received. 
(b)  The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this code, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within twelve (12) months of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant's right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
(c)  The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the city, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon as provided in accordance with state Government Code Section 935, as amended from time to time. The city shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in state Government Code Section 912.4, as amended from time to time. If the city fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by state Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city on the last day of the period within which the city was required to act upon the claim as provided in state Government Code Section 912.4. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the city within the three (3) years next preceding a notice of tax deficiency or assessment by the tax administrator, or during any year for which the service supplier, at the request of the tax administrator, has executed a waiver of the defense of the statute of limitations with regard to any claim the city may have for a utility users tax. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this subsection qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the 12-month written claim requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-170. - Low income household exemption. 
(a)  The utility users tax imposed by this code shall not apply to any service user who uses telephone, electric, gas or water services in or upon any premises occupied by such service user, provided the combined gross income of all members of the household in which such user resided was less than the low income household exemption level for the calendar year prior to the fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) for which the exemption provided in this section is applied for. The low income household exemption level shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
The exemption granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier to collect taxes from such exempt individual or the duty of such exempt individual to pay such taxes to the service supplier, unless an exemption is applied for by the service user and granted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) hereof. 
(b)  Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this code because of the provisions of subsection (a) above may file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon forms supplied by the tax administrator and shall recite facts under oath which qualify the applicant for an exemption. The tax administrator shall review all such applications and certify as exempt those applicants determined to qualify therefor notify all service suppliers affected that such exemption has been approved, stating the name of the applicant, the address to which such exempt service is being supplied, the account number, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this code from such exempt service user until further notice by the tax administrator is given. The service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing procedure upon receipt of such notice from the tax administrator, no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice from the tax administrator. 
(c)  All exemptions shall be renewed annually by the exempt service user during the renewal period of April 1 through April 30. The tax administrator shall notify all service suppliers by May 31 of exempt service users who did not renew during the annual renewal period. Each service supplier shall include the service users specified in such notice in its tax billing procedure no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice from the tax administrator. Exemptions shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual; provided such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence. Any individual exempt from the tax shall notify the tax administrator within ten (10) days of any change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemptions provided by this section when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this subsection, however, any service supplier who determines by any means that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or connection, such service supplier shall immediately notify the tax administrator of such fact and the tax administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-171. - Violation; misdemeanor; remedies—Cumulative. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punishable thereafter as provided in section 1-8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(b)  The conviction and fine or imprisonment of any person for violation of this code shall not relieve such person from paying the utility users tax together with any penalty or interest amount due under the terms of this code, nor shall the payment of any utility users tax, or any penalty, or any interest amount due prevent a civil action or criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this code. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-172. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2860, § 10, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed § 35-172 in its entirety. Former § 35-172 pertained to maximum tax amount payable under the utility users tax, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, adopted August 4, 2000.  
Sec. 35-173. - Right to administrative hearing; appeals. 
(a)  If any service user or service supplier (hereinafter "applicant" in this subsection) is aggrieved by any decision, administrative assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, or with the failure to grant a refund or exemption as provided for under this code, such applicant may appeal to the tax administrator in writing for an administrative hearing. If application by the applicant for an administrative hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the prior decision of the tax administrator shall become final. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give at least five (5) days' written notice scheduling a date, time and place for a hearing. Such notice shall be given through personal service or by depositing it in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant's last known address. The applicant may appear before the tax administrator and/or the tax administrator's authorized administrative hearing officer (hereinafter "hearing officer" in this subsection) and offer evidence appealing the tax administrator's decision. After such hearing the "hearing officer" shall make a determination and give written notice to the applicant regarding his or her determination. The determination of the "hearing officer" shall become final and shall render any subsequent appeal null and void and shall further act as a waiver against future action, unless an appeal is taken pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(b)  A timely request for an administrative hearing and attendance is required in accordance with subsection (a) above shall be a prerequisite for an appeal made pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. The determination of an applicant's appeal made pursuant to Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-174. - Nonpayment of tax—Bar to writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this code of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-175. - Saving clause. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor its superseding of any portion of any other code shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any chapter, article, code, or ordinance prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any tax or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-176. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision, and the decision not to enforce such, shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this code or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-177. - Notice of changes to utility users tax code. 
If a tax under this code is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of state Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the code change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the code change. If the service provider fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the code change to all collectors and remitters of the city's utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. NS-2436, § 2, 8-4-00)  
Sec. 35-178. - Effect of state and federal reference/authorization. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this article shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a utility service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent. 
To the extent that the city's authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this article is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this article shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 11, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-179. - No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval; amendment or repeal. 
This article of the Santa Ana Municipal Code may be repealed or amended by the city council without a vote of the people. However, as required by Chapter XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter approval is required for any amendment provision that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this article. The people of the City of Santa Ana affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an increase of the rate of a tax: 
(1)  The restoration of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this article, if the city council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax; 
(2)  An administrative or legislative action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the tax, so long as such interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this article; 
(3)  The establishment a class of persons or class of service that is exempt or excepted from the tax or the discontinuation of any such exemption or exception (other than the discontinuation of an exemption or exception specifically set forth in this article); or 
(4)  The collection of the tax imposed by this article, even if the city had, for some period of time, failed to collect the tax. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 12, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-180. - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this article or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one (1) or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 13, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-181. - Interaction with prior tax. 
(a)  Collection of tax by service providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this amended article as soon as feasible after the effective date of this article, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
(b)  Satisfaction of tax obligation by service users. Prior to April 1, 2015, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to this article, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, with respect to any charge for a service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to this article as amended herein, with respect to that charge. The intent of this paragraph is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior Utility Users' Tax Code to the amended Utility Users' Tax Ordinance (which transition period ends April 1, 2015) and to permit service providers or other persons with an obligation to remit the tax hereunder, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax. 
(c)  Satisfaction of tax obligation by service users paying the prior maximum utility users tax. Prior to July 1, 2015, any person who pays the maximum tax amount payable under the utility users tax pursuant to this article, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to this article as amended herein for the period of July 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015. 
(d)  In the event that a final court order should determine that the election enacting this article (as amended herein) is invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this article (as amended herein) is invalid in whole or in part, then the taxes imposed under this article, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, shall automatically continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant to this article has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or billing date) for which the tax imposed by this article is not valid. However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the city) paid by a person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this article (as amended herein) shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under this article, as it existed prior to its amendment as provided herein, on that service, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a service provided no later than six (6) months subsequent to the date on which the final court order is published. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 14, 12-9-14 )  
Sec. 35-182. - Ratification of prior tax. 
The voters of the City of Santa Ana hereby ratify and approve the past collection of the utility users tax as imposed by Chapter 35, Article VI, of this Code as it existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. NS-2860, § 15, 12-9-14 )  
Secs. 35-183—35-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX. 
 
Sec. 35-200. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Transactions and Use Tax" and shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City of Santa Ana ("city"). 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-201. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following words terms shall have the meaning given in this section: 
In the city means and includes all territory within the city limits. 
Operative Date means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the later of the adoption of this chapter and the approval by the voters of the city of a measure approving the imposition of an increased transactions and use tax; provided that, if the city shall not have entered into a contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration as required by section 35-203. Prior to such date, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-202. - Purpose. 
This article of the Santa Ana Municipal Code has been adopted for the following purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, which authorizes the city to adopt this tax. This article shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
(2)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(3)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
(4)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that can be administered in a manner that will, to the greatest degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of Parts 1.6 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, and thereby minimize the cost of collecting city transactions and use taxes, and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon person's subject to taxation under the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-203. - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incidental to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance. If the city has not contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. The city council may make any technical amendments to this chapter required by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, except for any changes affecting the tax rate, tax methodology, or its manner of collection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-204. - Imposition of transactions and use tax—Rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one and one half cents (1.5) of any gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this article until March 31, 2029 and then at the rate of one cent (1) until March 31, 2039. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-205. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-206. - Imposition of use tax—Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this article, at the rate of one and one-half cents (1.5) of the sales price of the property subject to the tax until March 31, 2029 and then at the rate of one cent (1) of the sales price of the property subject to the tax until March 31, 2039. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-207. - Adoption of provisions of state law—Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in the article and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with § 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-208. - Adoption of provisions of state law—Limitations; limitations on collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(1)  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
(A)  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
(B)  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; 
(C)  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
(i)  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or 
(ii)  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
(D)  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-209. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-210. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(1)  Measure of Tax. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions and use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
(2)  Transactions Tax Exemptions. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(A)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(B)  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
(i)  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
(ii)  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
(C)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date. 
(D)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date. 
For the purposes of subsections (2)(C) and (2)(D) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(3)  Use Tax Exemptions. There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
(A)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
(B)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(C)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date. 
(D)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date. 
For the purposes of subsections (3)(C) and (3)(D) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(4)  Exemption from Collection of Use Tax. Except as provided in subsection (5), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
(5)  Retailer Not Exempt from Collection of Use Tax. "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
(6)  Credit Against Use Tax for Transactions Tax Paid Elsewhere. Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-211. - Adoption of amendments to state law. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this article, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-212. - Enjoining collection prohibited. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the city, or against any officer of the State or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection hereunder, or Parts 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-213. - Termination. 
The authority set forth in this Article VII to impose a retail transactions and use tax shall continue until March 31, 2039. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-214. - Oversight committee. 
The City Council shall, by resolution establish as citizen oversight committee to act in an advisory role to the City Council in reviewing the annual revenue and expenditures of funds from the tax authorized by this article. The resolution shall establish the committee members' terms, qualifications and duties, and the committee's scope of authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-215. - Annual audit. 
An annual audit of the revenue generated by the sales and use tax and the expenditures made will be conducted by an independent certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-216. - Annual expenditures disclosure. 
The City of Santa Ana will publically disclose on an annual basis a list of expenditures made with sales and use tax monies for the preceding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 35-217. - Sunset provision. 
On March 31, 2029, the rate of one and one half cents (1.5) will be reduced to one cent (1) until March 31, 2039 for a total of twenty (20) years. 
(Ord. No. NS-2952 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— House moving code, § 8-1760 et seq.; parades, § 10-7 et seq.; vehicles in parks, § 31-2.16; vehicles for hire, Ch. 32; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference— City may enact vehicle laws only as authorized by state vehicle code, § 21, Veh. Code; for authorized regulation, see § 21100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Applicability of division. 
The definitions contained in this article shall govern the construction of this chapter. Whenever any words or phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein, but are now defined in the vehicle code of the state, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases as though set forth herein in full. 
(Code 1952, § 3210; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-2. - Parking meter zones. 
A parking meter zone, as hereinafter referred to, consists of those public street vehicular parking areas designated for metered parking by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1996, § 1, 2-6-89) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by Ord. No. NS-1996, § 36-2 pertained to definition of central traffic districts A and B and derived from the 1952 Code, § 3210.1, and Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 1962.  
Sec. 36-3. - Alleys. 
The word "alley" means any way or place open to public vehicular traffic which has a usable width of twenty (20) feet or less. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-4. - Holidays. 
For the purposes of this chapter, holidays are Sundays and any other days adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.3; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-5. - Loading zone. 
A loading zone is the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of a vehicle during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.4; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-6. - Official time standards. 
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.5; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-7. - Bicycle. 
A bicycle is a light vehicle without a motor, having two (2) wheels, handlebars and a seat or seats, and propelled by the operator. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.6; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-8. - Parkway. 
The parkway is that portion of the street other than the roadway, median or the sidewalk. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.7; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. 2394, § 1, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 36-9. - Curb. 
The curb is the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.8; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1,1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-10. - Pedestrian. 
(a)  A pedestrian is any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle. 
(b)  A pedestrian includes any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as pedestrian as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.9; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. 2394, § 2, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 36-11. - Director. 
As used in this chapter, "director" or "director of public works" means the executive director of the public works agency of the City of Santa Ana or his or her authorized representative. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.10; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 1, 8-19-91)  
Sec. 36-12. - Police officer. 
A police officer is any officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.11; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1,1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-13. - Vehicle code. 
The vehicle code is the vehicle code of the state. 
(Code 1952, § 3210.12; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1,1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-14. - Skateboard [defined.] 
A "skateboard" is any vehicle, device or conveyance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design upon which a person may place one (1) or more feet, and which is designed to be or can be propelled by human power, and which is not classified as a bicycle in this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1451, § 1, 10-16-78)  
Sec. 36-15. - Motorized skateboard [defined.] 
A "motorized skateboard" is the same as a skateboard in all respects except that it is designed to be or can be self-propelled by motorized power. 
(Ord. No. NS-1451, § 2, 10-16-78)  
Sec. 36-16. - Median. 
The median is that portion of the street which separates lanes of vehicular traffic and is not the roadway, sidewalk or parkway. 
(Ord. No. 2394, § 3, 8-16-99)  
Sec. 36-17. - Roller skate. 
Roller skate shall mean any footwear or device with any number of wheels which may be attached to the foot or footwear and which is designed to be or can be propelled by human power, and which is not classified as a bicycle or skateboard in this Code. This definition includes, but is not limited to, in-line skates. 
(Ord. No. NS-2424, § 1, 5-1-00)  
Sec. 36-18. - Civic center. 
For purposes of this chapter, the civic center is that area in the City of Santa Ana, County of Orange, State of California, bounded by Sycamore Street on the east, Civic Center Drive West on the north, Shelton Street on the west, and Santa Ana Boulevard on the south. 
(Ord. No. NS-2424, § 1, 5-1-00)  
Secs. 36-19—36-24. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 36-25. - Powers of the council—As authorized; methods of exercising. 
The council may exercise any rights, powers or authority granted to it by the provisions of the state vehicle code by either resolution or ordinance. 
(Code 1952, § 3293; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-26. - Same—Resolution effect. 
All resolutions passed and adopted by the council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and pursuant to the provisions of the state vehicle code, affecting subjects covered by this chapter, shall be deemed to be a part of this chapter, and any violations of any of the provisions of any such resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter, to the same effect as if said resolution were fully set out herein. 
(Code 1952, § 3293.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-27. - Violations; penalty; appearance; bail. 
(a)  Officers of the police department, or such employees, agents, or contractors as are assigned by the chief of police or city manager, are authorized to take the number of any vehicle or thing parked, placed, ranked, stored, or left in violation of any of the provisions of this Code; the state vehicle license of such vehicle; the time and date of such overparking; and the make of such vehicle; and to issue, in writing, a citation for said violation in the same form and subject to the same procedure provided for by the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state applicable to the traffic violation within the city. 
(b)  Any operator or owner of a vehicle to whom a citation has been issued for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, may, on or before the appearance date set out on such citation pay to the court as bail, as a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of bail indicated on the citation. Said payment may be made in person or by mailing the same to the clerk of the municipal court, Orange County, within said period. Otherwise, the person may appear for arraignment on the date set forth in the citation. Any owner or operator violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) and for a second conviction within a period of one (1) year, by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one (1) year, by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  Any operator or owner of a vehicle to whom a citation has been issued for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter for which no provision for the posting of bail in full satisfaction of which violation has been made in subsection (b) of this section, may, prior to the appearance date set out on such citation, deposit with the magistrate of said municipal court, such bail as the magistrate shall fix as reasonably sufficient. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and in his discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. All proceedings and things not expressly provided for in this subsection (c) shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Sections 40500, 40501 and 40502 of the State Vehicle Code as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 1952, § 3309; Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 2-16-53; Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 8-2-71; Ord. No. NS-1245, § 1, 1-6-75; Ord. No. NS-2837, § 2, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 36-28. - Effect of regulations upon state highways. 
Any provision of this chapter which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the state department of public works is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the department of public works of the state. 
Whenever this chapter delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which, by state law, requires the prior approval of the state department of public works, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the state department of public works when and to the extent required. 
(Code 1952, § 3294; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1290, § 1, enacted Feb. 2, 1976, repealed § 36-29, derived from Code 1952, § 3295, and Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 1962. Said section provided for notice to the council of traffic-control changes.  
Sec. 36-30. - Authority of officers. 
(a)  Officers of the police department, or such employees as are assigned by the chief of police or city manager, are authorized to enforce all traffic laws of this city, and all of the vehicle code sections applicable in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such employees, agents, or contractors as are assigned by the chief of police or city manager, are authorized to enforce the parking regulations imposed under this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 3220; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1,1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2837, § 3, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 36-31. - Authority to direct traffic—Emergency authority. 
Officers of the police department, or such employees, agents, or contractors as are assigned by the chief of police or city manager, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, signals or other devices in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of fire or other emergency, officers of the police department, or such employees, agents, or contractors as are assigned by the chief of police or city manager, may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1952, § 3220.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2837, § 4, 9-4-12)  
Sec. 36-32. - Same—Fire department officials. 
Officers of the fire department, while they are at the scene of a fire, in the course of their duties, protecting personnel or equipment of the fire department, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. 
(Code 1952, § 3220.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-33. - Same—Flagman. 
A person designated as a flagman by a contractor working on the city streets under a permit issued by the city, or a city employee designated as a flagman by the director of public works or his representative, during construction or repair of, or in, streets, may direct traffic by use of hand signals or warning flags if the operation of special highway construction equipment, trucks, concrete mixers, mobile cranes or other construction equipment might interfere with the safe movement of traffic. 
(Code 1952, § 3220.3; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-34. - Same—Persons other than officials. 
No person other than officers of the police department, or a person deputized by the chief of police, or persons authorized by law, shall direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except in an emergency until an officer arrives, and except that a person may operate, when or as herein provided, a push-button signal erected by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 3221; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-35. - Obstruction or interference with officers. 
No person shall interfere with, or obstruct in any way, any police officers or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Code 1952, § 3222; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-36. - Obedience to directions at school crossings; direction by minor. 
No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the chief of police to control traffic at school crossings, provided such persons giving any order, signal or directions at such school crossings shall at the time be wearing some insignia indicating such appointment. It shall be unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the chief of police. 
(Code 1952, § 3222.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-37. - Stopping at school crossings. 
No person driving, operating or propelling any vehicle or thing shall fail or refuse to stop within fifty feet (50') of the nearest side of a school crosswalk and before passing the point where any signal device, flagman or other person is stationed, giving warning that children are about to cross or are crossing the street; and it is further declared unlawful to proceed until such time as signal has stopped, been raised, or been removed, or the flagman or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go, or has left the locality. 
(Code 1952, § 3223; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-38. - Persons riding bicycles or animals shall obey traffic regulations. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as provided for by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1952, § 3224; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-39. - Public employees shall obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of said chapter, except as otherwise permitted herein or by state statute. 
(Code 1952, § 3225; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-40. - Exemptions to certain vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking and standing of vehicles, shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire departments, any public or private ambulance or any public utility vehicle which is qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle when such vehicle mentioned in this section operates in the manner specified in the vehicle code in response to emergency call. Said provisions regulating parking or standing vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle belonging to the city government or a public utility or its agent while necessarily in use on construction or repair work on or in the public right-of-way. The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of safety of others. 
(Code 1952, § 3226; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-41. - Miscellaneous driving movements and acts prohibited. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while it is in motion and when such vehicles are identified as part of such procession by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(2)  While riding any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, skateboard, motorized skateboard, roller skates, or any toy vehicle, attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway, and no person driving any vehicle shall permit the same to be done. 
(3)  Drive any motor vehicle within or over any sidewalk area or any parkway except at a driveway. 
(4)  Drive over or across any new pavement or freshly painted marking, when any street barrier, sign or marking is in place, warning persons not to drive over or across the same, or when a sign is in place stating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. 
(5)  Drive or operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the city, or by any public utilities, or by any department of the city, or by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city, and no unauthorized person shall move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. 
(6)  Drive a vehicle onto or from any freeway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(7)  Park any vehicle within three hundred (300) feet of any fire apparatus which is stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(8)  Ride a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk within a business district, as that term is defined in California Vehicle Code, Section 235. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk other than in a business district, or in any other public place, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(9)  Drive a vehicle into an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians in such intersection or crosswalk, notwithstanding any official traffic-control device or signal indication to proceed. 
(10)  Drive any motor vehicle upon or over a median. 
(11)  Ride a bicycle, skateboard, motorized scooter, roller skates, or any other device or conveyance with a riding surface of any design which is designed to be or can be propelled by human power within the civic center. Any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be punished by a fine which shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and for any subsequent convictions within one year shall be punished with a fine which does not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(Code 1952, § 3240; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1451, § 3,10-16-78; Ord. No. 2394, § 4, 8-16-99; Ord. No. NS-2424, § 2, 5-1-00; Ord. No. NS-2634, § 2, 7-7-03)  
Sec. 36-42. - Driving around railway barriers. 
No person shall drive any vehicle around, or under, any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such a gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1952, § 3290; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-43. - Amplification devices. 
No driver of a vehicle shall operate or permit operation of any radio system, loudspeaker, or other noise device intended to make sound audible outside the vehicle when the vehicle is being operated upon any street and the purpose of such sound is to advertise for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 1, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-44. - Buses may stop in front of driveway. 
A bus engaged as a common carrier may stop to load or unload passengers in front of a driveway. At no time shall the bus so stop for a period longer than is necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1952, § 3241; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-45. - Obstructions to vision—Prohibited at corners. 
On property on any corner formed by intersecting streets, it shall be unlawful to install, set out, maintain or allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, fence, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the eye, higher than two and one-half (2½) feet above the top of the sidewalk, or, where no sidewalks exist, higher than three (3) feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, within the triangular area between the property line and a diagonal line joining points on the property lines twenty-five (25) feet from the point of their intersection; or, in the case of rounded corners, the triangular area between the tangents to the curve and a diagonal line joining the points on said tangent twenty-five (25) feet from the point of their intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the beginning and at the end of the curve at the corners. 
(Code 1952, § 3292; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-46. - Same—Exemptions. 
The provisions of section 36-45 shall not apply to permanent structures or buildings complying with the zoning ordinance or in existence at the time the ordinance adopting said section became effective, poles and standards for public service utilities, trees trimmed to the trunk to a line at least seven (7) feet above the top of the sidewalk, or where there are no sidewalks, eight (8) feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, supporting members of appurtenances to permanent buildings existing on the date the ordinance adopting said section became effective, official traffic-control devices, places where the contour of the ground is cut so there can be no cross visibility at the intersection, or signs mounted ten (10) feet or more above the ground whose supports do not exceed a maximum dimension of ten (10) inches measured parallel to the ground surface. 
(Code 1952, § 3292.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-47. - Same—Enforcement. 
The enforcement of sections 36-45 and 36-46 shall be under the direction of the director of public works. He shall investigate violations of said sections, give notices as may be required to carry out said sections, and perform such other duties in connection with the enforcement of said sections as may be required. 
Any obstruction maintained in violation of said sections shall be deemed a public nuisance upon failure to obey the provisions of said sections within twenty (20) days after the posting upon the premises of notice to abate the nuisance, signed by the director of public works. The same may be abated in the same manner as any other public nuisance, which shall be in addition to any criminal action against the person maintaining the obstruction to vision. 
(Code 1952, § 3292.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-48. - Skateboards prohibited from roadway and bicycle path. 
No person shall ride any skateboard or motorized skateboard, in, on, over or upon any roadway, as that term is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, in the City of Santa Ana. Furthermore, no person shall ride any motorized skateboard in, on, over or upon any bicycle lane, path or trail in the City of Santa Ana, whether or not such bicycle lane, path, or trail is within a roadway. 
(Ord. No. NS-1451, § 4, 10-16-78) 
Cross reference— "Skateboard," "motorized skateboard" defined, §§ 36-14, 36-15.  
Sec. 36-49. - Prohibition of buses on local streets. 
(a)  No person shall park or drive any private bus on or along any local street. 
(b)  As used in this section, "private bus" means any bus, as defined in section 233 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, which is operated by any person or entity other than a public agency, and which is not in use solely for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  The transportation of school children, the elderly, or the physically handicapped. 
(2)  For nonprofit purposes, such as a vanpool as defined in section 668 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(3)  For pickup or delivery of persons at their home addresses in connection with transportation to or from an airport or other mass transportation facility. 
(c)  As used in this section, "local street" includes any point on a public or private street which has the following characteristics: 
(1)  Either side of the street in either direction is developed primarily with residential uses as far as the next intersecting street. 
(2)  The street has no more than one (1) traffic lane in each direction. 
(3)  The street is not designated as an arterial street in the general plan of the city. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to buses having a gross vehicle weight of less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds. 
(Ord. No. NS-2185, § 1, 3-15-93)  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2922, § 4, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed div. 3, §§ 36-50—36-63, in its entirety. Former div. 1, pertained to "Vending vehicles," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2655, § 1, adopted July 6, 2004 and Ord. No. NS-2701, §§ 1—8, adopted November 7, 2005. 
 
Secs. 36-50—36-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Sec. 21350 et seq., Veh. Code. 
 
Sec. 36-70. - Authority to install. 
The director of public works has the power and the duty to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic-control devices and markings when they are required or authorized by state law, or ordinances or resolutions of this city. No provisions of the vehicle code or this chapter, for which signs or markings are required, shall be enforced against alleged violators unless appropriate signs or markings are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1952, § 3230; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-71. - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto if placed in accordance with the vehicle code and this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of any emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Code 1952, § 3231; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62) 
State Law reference— For similar provisions, see §§ 21461, 21462, Veh. Code.  
Sec. 36-72. - Traffic signals. 
The director of public works is authorized to install and maintain official traffic-control signals at those intersections and at other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion, or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard in accordance with engineering studies. 
(Code 1952, § 3232; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-73. - Roadway markings. 
The director of public works is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings, as described in the vehicle code, on those streets, or parts of streets, where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. 
(Code 1952, § 3232.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-74. - Lane lines. 
The director of public works is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traversed by vehicles, and may place signs temporarily indicating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. 
(Code 1952, § 3232.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-75. - Discontinuance of operation. 
The director of public works is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device or marking not specifically authorized by state law, or this chapter or resolution, whenever engineering studies show that conditions which warrant or require such control no longer exist or where such device or marking is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 3232.3; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-76. - Hours of operation of traffic-control signals. 
The director of public works shall determine the hours in which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in cases where such hours or days are specified by this chapter or any resolution. 
(Code 1952, § 3232.4; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-77. - Temporary devices. 
The chief of police and his authorized officers are authorized to erect and maintain temporary signs or signals regulating traffic and movement of vehicles upon the streets in the city, so as to prohibit travel or turning, of vehicles upon said streets as in their opinion the occasion may require. 
(Code 1952, § 3233; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-78. - Turning markers at intersections designating multiple lanes. 
The director of public works is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which the driver of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by statute or ordinance. The director of public works may place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. 
(Code 1952, § 3234; Ord. No.NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-79. - Restricting right, left or U-turns. 
The director of public works is authorized to determine thoseintersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. The director of public works shall place proper signs at such intersections to indicate the restrictions in force. The signs shall plainly indicate the restrictions in force and the hours in which they are in force, or the signs may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1952, § 3236; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-80. - Restricting turns at red signal. 
The director of public works is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn against a "Stop" or "Red" signal, and shall erect proper signs giving notice of the prohibition. 
(Code 1952, § 3238; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62) 
State Law reference— For authority, see § 21453(b), Veh. Code.  
Sec. 36-81. - Designation of "through" streets and "stop" intersections. 
The director of public works is authorized to designate certain streets in the city to be "Through" streets and certain intersections to be "Stop" intersections, and any railway grade crossing to be a "Stop" intersection. The director of public works shall erect and maintain "Stop" signs as provided in the vehicle code whenever he designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a "Through" street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop, at one (1) or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop. 
(Code 1952, § 3238.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-82. - "Yield right-of-way" signs. 
The director of public works is authorized to designate any intersection to be controlled by "Yield right-of-way" signs. The director of public works shall erect and maintain "Yield right-of-way" signs, as described in the vehicle code, whenever he designates such intersections to be controlled by "Yield right-of-way" signs. 
(Code 1952, § 3238.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Secs. 36-83—36-113. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 36-114. - Establishing crosswalks at intersections. 
The director of public works is authorized to establish and maintain crosswalks at intersections and to designate them by appropriate devices or painted marks or signs upon the surface of the roadway. 
(Code 1952, § 3250; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-115. - Establishing crosswalks between intersections. 
The director shall establish and maintain such crosswalks between intersections as the director may determine to be necessary for pedestrian safety, based on engineering studies which show such necessity, or as the director may be directed to establish by resolution of the city council, and shall designate them by appropriate devices or painted marks or signs upon the surface of the roadway. 
(Code 1952, § 3251; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 2, 8-19-91)  
Sec. 36-116. - Prohibiting pedestrians in crosswalks. 
The director of public works may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection directing pedestrians not to cross in the unmarked crosswalk so indicated. 
(Code 1952, § 3252; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-117. - When pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
Where signs have been posted prohibiting crossing a street other than in a crosswalk, no pedestrian shall cross a street other than in a crosswalk. The director is authorized to post such signs at such locations as the director may determine to be necessary for pedestrian safety. 
(Code 1952, § 3253; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 3, 8-19-91)  
Sec. 36-118. - Standing in median. 
No person shall stand, walk or sit on any median other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk. This section shall not apply to any public officer, construction worker or employee of a public utility or its agent acting in the line of duty if such presence on the median is necessary to carry out the functions of the job. 
(Code 1952, § 3254; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. 2394, § 5, 8-16-99)  
Secs. 36-119, 36-120. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-121. - Crossing guards for elementary schools. 
(a)  Adult crossing guards for street crossings by elementary school children on their way to or from school shall normally be provided by the city if the crossing is in a "suggested route to school," as determined pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, if at least forty (40) such children use the crossing while going to or from school for each of any two (2) hours (not necessarily consecutive) on any school day (except as otherwise provided in subsection (1) b below), and if any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  At uncontrolled crossings where there is no alternate controlled crossing within six hundred (600) feet; and: 
a.  If the critical (eighty-five (85) percentile) approach speed does not exceed forty (40) miles per hour: where the vehicular traffic volume exceeds three hundred fifty (350) vehicles during each of any two (2) hours (not necessarily consecutive) in which forty (40) or more school pedestrians cross daily while going to or from school; or 
b.  If the critical (eighty-five (85) percentile) approach speed exceeds forty (40) miles per hour: where the vehicular traffic volume exceeds three hundred (300) vehicles during each of any two (2) hours (not necessarily consecutive) in which thirty (30) or more school pedestrians cross daily while going to or from school. 
(2)  At stop sign controlled crossings where the vehicular traffic volume on an undivided street of four (4) or more lanes exceeds five hundred (500) vehicles per hour during any period when the school pedestrians are going to or from school. 
(3)  At traffic signal controlled crossings where either: 
a.  The number of vehicular turning movements through the school crosswalk exceeds three hundred (300) per hour while school pedestrians are going to or from school; or 
b.  There are circumstances not normally present at a signalized intersection, such as crosswalks more than eighty (80) feet long with no intermediate refuge, or an abnormally high proportion of large commercial vehicles. 
(b)  The director shall work cooperatively with elementary school officials to develop "suggested routes to school" in accordance with guidelines issued by the California Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1013, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. NS-2141 § 4, 8-19-91)  
Secs. 36-122—36-125. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2141, § 5, adopted Aug. 19, 1991, repealed former §§ 36-122—36-125, which pertained to adult school crossing guards at various locations and derived from Ord. No. NS-1013, § 1, adopted May 4, 1970.  
Sec. 36-126. - Crossing guards for elementary schools; special circumstances. 
In the event a location does not meet the standards set forth in section 36-121, and the appropriate board of education, within whose jurisdiction this intersection is, feels that special circumstances warrant the placement of an adult crossing guard at this location to protect the children crossing to or from their elementary school, the board may place an adult crossing guard at this intersection at its own expense. In such event, the city will place such guards under city police control and will provide them only with training and supervision at city expense. 
(Ord. No. NS-1013, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 6, 8-19-91)  
Secs. 36-127—36-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 36-130. - Applicability of parking regulations. 
The provisions of this article imposing regulations on stopping or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty of other or more restrictive provisions of the vehicle code, or the ordinances of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles at specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1952, § 3261; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-131. - Parking signs and curb markings, color legend. 
The director is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place and maintain and, when required herein, shall place the following curb markings or signs to indicate parking, standing or stopping regulations, and said curb markings and signs shall have the meanings as herein set forth as follows: 
(1)  Red curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time of any day except as permitted by the vehicle code. 
(2)  Yellow curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day or, if a sign specifying a different time period has been posted adjacent to the yellow marked curb, during the time period specified in such sign, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes, and such loading or unloading shall be actively carried on during all of the said time. 
(3)  White curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time of any day or, if a sign specifying a time period has been posted adjacent to the white marked curb, during the time period specified in such sign, for any purpose other than stopping for three (3) minutes or less for the purpose of loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. 
(4)  Green curb markings shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for a period of time longer than twelve (12) or twenty-four (24) minutes at all times or during certain hours of the day as designated by signs. Such restrictions may be limited so as not to apply on specified days and, if so limited, such limitation shall also be designated on said signs. 
(5)  Blue curb markings or a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background posted immediately adjacent to and visible from each parking space, indicates parking for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans, as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1952, § 3260; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1302, § 1, 4-5-76; Ord. No. NS-1782, § 1, 7-1-85; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 7, 8-19-91)  
Sec. 36-132. - No parking zones. 
The director of public works is authorized to place signs or markings prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking at all times or during certain hours of the day on any portion of any street within the city where the council so directs by resolution, or where engineering studies have been made and the director of public works determines that such signs or markings are necessary to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of traffic. Such restrictions may be limited so as not to apply on specified days. 
When a sign or marking giving notice of such a restriction is in place, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of such sign or marking. 
Police officers are authorized to remove a vehicle from the roadway when such vehicle is stopped, standing or parked in violation of this section, provided that a sign giving notice that the vehicle may be removed has been posted. 
(Code 1952, § 3261.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1546, § 2, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 36-133. - No parking or standing during street sweeping. 
(a)  No operator of any motor vehicle, and no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any street in the city that is designated as to days and times for street sweeping during the time period parking is prohibited for street sweeping. 
(b)  The director is hereby authorized to determine the locations of and to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs designating the hours during which, and day or days of the month on which, parking is prohibited in order to permit city equipment to sweep the streets. 
(Ord. No. NS-1782, § 3, 7-1-85; Ord. No. NS-2141, § 8, 8-19-91)  
Sec. 36-134. - Emergency parking signs. 
Whenever the director of public works or the chief of police shall determine that, in a special situation, traffic congestion is likely to result on any street or alley from holding public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, street construction, maintenance or repair work, or for any other reason, they shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such special situation, and the director of public works or the chief of police shall cause such signs to be moved promptly thereafter. When signs authorized by provisions of this article are in place giving notice of the provisions thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
The chief of police is authorized to remove such vehicle from the roadway when such vehicle is parked in violation of this section. 
(Code 1952, § 3261.3; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-135. - Parking in alleys and parkways. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in any alley in the city except while actively engaged in loading or unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(c)  Police officers are authorized to remove a vehicle from the alley or parkway when such vehicle is stopped, standing or parked in violation of this section, provided that a sign giving notice that the vehicle may be removed has been posted. 
(Code 1952, § 3261.4; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2146, § 1, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 36-136. - Parking at certain places and for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  Parking for sale, etc., when inoperative. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle for a period of time longer than twelve (12) hours on any public street or highway in the city unless such vehicle is in a condition to be lawfully operated upon the public highways; and no person shall repair, dismantle, overhaul or do any mechanical work upon any vehicle on any part of any public street or highway in the city except to change rims, to replace flat tires or to make other emergency repairs to enable such vehicle to be moved to the proper place for mechanical work. 
(b)  Parking over seventy-two hours. No person who owns or has custody or control of any vehicle shall park or store such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. The chief of police is authorized to remove any vehicle from the roadway if such vehicle is parked or stored in violation of this subsection (b). 
(c)  Parking on left of one-way roadway. In the event the highway way includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon such roadway, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such a one-way roadway. 
(Code 1952, § 3261.5; Ord. No. NS-560, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-878, § 1, 11-20-67; Ord. No. NS-1587, § 1, 7-6-81; Ord. No. NS-1660, § 2, 3-21-83; Ord. No. NS-2241, § 3, 10-5-94) 
Cross reference— Pedestrian food vendors, § 26-100 et seq.  
Sec. 36-137. - Left side parking on one-way streets. 
Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked parallel to and within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb, facing in the direction of the traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(Code 1952, § 3262; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-138. - Parking spaces, bus zones, loading zones and physically handicapped zones. 
(a)  The director of public works is authorized to install parking space markings to indicate the parking spaces adjacent to curb where authorized parking is permitted. No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any public street in the city where the surface of said street has been marked with painted lines designating parking spaces or stalls so that said vehicle is across or upon any such line or in such a position that said vehicle is not entirely within the area designated by such lines as a parking space or stall. 
(b)  The director of public works is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading and unloading of buses and common carriers of passengers, and to determine the location and length thereof. 
(c)  The director of public works is authorized to establish loading zones, and no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any loading zone for a period of time longer than is permitted for such loading zone. 
(d)  The director of public works is authorized to establish and maintain parking zones limited exclusively for vehicles of physically handicapped persons displaying either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans, as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1952, § 3263; Ord. No. NS-547, 11-20-61; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62, Ord. No. NS-1302, § 2, 4-5-76)  
Sec. 36-139. - Angle parking areas. 
No operator shall park or stand any vehicle in any manner except diagonal to the curb, entirely between the parallel lines painted on the pavement delineating a parking stall on those portions of the streets described as follows: 
(a)  The east side of Ross Street, between Santa Ana Boulevard and Civic Center Drive; 
(b)  Both sides of Fourth Street, between Ross Street and French Street; 
(c)  The south side of Walnut Street, between Parton Street and Ross Street, and the north side of Walnut Street, between Parton Street and Flower Street; 
(d)  The south side of St. Gertrude Place, between Towner Street and Flower Street; 
(e)  The north side of Anahurst Place, between Towner Street and Flower Street; 
(f)  The south side of Tenth Street, between Raitt Street and Townsend Street; 
(g)  The south side of Ninth Street, between Raitt Street and a point 110 feet west of the west property line of Raitt Street; 
(h)  The Van Ness Avenue cul-de-sac north of Fifteenth Street; 
(i)  The east side of Center Street between Monte Vista Avenue and McFadden Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 3264; Ord. No. NS-560, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-643, § 1, 4-1-63; Ord. No. NS-797, § 1, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-968, § 1, 5-19-69; Ord. No. NS-973, § 3, 7-22-69; Ord. No. NS-1552, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. NS-1681, § 1, 5-16-83)  
Sec. 36-140. - Angle parking marking. 
Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the director of public works shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles may be parked. 
(Code 1952, § 3264.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 36-141, relative to parking time limits in central traffic districts "A" and "B," was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1546, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1980. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 3265, and Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, enacted Jan. 15, 1962.  
Sec. 36-142. - Time limit parking. 
The executive director of the public services agency is authorized to place signs or markings prohibiting parking in excess of twelve (12) minutes, twenty-four (24) minutes, one (1) hour, or two (2) hours on any portion of any street within the city, for any time period up to and including twenty-four (24) hours per day, where the council so directs by resolution, or where the executive director of the public services agency determines that such restriction is necessary to accommodate the public demand for short-term parking. Such restrictions may be limited so as not to apply on specified days. 
When a sign or marking giving notice of such a restriction is in place, no person shall park any vehicle or leave the same parked, whether attended or unattended, for a period of time longer than set out on said sign or marking. 
(Code 1942, § 3265.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1546, § 3, 10-6-80; Ord. No. NS-1782, § 2, 7-1-85)  
Sec. 36-143. - Continuing violations; additional offenses. 
Every person violating a sign or marking placed in accordance with the provisions of sections 36-138, 36-142, 36-147, or 36-147.1 which prohibits parking for longer than a specified period of time is guilty of a separate and further violation for each period of time that the vehicle is left so parked, equal to the maximum legal parking time specified by such sign marking. 
(Code 1952, § 3266; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1546, § 4, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 36-144. - Same—All night parking prohibited on certain streets; exception. 
(a)  No person shall park and leave standing any vehicle for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) a.m. and six o'clock (6:00) a.m. of any day upon any portion of Main Street, Broadway, First Street, Seventeenth Street, Flower Street, Edinger Avenue, Warner Avenue, Bristol Street, Eighth Street or Fourth Street, or upon any portion of any public highway in the city where parking meters have been installed along the curb, or at any place on any such highway between any two (2) parking meters along the curb. 
(b)  Exception. Notwithstanding subsection (a), parking is allowed in designated parking meters on Fourth Street between Ross Street and Mortimer Street every night until four o'clock (4:00) a.m. 
(Code 1952, § 3268; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2880, § 8, 9-1-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2880, § 8, adopted September 1, 2015 , amended § 36-144 in its entirety. Previously § 36-114 was titled "Same—All night parking prohibited on certain streets."  
Sec. 36-145. - Same—Commercial vehicles. 
No person shall park and/or leave standing on any street, or portion thereof, in any residential district located within the city any commercial vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more for a period of time longer than two (2) hours. Such restriction shall not apply to any commercial vehicle which is making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the residential street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the residential street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Code 1952, § 3268.1; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2419, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Sec. 36-145.5. - Ban on parking vehicles exceeding six feet in height within one hundred feet of intersections. 
The executive director of public works may designate certain streets or highways, or portions thereof, for which during all or certain hours of the day, the stopping, parking, or standing of vehicles that are six (6) feet or more in height (including any load thereon) shall be prohibited within one hundred (100) feet of any intersection. With the exception of alleys, any such prohibition shall not apply until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2457, § 3, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 36-146. - Curb parking right-of-way. 
For the purpose of this section a curb parking space shall be an area open for lawful parking alongside or adjacent to a curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two (2) or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time. Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at said parking space prior to any vehicle other than his, and who proceeds beyond said space a distance not to exceed ten feet (10') measured at the rear bumper, for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way over any person driving, or attempting to drive, any other vehicle directly into such curb parking space, or who, in any manner, obstructs such curb parking space; and driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to the driver first arrived at said parking space. 
(Code 1952, § 3267; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-147. - Parking on city property. 
Whenever the executive director of the public services agency shall determine that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted in any manner, including the issuing of permits for overnight parking, the executive director of the public services agency shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand a vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs, and any vehicle parked in violation of such signs may be towed to a public storage garage at the expense of the owner of such vehicle; or the police department may, and it is granted authority to, issue a citation in the usual form and manner for any violation of the prohibition, limitation or restriction indicated by such signs or for any violation of the provisions of this article. Any parking, movement or ranking of any vehicle on any city-owned parking lot, whether open to the public or restricted to certain classes of vehicles, which is in violation of the language of subsections (1) through (9), (12) and (13) of section 36-142 is declared to be in violation of this article and shall be treated as though the language of said sections were set forth in full hereinafter. 
(Code 1952, § 3268.2; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-708, § 1, 1-6-64; Ord. No. NS-1782, § 4, 7-1-85)  
Sec. 36-147.1. - Parking on property of community redevelopment agency or property of joint powers agencies of which city is a member. 
(a)  Whenever the city has entered into a joint powers agreement with any other public entity, section 36-147 of this Code shall apply to any parking facility located within Santa Ana, owned or operated jointly by the parties to said agreement in the same manner and to the same extent as if the facility were exclusively owned by the city, providing the governing body of said joint authority has first requested such application. 
(b)  Section 36-147, of this Code shall apply to any parking facility or area owned by the community redevelopment agency of the City of Santa Ana in the same manner and to the same extent as if the facility were exclusively owned by the city providing the executive director of the community redevelopment agency has first requested such application. 
(Ord. No. NS-1194, § 2, 2-25-74; Ord. No. NS-1782, § 5, 7-1-85)  
Sec. 36-148. - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by contract with this city, shall paint any public street or curb surfaces. 
(Code 1952, § 3269; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-2440, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Secs. 36-149—36-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 36-170. - Designated; placing signs. 
The city council designates certain streets or portions thereof as streets, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons; these streets shall be known as truck routes, and are described as follows: 
(1)  Seventeenth Street-Westminister Avenue, all portions within the city. 
(2)  Fourth Street, all portions within the city from Grand Avenue, easterly. 
(3)  First Street, all portions within the city. 
(4)  Edinger Avenue, all portions in the city. 
(5)  Warner Avenue, all portions in the city. 
(6)  MacArthur Boulevard, all portions in the city. 
(7)  Segerstrom Avenue-Dyer Road, all portions in the city. 
(8)  Bristol Street, all portions in the city. 
(9)  Main Street, all portions in the city. 
(10)  Standard Avenue, between Warner Avenue and First Street. 
(11)  Grand Avenue, all portions in the city. 
(12)  Harbor Boulevard, all portions in the city. 
(13)  Euclid Street, all portions in the city. 
(14)  Fairview Street, all portions in the city. 
(15)  Tustin Avenue, all portions in the city. 
(16)  Memory Lane, all portions in the city from Bristol, westerly. 
The director of public works is authorized to designate the above streets by appropriate signs as truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons, where, in his opinion, such designation is required. 
(Code 1952, § 3270; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-1699, § 1, 10-24-83)  
Sec. 36-171. - Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets. 
The city council designates all streets in the city, except those enumerated in section 36-170, as streets on which any commercial vehicle of gross weight over three (3) tons is prohibited. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets, when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise, from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets, for which a building permit has been previously obtained. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a passenger bus under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, or owned by a bus company licensed by the city, or to any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or any vehicle owned by the city while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of a city utility or street. The director of public works may erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by this section where he deems the same to be necessary. 
(Code 1952, § 3271; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1, 1-15-62)  
Sec. 36-172. - Terminal access routes. 
(a)  The truck routes specified in section 36-170, exclusive of the streets specified in subsection (b) of this section, are hereby designated as terminal access routes, which may be used by a combination of vehicles (consisting of a truck tractor and semitrailer, or of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer) which exceeds any of the size limitations set forth in sections 35400 and 35401 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, and which is exempted from such limitations pursuant to Section 35401.5(a) of said Vehicle Code, for the purpose of access to or from a facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be off-loaded or at which the vehicle combinations are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured. 
(b)  The following streets are excluded from the designation of terminal access routes under this section: 
(1)  Main Street north of Warner Avenue. 
(2)  Fourth Street west of Tustin Avenue. 
(c)  The executive director of the public works agency is authorized and directed to provide signing as necessary to indicate the use as terminal access routes of the streets specified in this section for such use. 
(d)  From and after the provision of signing pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, no person may operate any combination of vehicles exceeding any of the size limitations set forth in Sections 35400 and 35401 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California on any street in the City of Santa Ana other than streets which are designated as terminal access routes pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1932, § 1, 10-19-87)  
Secs. 36-173—36-192. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ONE-WAY TRAVEL 
 
Sec. 36-193. - One-way streets and alleys. 
The director of public works is authorized to post signs and official traffic-control devices restricting vehicular traffic to one direction only, at all times or during certain hours of the day, on any portion of any alley, street, or specific lane on any street within the city where the council so directs by resolution, or where engineering studies have been made and where the director of public works determines that it is necessary to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
When a sign or official traffic-control device giving notice that vehicular traffic is so restricted is in place, no person shall operate a vehicle in violation of such sign. 
(Code 1952, § 3272; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1,1-15-62; Ord. No. NS-643, § 2, 4-1-63; Ord. No. NS-797, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. NS-969, § 1, 5-19-69; Ord. No. NS-1234, § 1, 9-16-74; Ord. No. NS-1546, § 5, 10-6-80)  
Sec. 36-194—36-196. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1546, § 1, enacted Oct. 6, 1980, repealed §§ 36-194—36-196, relative to the placing of signs on one-way streets, operation of vehicles in violation of such one-way street signs, and designation of one-way alleys. Said sections were derived from Code 1952, §§ 3272.1, 3272.2, 3273; Ord. No. NS-560, § 1. adopted Jan. 15, 1962; Ord. No. NS-695, adopted Nov. 18, 1963, and Ord. No. NS-710, § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 1964.  
Secs. 36-197—36-226. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2904 § 2, adopted October 18, 2016 , repealed art. VII, §§ 36-227—36-371, in its entirety; and § 3, enacted a new art. VII, to read as set out herein. Former art. VII, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2822, § 2, adopted August 24, 2011. 
 
Sec. 36-227. - Prima facie speed limits in general. 
The City Council of the City of Santa Ana determines and declares, upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys made on or after January 7, 2016, which surveys are public records on file in the offices of the Public Works Agency of the City, that the prima facie speed limits specified in those sections are reasonable, safe and most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic upon the streets and portions of streets specified in those sections, which streets and portions of streets would otherwise be subject to the prima facie speed limits established in the California Vehicle Code. 
These prima facie speed limits shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the streets and portions of streets to which they pertain. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any twenty-five (25) mile per hour prima facie speed limit which is applicable when passing a school or the grounds thereof. 
( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-228. - Alton Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Alton Avenue are as follows: 
Between Susan Street and Greenville Street 	45 
Between Greenville Street and Bristol Street 	45 
Between Main Street and Standard Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-229. - Bear Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Bear Street are as follows: 
Between Sunflower Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard 	40 
Between MacArthur Boulevard and Alton Avenue 	40 
Between Alton Avenue and Segerstrom Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-230. - Bristol Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Bristol Street are as follows: 
Between Hesperian/SR 22 EB On-Ramp & Santa Clara Ave. 	45 
Between Santa Clara Avenue and Seventeenth Street 	45 
Between Seventeenth Street and Civic Center Drive 	40 
Between Civic Center Drive and Walnut Street 	35 
Between Walnut Street and McFadden Avenue 	40 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	40 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	40 
Between Warner Avenue and Segerstrom Avenue 	40 
Between Segerstrom Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard 	40 
Between MacArthur Boulevard and Sunflower Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-231. - Broadway and Broadway Place. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Broadway and Broadway Place are as follows: 
Between Main Place Drive and Seventeenth Street 	40 
Between Seventeenth Street and Washington Avenue 	35 
Between Washington Avenue and Civic Center Drive 	30 
Between Civic Center Drive and First Street 	25 
Between First Street and McFadden Avenue 	30 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	30 
Between Edinger Avenue and Main Street (250 feet North of Warner Avenue) 	30 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-232. - Cabrillo Park Drive. 
The speed limit (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Cabrillo Park Drive is as follows: 
Between Seventeenth Street and Fourth Street 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-233. - Cambridge Street. 
The speed limit (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Cambridge Street is as follows: 
Between the North City Limit (NCL)/Route 22 and Fairhaven Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-234. - Chestnut Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Chestnut Avenue are as follows: 
Between Main Street and Standard Avenue 	30 
Between Standard Avenue and Grand Avenue 	35 
Between Grand Avenue and the East City Limit (ECL)/Elk Lane/Main Street 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-235. - Civic Center Drive. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Civic Center Drive are as follows: 
Between Fairview Street and Bristol Street 	35 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	35 
Between Flower Street and Broadway 	25 
Between Broadway and French Street 	25 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-236. - Dyer Road. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Dyer Road are as follows: 
Between Flower Street and Main Street 	40 
Between Main Street and Halladay Street 	40 
Between Halladay Street and Route 55 Freeway 	40 
Between Route 55 Freeway and Barranca Parkway/Red Hill Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-237. - Edinger Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Edinger Avenue are as follows: 
Between the West City Limit (WCL) east of Euclid Street and Richardson Street 	40 
Between Santa Ana River (WCL) and Fairview Street 	40 
Between Fairview Street and Raitt Street 	35 
Between Raitt Street and Bristol Street 	35 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	40 
Between Flower Street and Main Street 	40 
Between Main Street and Standard Avenue 	40 
Between Standard Avenue and Ritchey Street 	45 
Between Ritchey Street and the East City Limit (ECL) 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-238. - Euclid Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Euclid Street are as follows: 
Between Westminster Avenue and First Street 	40 
Between First Street and the South City Limit (SCL)/Lenhardt Avenue 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-239. - Fairhaven Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Fairhaven Avenue are as follows: 
Between Grand Avenue and Linwood Avenue 	40 
Between Linwood Avenue and Greengrove Street East City Limit (ECL) 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-240. - Fairview Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Fairview Street are as follows: 
Between Route 22 EB Off-Ramp and Fifth Street 	45 
Between Fifth Street and Edinger Avenue 	45 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	45 
Between Warner Avenue and Alton Avenue 	45 
Between Alton Avenue and Sunflower Avenue 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-241. - Fifth Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Fifth Street are as follows: 
Between Euclid Street and Harbor Boulevard 	30 
Between Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street 	35 
Between Fairview Street and Hawley Street 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-242. - First Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of First Street are as follows: 
Between the West City Limit (WCL) west of Euclid and Newhope Street 	40 
Between Newhope Street and Harbor Boulevard 	40 
Between Harbor Boulevard and Townsend Street 	40 
Between Townsend Street and Flower Street 	40 
Between Flower Street and Birch Street 	40 
Between Birch Street and Standard Avenue 	40 
Between Standard Avenue and Tustin Avenue/the East City Limit (ECL) 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-243. - Flower Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Flower Street are as follows: 
Between Seventeenth Street and Santa Ana Boulevard 	35 
Between Santa Ana Boulevard and Bishop Street 	35 
Between Bishop Street and Warner Avenue 	30 
Between Warner Avenue and Sakioka Drive/Sunflower Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-244. - Fourth Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Fourth Street are as follows: 
Between Mortimer Street and McClay Street 	35 
Between McClay Street and Route 5 Freeway 	35 
Between Interstate 5 Freeway and Route 55 Freeway 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-245. - Grand Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Grand Avenue are as follows: 
Between the North City Limit (NCL)/SR 22 Ramps and Fairhaven Avenue 	35 
Between Fairhaven Avenue and Santa Clara Avenue 	40 
Between Santa Clara Avenue and Seventeenth Street 	40 
Between Seventeenth Street and First Street 	40 
Between First Street and McFadden Avenue 	45 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	45 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	45 
Between Warner Avenue and Dyer Road 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-246. - Greenville Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Greenville Street are as follows: 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	30 
Between Warner and Sunflower/Wimbledon 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-247. - Halladay Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Halladay Street are as follows: 
Between Warner Avenue and Dyer Road 	30 
Between Dyer Road and Alton Avenue 	30 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-248. - Harbor Boulevard. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Harbor Boulevard are as follows: 
Between Westminster Avenue and Fifth Street 	40 
Between Fifth Street and First Street 	40 
Between First Street and a point six hundred (600) feet south of Kent Avenue 	40 
Between the city limits of Santa Ana at Santa Ana River (N/O Warner) and Segerstrom Avenue 	40 
Between Segerstrom Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-249. - Hazard Avenue. 
The speed limit (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Hazard Avenue is as follows: 
Between Euclid Street and Harbor Boulevard 	30 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-250. - Lake Center Drive. 
The speed limit (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Lake Center Drive is as follows: 
Between Harbor Boulevard and Susan Street 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-251. - Lincoln Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Lincoln Avenue are as follows: 
Between Fairhaven Avenue and Santa Clara Avenue 	35 
Between Santa Clara Avenue and Seventeenth Street 	35 
Between Seventeenth Street and Washington Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-252. - Lyon Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Lyon Street are as follows: 
Between First Street and McFadden Avenue 	35 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	35 
Between Edinger Avenue and Saint Andrew Place 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-253. - MacArthur Boulevard. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portion of MacArthur Boulevard are as follows: 
Between the West City Limit (WCL) at Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street 	40 
Between Fairview Street and Main Street 	40 
Between Main Street and the East City Limit (ECL) at SR 55 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-254. - Main Place Drive. 
The speed limit (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Main Place Drive is as follows: 
Between Main Street/Memory Lane and Broadway 	35 
Between Broadway and Main Street/Town & Country Road 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-255. - Main Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Main Street are as follows: 
Between the North City Limit (NCL) at SR 22 and Seventeenth Street 	35 
Between Seventeenth Street and Washington Avenue 	35 
Between Washington Avenue and First Street 	30 
Between First Street and Chestnut Avenue 	35 
Between Chestnut Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	35 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	35 
Between Warner Avenue and Goetz Avenue 	40 
Between Goetz Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard 	40 
Between MacArthur Boulevard and Sunflower Avenue 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-256. - McFadden Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of McFadden Avenue are as follows: 
Between the Sail Street/West City Limit (WCL) and Euclid Street 	40 
Between Euclid Street and Newhope Street 	40 
Between Newhope Street and Harbor Boulevard 	40 
Between Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street 	40 
Between Fairview Street and Raitt Street 	35 
Between Raitt Street and Bristol Street 	35 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	30 
Between Flower Street and Main Street 	35 
Between Main Street and Standard Avenue 	35 
Between Standard Avenue and Grand Avenue 	35 
Between Grand Avenue and the East City Limit (ECL) 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-257. - Memory Lane. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Memory Lane are as follows: 
Between Santa Ana River/West City Limit (WCL) and Bristol Street 	40 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	35 
Between Main Street and the North City Limit (NCL)/Parker Street 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-258. - Newhope Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Newhope Street are as follows: 
Between Westminster Avenue and First Street 	35 
Between First Street and Edinger Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-259. - Pullman Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portion of Pullman Street are as follows: 
Between Warner Avenue and Dyer Road 	40 
Between Dyer Road and Garry Avenue 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-260. - Raitt Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Raitt Street are as follows: 
Between First Street and Willits Street 	30 
Between Willits Street and McFadden Avenue 	35 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	40 
Between Edinger Avenue and Saint Gertrude Place 	40 
Between Saint Gertrude Place and Warner Avenue 	40 
Between Warner Avenue and Segerstrom Avenue 	40 
Between Segerstrom Avenue and Alton Avenue 	40 
Between MacArthur Boulevard and Sunflower Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-261. - Ritchey Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Ritchey Street are as follows: 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	40 
Between Edinger Avenue and Wright Street 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-262. - Santa Ana Boulevard. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Santa Ana Boulevard are as follows: 
Between Raitt Street and Bristol Street 	35 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	35 
Between Flower Street and Ross Street 	30 
Between Ross Street and French Street 	25 
Between French Street and Santiago Street 	30 
Between Santiago Street and Grand Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-263. - Santa Clara Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Santa Clara Avenue are as follows: 
Between Lincoln Avenue and Grand Avenue 	35 
Between Grand Avenue and Wright Street 	40 
Between Wright Street and Tustin Avenue 	40 
Between Tustin Avenue and East City Limit (ECL)/Route 55 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-264. - Segerstrom Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Segerstrom Avenue are as follows: 
Between Santa Ana River/West City Limit (WCL) and Spruce Street 	40 
Between Spruce Street and Flower Street/Dyer Road 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-265. - Seventeenth Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Seventeenth Street are as follows: 
Between Fairview Street and West City Limit 	40 
Between Fairview Street and Bristol Street 	40 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	40 
Between Flower Street and Main Street 	35 
Between Main Street and Wright/Eastside Street 	35 
Between Wright/Eastside Street and Tustin 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-266. - Standard Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Standard Avenue are as follows: 
Between First Street and Chestnut Avenue 	30 
Between Chestnut Avenue and McFadden Avenue 	30 
Between McFadden Avenue and Edinger Avenue 	30 
Between Edinger Avenue and Warner Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-267. - Susan Street. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Susan Street are as follows: 
Between Harvard Street and Pendleton Avenue 	35 
Between Warner Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard 	35 
Between MacArthur Boulevard and Sunflower Avenue 	35 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-268. - Reserved.  
Sec. 36-269. - Tustin Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Tustin Avenue are as follows: 
Between North City Limit (NCL)/Fairhaven Avenue and Twentieth Street 	40 
Between Seventeenth Street and Fruit Street 	40 
Between Fruit Street and the South City Limit (SCL) north of First Street 	40 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-270. - Warner Avenue. 
The speed limits (in miles per hour) for the following portions of Warner Avenue are as follows: 
Between the West City Limit (WCL)/Santa Ana River west of Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street 	45 
Between Fairview Street and Raitt Street 	45 
Between Raitt Street and Bristol Street 	45 
Between Bristol Street and Flower Street 	40 
Between Flower Street and Main Street 	40 
Between Main Street and Grand Avenue 	40 
Between Grand Avenue and the Route 55 Freeway 	45 
Between the Route 55 Freeway and Red Hill Avenue 	45 
 
;hn0; ( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Sec. 36-271. - Westminster Avenue. 
Between Euclid Street and Newhope Street 	45 
Between Newhope Street and Clinton Street 	45 
 
( Ord. No. NS-2904, § 3, 10-18-16)  
Secs. 36-272—36-397. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PARKING METERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Parking lots, § 36-431 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-398. - Parking meter district; zones and fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 22508 of the California Vehicle Code, parking meter districts and parking meter district zones may be established and determined by ordinance of the city council and the boundaries of the parking meter district shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of South line of First Street and the Southerly prolongation of the West line of Olive Street, thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the Southerly prolongation of the East line of Spurgeon Street and the Easterly prolongation of the South line of First Street; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the Southeast corner of Spurgeon Street and Third Street; Thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the Southerly prolongation of the East line of French Street and the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Third Street; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the Southeast corner of Fourth Street and French Street; Thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the Southerly prolongation of the East line of Mortimer Street and the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Fourth Street; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Sixth Street and Mortimer Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of French Street and Santa Ana Boulevard; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the North line of Eighth Street and the Northerly prolongation of the East line of French Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Spurgeon Street and Eighth Street; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Washington Avenue and Spurgeon Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Bush Street and Washington Avenue; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Seventeenth Street and Bush Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Main Street and Seventeenth Street; Thence Northerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Buffalo Avenue and the Northerly prolongation of the East line of Main Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Southwest corner of Main Street and Buffalo Avenue; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Seventeenth Street and Main Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Broadway and Seventeenth Street; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Washington Avenue and Broadway; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Flower Street and Washington Avenue; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Civic Center Drive and Flower Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Boyd Way and the Westerly prolongation of the North line of Civic Center Drive; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Sixth Street and Boyd Way; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Shelton Street and the Westerly prolongation of North line of Sixth Street; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Southwest corner of Santa Ana Boulevard and Shelton Street; Thence Easterly in a direct line to the Southwest corner of Flower Street and Santa Ana Boulevard; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Third Street and Flower Street; Thence Westerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Olive Street and the Westerly prolongation of the North line of Third Street; Thence Southerly in a direct line to the intersection of South line of First Street and the Southerly prolongation of the West line of Olive Street, the point of the beginning. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d), the fee charged for parking in any metered parking spaces in the parking meter district shall be five cents ($0.05) for each three (3) minutes or one dollar ($1.00) per hour. 
(c)  Parking meter zones. The following parking meter zones are hereby created within the parking meter district as described in subsection (a): 
(1)  Willard Zone. The boundaries of the "Willard Zone" shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection of the Northwest corner of Broadway and Civic Center Drive; thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Broadway and Washington Avenue; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Flower Street and Washington Avenue; thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Civic Center Drive and Flower Street; thence Easterly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Broadway and Civic Center Drive, the point of the beginning. 
(2)  Midtown Zone. The boundaries of the "Midtown Zone" shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the North line of Eighth Street and the Northerly prolongation of the East line of French Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Spurgeon Street and Eighth Street; thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Washington Avenue and Spurgeon Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Bush Street and Washington Avenue; thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Seventeenth Street and Bush Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Main Street and Seventeenth Street; thence Northerly in direct line to the intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Buffalo Avenue and Northerly prolongation of the East line of Main Street; thence Westerly in direct line to the Southwest corner of Main Street and Buffalo Avenue; thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Seventeenth Street and Main Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Broadway and Seventeenth Street; thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Broadway and Civic Center Drive; thence intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the North line of Eighth Street and Northerly prolongation of the East line of French Street, the point of the beginning. 
(3)  Downtown Zone. The boundaries of the "Downtown Zone" shall be as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection of the South line of First Street and the Southerly prolongation of the East line of Spurgeon Street; thence Northerly in a direct line to the intersection of Spurgeon Street and Third Street; thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the Southerly prolongation of the East line of French Street and the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Third Street; thence Northerly in a direct line to the Southeast corner of Fourth Street and French Street; thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the Southerly prolongation of the East line of Mortimer Street and the Easterly prolongation of the South line of Fourth Street; thence Northerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of Sixth Street and Mortimer Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the Northeast corner of French Street and Santa Ana Boulevard; thence Northerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Easterly prolongation of the North line of Eighth Street and the Northerly prolongation of the East line of French Street; thence Westerly along the North line of Civic Center Drive to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Boyd Way and the Westerly prolongation of the North line of Civic Center Drive; thence Southerly in a direct line to the Northwest corner of Sixth Street and Boyd Way; thence Westerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Shelton Street and the Westerly prolongation of the North line of Sixth Street; thence Southerly in a direct line to the Southwest corner of Santa Ana Boulevard and Shelton Street; thence Easterly in a direct line to the Southwest corner of Flower and Santa Ana Boulevard; thence Southerly a direct line to the Northwest corner of Third Street and Flower Street; thence Westerly in a direct line to the intersection of the Northerly prolongation of the West line of Olive Street and the Westerly prolongation of the North line of Third Street; thence Southerly in a direct line to the intersection of the South line of First Street and the Southerly prolongation of the West line of Olive Street; thence Easterly in a direct line to the intersection of the South line of First Street and the Southerly prolongation of the East line of Spurgeon Street, the point of the beginning. 
(d)  Fees. The parking fees for parking in the parking meter zones as hereinabove described shall be as follows: 
(1)  Willard Zone. The fee charged for parking in any metered parking space within the Willard Zone shall be five cents ($0.05) for each three (3) minutes or one dollar ($1.00) per hour. 
(2)  Midtown Zone. The fee charged for parking in any metered parking space within the Midtown Zone shall be five cents ($0.05) for each three (3) minutes or one dollar ($1.00) per hour. 
(3)  Downtown Zone. The fee charged for parking in any metered parking space within the Downtown Zone shall be five cents ($0.05) for each two minutes or one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per hour. one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per hour or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-2525, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. NS-2880, § 3, 9-1-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2880, § 3, adopted September 1, 2015 , amended § 36-398, to read as set out herein. Previously § 36-398 was titled "Parking meter district zone and fees." 
Cross reference— Meter rate at municipal parking lot, § 36-435.  
Sec. 36-399. - Hours. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, the provisions of this article relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week, except such parking limitations shall not be operative on any legal holiday. Further limitations of the hours of operation shall be effective only when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are affixed to specific parking meters. 
(b)  In the following parking meter zones effective parking hours shall be as follows: 
(1)  Willard Zone. The provisions of this article relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of each week, except such parking limitations shall not be operative on any legal holiday. Further limitations of the hours of operation shall be effective only when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are affixed to specific parking meters. 
(2)  Midtown Zone. The provisions of this article relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week, except such parking limitations shall not be operative on any legal holiday. Further limitations of the hours of operation shall be effective only when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are affixed to specific parking meters. 
(3)  Downtown Zone. The provisions of this article relating to the operation of parking meters shall be effective only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each week, except such parking limitations shall not be operative on any legal holiday. Further limitations of the hours of operation shall be effective only when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are affixed to specific parking meters. 
(c)  Legal holiday shall be defined as those legal holidays observed by city employees as identified in section 9-135 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(d)  The executive director of the finance and management services agency or designee is authorized to place signs or markings, on or immediately adjacent to parking meters, prohibiting parking in excess of twelve (12) minutes, fifteen (15) minutes, twenty-four minutes (24), thirty (30) minutes, one hour, two (2) hours, three (3) hours or four (4) hours on any portion of any street within such parking meter district zone, for any time period up to and including twenty-four (24) hours per day. Such restrictions may be limited so as not to apply on specified days. 
( Ord. No. NS-2880, § 4, 9-1-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2880, § 4, adopted September 1, 2015 , set out provisions for use herein as § 36-399. Prior to the adoption of those provisions § 36-399 was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1996, § 3, adopted February 6, 1989. Former § 36-399 pertained to "Deposit of coins in central traffic districts A and B" and was derived from the 1952 Code, §§ 3301 and 3302 and Ord No NS-906, § 1, adopted December 18, 1967.  
Sec. 36-400. - Location on curb; space markings. 
All parking meters shall be placed upon the curb alongside of and next to parking spaces. Such parking spaces shall be of sufficient size to accommodate an automobile and shall indicate parallel or diagonal parking by painted lines on the pavement. 
(Code 1952, § 3303)  
Sec. 36-401. - Parking vehicle. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which there is located, under the provisions of this article, a parking meter, the owner, operator or manager of said vehicle shall, upon entering said space, immediately deposit the proper coin of the United States in said meter and said parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the parking limit provided for the coin deposited. All parking shall be between the lines of the parking space, including any and all appurtenances or materials attached to or extending from the vehicle parked within the space. 
(Code 1952, § 3304; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 2, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-402. - Regulations for parking. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Permit any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time as herein provided, or to remain parked in any metered parking space adjacent to a parking meter while the signal showing legal parking is not displayed by said parking meter, or to deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond or longer than the maximum legal parking limit for that particular parking area, or deposit coins into multiple adjacent meters for the purpose of parking a vehicle in multiple adjacent parking spaces. 
(2)  Park any vehicle across any line painted upon the pavement, or any similar marking of a parking meter space, or in such a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely with the area designated by such line or marking including any and all appurtenances or materials attached to or extending from the vehicle parked within the space. 
(3)  Use any parking space set off by painted lines on the pavement alongside of and next to a parking meter for the purpose of standing, storing or parking any object or thing other than a vehicle used for transportation, without first obtaining written permission from the chief of police or the executive director of the community development agency or their respective designee so to do. 
(Code 1952, § 3305; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 3, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-403. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2880, § 5, adopted September 1, 2015 , repealed § 36-403 in its entirety. Former § 36-403 pertained to "Hours," and was derived from Code 1952, § 3307; Ord. No. NS-58, § 1, adopted August 16, 1954; Ord. No. NS-1996, § 4, adopted February 6, 1989; Ord. No. NS-2138, § 2, adopted August 5, 1991 and Ord. No. NS-2525, § 4, adopted April 21, 2003.  
Sec. 36-404. - Continuing violations separate offenses. 
Every person violating the provisions of this article by failing or refusing to deposit the proper coin in a parking meter, by leaving the vehicle parked after the meter shows a signal indicating that the lawful parking period for the coin deposited has expired, or by depositing in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular traffic zone as designated by the council and shown by the adjacent meter, or by depositing coins in multiple adjacent meters for the purpose of parking a vehicle in multiple adjacent spaces, is guilty of a further and separate violation for each period of time, equal to the maximum legal parking time for the particular traffic zone, or parking space, as designated by the council, that the vehicle is left so parked. 
(Code 1952, § 3306; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-405. - Use of slugs; damaging meter. 
No person shall deposit in any parking meter any slug or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Code 1952, § 3308; Ord. No. NS-1996, § 5, 2-6-89)  
Sec. 36-406. - Use of funds. 
All money deposited in said parking meters shall be deposited in a special fund, to be known as the "parking fund". The specific authorized use of revenues shall be, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  For purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of pay stations and/or parking meters and for the payment of any and all expenses relating thereto. 
(2)  For purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating and maintaining on- or off- street parking facilities. 
(3)  For installation and maintenance of alternative mode programs, landscaping, pedestrian linkages, sidewalk cleaning, street, way finding systems, and traffic control devices and signals. 
(4)  For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles. 
(5)  For proper security within the parking meter district. 
(6)  For the proper regulation, control, enforcement and inspection of parking and traffic upon the public streets and off-street parking facilities. 
(7)  To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and interest on financing mechanisms used by the city to meet any of the purposes authorized by this section. 
(8)  For transportation and parking planning, and marketing programs related to the parking meter district. 
(9)  For construction and maintenance of public restrooms in the parking meter district. 
(Code 1952, § 3310; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 6, 4-21-03; Ord. No. NS-2880, § 6, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 36-407. - Exemption for holders of parking permits. 
In any area which is part of a parking meter zone and which is also part of a permit parking district established in accordance with Article XI of this chapter, any person who has been issued a parking permit pertaining to that area pursuant to the regulations applicable to that permit parking district and who displays such permit on his or her vehicle in accordance with section 36-488 shall be entitled to park such vehicle in any metered space located in such area. Section 36-401 and paragraph (1) of section 36-402 shall not apply to any vehicle so parked. 
(Ord. NS-2113, § 1, 3-4-91)  
Secs. 36-408—36-412. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HOOD PERMIT 
 
Sec. 36-413. - Application. 
Any person doing any building, construction, alteration, repair or addition to the structural detail or part of any building, or rendering any maintenance or janitor service to buildings on a contract basis in any parking meter zone and any public utility operating maintenance or service vehicles in such zone in the city may apply to the downtown development manager for a permit to use a parking meter hood. Such application shall state the name of the person, organization, or if a partnership, the names of the partners, the business address of the applicant, the nature of the business carried on by him, the fact that it is necessary to use a truck or other vehicle because of the equipment thereon, or the materials or machinery transported thereby, in said parking meter zones. Upon approval of said application, the downtown development manager shall issue the permit with specified valid term. 
(Code 1952, § 3311; Ord. No. NS-127, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-1996, § 6, 2-6-89; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 1, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 7, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-414. - Issuance—Initially; legend. 
Upon receipt of an application for a hood permit approved as hereinabove provided for and payment of the required charges, the executive director of the community development agency or designee shall issue a permit which shall be numbered and each of which permits shall be accompanied by a hood and on both sides shall carry the legend in boldface type "PERMIT PARKING ONLY." The permit shall further recite the date of issuance, the date upon which it expires and the name and address of the permittee. No permit shall be issued to any applicant who does not hold a paid-up business license in the city, if such license is required. 
(Code 1952, § 3311.1; Ord. No. NS-127, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 2, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 8, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-415. - Same—After revocation. 
When the executive director of the community development agency or designee finds that any person holding a permit under the provisions of chapter 36, division 2 has violated the provisions of this division, the permittee shall immediately deliver the same to the executive director of the community development agency or designee upon receipt of notice of revocation by mail. Said permittee may appeal to the council pursuant to the provisions of chapter 3 of this Code. Unless the council after hearing shall waive the revocation, no permittee shall be issued a new permit or hood within thirty (30) days of such revocation. The council at any hearing held, or if there is no hearing requested the downtown development manager, may extend the period during which no new permit or hood shall be issued up to, but not exceeding, one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Code 1952, § 3311.6; Ord. No. NS-127, § 2, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 15, 12-9-74; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 3, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 9, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-416. - Charges—For permit. 
The minimum charge for any hood permit so issued shall be six dollars ($6.00) per day of any part thereof. The minimum charge for additional permits for the same meter space so issued shall be three dollars ($3.00). A permit may be issued for a maximum period of six (6) months. All permittees shall, prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit, make a deposit of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each hood issued, which deposit shall be returned upon the surrender of the hood in good condition to the office of the director of finance through the downtown development office. 
(Code 1952, § 3311.2; Ord. No. NS-127, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 4, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 10, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-417. - Same—For lost, damaged or withheld permits or hoods. 
The loss of any permit or hood shall be reported to the downtown development manager not later than noon on the next succeeding business day following the loss, and the permittee shall pay to the city thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each hood lost. The permittee shall pay to the city thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for any hood in his possession that becomes damaged beyond repair. In the event repair is possible, said permittee shall pay the cost of such repair, which in no case shall exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The provisions for payment in case of damage hereinabove set out shall not apply to damage or deterioration from normal usage or to damage by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by persons other than the permittee, his agents or employees. 
If the permittee fails to return the hood and fails to renew his permit granted hereunder by paying the charges hereinabove fixed therefore within seven (7) days of the expiration of said permit, he shall pay to the city for such unlawful withholding of such hood, the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). No new permit or hood shall be issued to any permittee when any payment provided for this section has become due and has not been paid. The determination of the cause of damage to any hood shall be made by the downtown development manager. 
(Code 1952, § 3311.3; Ord. No. NS-127, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 5, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 11, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-418. - Cancellation of permit. 
The downtown development manager shall revoke any permit issued hereunder and immediately take up the hood accompanying the same, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When the permittee has failed to pay any charge or fee provided for in this article. 
(2)  When the circumstances or needs under which the permit was granted no longer exist. 
(3)  When the permittee ceases to carry a business license in the city or fails to pay the current business license fee due thereunder if such license if required. 
(4)  When the hood is used to cover any parking meter without the display of a current unrevoked permit in the transparent window of said hood. 
(5)  When the hood is used to cover any parking meter for any purpose other than the business purposes permitted by this article. 
(6)  When the hood is not removed from the parking meter immediately upon the completion of work for which this article permits the hood to be used. 
(7)  When any person other than the permittee or his regular employee or agent is allowed to use the hood. 
(8)  When the hood is used to cover any parking meter adjacent to and regulating a stall where parking is limited to twenty-four (24) minutes or less. 
(Code 1952, § 3311.4; Ord. No. NS-127, § 1, 8-15-55; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 6, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 12, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-419. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2525, § 13, adopted April 21, 2003, repealed § 36-419 in its entirety, which pertained to special U.S. recruiter bonds and derived from the Code of 1952, § 3311.7; Ord. No. NS-535, § 1, adopted August 21, 1961; Ord. No. NS-2028, § 7, adopted September 18, 1989.  
Sec. 36-420. - Funerals. 
Any organization conducting a funeral in any building in a parking meter zone may apply to the downtown development manager for a permit to use parking meter hoods in front of or near such building during such funeral and shall furnish such information on the application as the downtown development manager may require. The downtown development manager shall determine the number of hoods which shall be issued, the area in which they may be used and the time during which they may be used. Upon payment of the meter hood charges as specified in section 36-416, the downtown development manager shall issue a permit accompanied by a hood and on both sides shall carry the legend in boldface type "FUNERAL PARKING ONLY." 
(Ord. No. NS-2028, § 8, 9-18-89; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 14, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-421. - Change in reference. 
(a)  Wherever the language of any section, subsection, provision, or clause contained in chapter 36 of this Code shall mention the community development agency, such section, subsection, provision, or clause shall mean the finance and management services agency. 
(b)  Wherever the language of any section, subsection, provision, or clause contained in chapter 36 of this Code shall mention the executive director of the community development agency, such section, subsection, provision, or clause shall mean the executive director of the finance and management services agency. 
(c)  Wherever the language of any section, subsection, provision, or clause contained in chapter 36 of this Code shall mention the downtown development manager, such section, subsection, provision, or clause shall mean the treasury and customer services manager. 
( Ord. No. NS-2880, § 7, 9-1-15 )  
Secs. 36-422—36-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 36-431. - Resolution to regulate. 
The council may, by resolution, declare the necessity for the use of parking meters on any municipally owned or operated parking lot, may fix and determine traffic patterns for the movement of traffic on such municipally owned or operated parking lot and governing the ingress and egress thereto and therefrom, and when the council regularly passes and adopts any resolution for any of said purposes the same shall control the use of the area affected thereby, and said regulations may be applied to lots open to public use or to lots restricted to certain classes of vehicles and to certain hours and days. 
(Code 1952, § 3312; Ord. No. NS-708, § 2, 1-6-64; Ord. No. NS-1996, § 7, 2-6-89)  
Sec. 36-432. - Violations—Enumerated. 
No person, on any public parking lot which is municipally owned or operated, shall commit any of the following violations: 
(1)  Enter said parking lot over any area or driveway or the portion between any curb returns which is not marked with the word "entrance" painted thereon or in some manner clearly designated for use as an entrance. 
(2)  Park, place or rank any vehicle on any portion of such lot in such a manner as to interfere with or restrict the freedom of traffic movement between the areas indicated for parking, or to interfere with the free ingress or egress to and from said lot. 
(3)  Move any vehicle from any such parking lot into any public way over any area except an area marked with the word "exit" or otherwise indicated by arrows, signs or words that it is a driveway, or place for the leaving of such parking lot. 
(4)  Park any vehicle with a trailer or any other thing attached thereto which extends into the areas commonly used for traffic movement. 
(5)  Park, place or rank any vehicle or thing on any portion of said property which has been marked in red or by pavement stripes or words or signs to indicate that no parking is permitted. 
(6)  Park any vehicle or thing in any manner except entirely within the area indicated for vehicular parking by parallel lines painted upon the paved surface or in any manner so that any portion of said vehicle or thing extends over or across any line painted on the paved portion of said property. 
(7)  Move any vehicle on any such lot at any speed exceeding ten (10) miles per hour. 
(8)  Fail to place the name and address of the driver, the name and address of the registered owner and the registration number of any vehicle that has collided with any other vehicle or thing on such parking lot on the vehicle or thing collided with if the same is unattended, or to give such information to the person in charge of the other vehicle or thing if the same is attended. 
(9)  Permit any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond any period of time declared by resolution of the council to be the maximum time for parking on such lot. 
(10)  Deposit any coin, slug or thing in any parking meter on such lot other than a coin of the United States of America, of the size or value indicated for use in such parking meter. 
(11)  Leave any vehicle or thing in any parking space adjacent to or in front of any parking meter regulating parking in such space at any time when metered parking restrictions are in effect, while or after said meter shows a signal indicating unlawful parking. 
(12)  Park or place any truck exceeding two (2) tons in gross weight upon any portion of any parking lot. 
(13)  Drink any alcoholic beverage on said parking lot at any time of day or night. 
(14)  Move any vehicle onto or move any vehicle off of any municipally owned or operated parking lot in any manner so as to drive over the curb, curbline or sidewalk, except in a driveway area or between curb returns. 
(15)  Park or place any vehicle in any area designated exclusively for vehicles of physically handicapped persons, unless said vehicle displays either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.1 of the California Vehicle Code, or to disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1952, §§ 3312.1—3312.13; Ord. No. NS-708, § 3, 1-6-64; Ord. No. NS-1302, § 3, 4-5-76; Ord. No. NS-1996, § 8, 2-6-89)  
Sec. 36-433. - Same—Citation. 
The police department is empowered to issue citations in the usual form and manner for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1952, § 3313)  
Sec. 36-434. - Same—Removal and storage of vehicle. 
The police department is authorized and directed to remove and place in storage, at a regular storage garage, any vehicle which is parked on any such parking lot in violation of this article or any vehicle left on any such parking lot for a period exceeding thirty (30) hours, unless special permission has been granted by the chief of police or the executive director of the community development agency for such extended parking privileges. 
(Code 1952, § 3314; Ord. No. NS-2525, § 15, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 36-434.1. - Same—Application to parking facility of joint powers agency of which city is a member. 
Whenever the city has entered into a joint powers agreement with any other public entity, sections 36-432, 36-433 and 36-434 of this Code shall apply to any parking facility located within Santa Ana, owned or operated jointly by the parties to said agreement in the same manner and to the same extent as if the facility were exclusively owned by the city, providing the governing body of said joint authority has first requested such application. 
(Ord. No. NS-1194, § 3, 2-25-74)  
Sec. 36-435. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2525, § 16, adopted April 21, 2003, repealed § 36-435 in its entirety, which pertained to the parking lot on Third, north side between Birch and Ross and derived from the Code of 1951, § 3315 and Ord. No. NS-153, § 1, adopted January 3, 1956.  
Sec. 36-436. - Parking lot at northeast corner of Flower Street and Santa Ana Boulevard. 
Parking of vehicles in the city-leased lot at the northeast corner of the intersection of Flower Street and Santa Ana Boulevard is restricted to: 
(a)  Official vehicles of the City of Santa Ana, State of California or the County of Orange, and 
(b)  Private vehicles for which a permit has been issued by the director of transportation of the City of Santa Ana. 
No person shall park any vehicle other than such vehicles as described in this section in the abovedescribed lot. 
(Ord. No. NS-1653, § 1, 11-1-82)  
Secs. 36-437—36-449. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ICE CREAM TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 36-450. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council expressly finds that vehicles in which ice cream, confections and other frozen dessert products are carried for purposes of retail sale on the public streets pose special dangers to the public health, safety and welfare of children and residents in the City of Santa Ana. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this article, to provide responsible companies and individuals who engage in the operation of ice cream trucks with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-451. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Ice cream truck means any vehicle, as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales on any public street, alley or highway within the City of Santa Ana of ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, sherbets, frozen yogurt, frozen dessert products and confections of any kind. The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to ice cream, confections or frozen dessert products. 
(b)  Frozen dessert product includes ice cream, ice milk, popsicles, frozen yogurt, confections and chilled desserts of any kind. 
(c)  Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, stockholder and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors and lessees of ice cream trucks. 
(d)  Vend or vending means offering frozen dessert products of any kind for sale from a motor vehicle on a street, alley, highway or public place within the City of Santa Ana and includes the movement or standing of an ice cream truck for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of frozen dessert products. 
(e)  Ice cream vendor shall mean any person, as defined in this article, who: 
(1)  Conducts or permits or causes the operation of ice cream trucks; 
(2)  Owns, operates, controls, manages or leases ice cream trucks; or 
(3)  Contracts with persons to drive and vend from ice cream trucks. 
(f)  Operator shall mean any person who drives, operates or vends from an ice cream truck and shall include the driver and assistant on each ice cream truck. 
(g)  Vendor's permit shall mean a permit issued by the City of Santa Ana authorizing the holder thereof to engage in the business of ice cream vending. 
(h)  Operator's permit shall mean the permit issued to any person who drives or operates an ice cream truck, vends, sells or assists in selling products from an ice cream truck. 
(i)  Safety inspection sticker shall mean a sticker affixed to an ice cream truck evidencing that it has been inspected by the Santa Ana Police Department and found to be in safe operating condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-452. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause the operation of an ice cream truck in the City of Santa Ana without a vendor's permit issued pursuant to the provision of this article and any other license or permit required under any other chapter of this Code for each and every ice cream truck. 
(b)  No person shall drive or vend from any vehicle defined as an ice cream truck in the City of Santa Ana without an operator's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-453. - Permit term and renewal. 
The term of vendor and operator permits, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such term, the permittee may renew the permit for additional one-year terms by submitting new applications in conformance with sections 36-454 and 36-455 together with such permit renewal fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-454. - Application for ice cream vendor permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate or cause the operation of one or more ice cream trucks shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Neither the filing of an application for a permit, nor the payment of an application fee, shall authorize the vending from, operation or management of an ice cream truck until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for a permit to conduct business as an ice cream vendor shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted; 
(3)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(4)  The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant; 
(5)  A description of the merchandise which the ice cream trucks will vend; 
(6)  The number of vehicles to be owned, operated or controlled by the applicant and the makes, body styles, years, serial and engine numbers, state license plate numbers, and names and addresses of the registered and/or legal owners of each vehicle; 
(7)  A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other distinguishing characteristics of applicant's vehicles; 
(8)  A policy of insurance in the manner and form required by this article from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the State of California; 
(9)  The full true names and residence addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed or with whom the applicant has contracted or intends to contract as drivers, operators or attendants; 
(10)  Certification, from the Santa Ana Police Department, evidencing that each and every ice cream truck to be owned, operated or controlled by the applicant has, within two (2) months prior to the date the application is received by the chief of police, passed a safety inspection and is eligible for the issuance of a safety inspection sticker; 
(11)  The applicant, if an individual; or each of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) per cent of the stock of the corporation; or each of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holders, managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from ice cream trucks, shall also furnish the following information: 
a.  California driver's license or identification number of the above-described natural persons; 
b.  Date of birth of the above-described natural persons; 
c.  The permit history of the above-described natural persons for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such person, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
d.  All criminal convictions suffered by the above-described natural persons, including ordinance violations, but excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction; 
(12)  The applicant, if other than an individual, shall also furnish the following information: 
a.  Each business address of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application and the inclusive dates of each such business; 
b.  The nature of the business or firm for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
c.  The permit history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
d.  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant including ordinance violations, stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction; 
(13)  Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police or his designated representative may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The applicant, if a natural person or, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the designated responsible managing officer, shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (c) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within two (2) weeks after such change. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-455. - Application for operator's permit; contents; required fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an operator's permit for an ice cream truck shall make application to the chief of police or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this article. The department of finance shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the chief of police at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance fees required under this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Neither the filing of an application for a permit, nor the payment of an application fee, shall authorize the vending from or operation or management of an ice cream truck until such permit has been granted or renewed. 
(c)  Each applicant for an operator's permit shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The full true name under which the business will be conducted; 
(3)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(4)  The present residence address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(5)  California driver's license number of the applicant; 
(6)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(7)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth; 
(8)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant, at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(9)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(10)  The permit history of the applicant, for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation; 
(11)  All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations, and traffic offenses; 
(12)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is insured under a policy of insurance in the manner and form required by this article from a responsible, solvent insurance carrier authorized to issue public liability and property damage insurance in the State of California; 
(13)  Certification from the Santa Ana Police Department that the applicant has successfully completed, within two (2) months of the date the application is received by the chief of police, a special training course in traffic safety, based upon a curriculum devised and carried out by the Santa Ana Police Department; 
(14)  Such other identification and/or information as the chief of police or his designated representative may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(d)  The applicant shall personally appear at the police department of the City of Santa Ana and produce proof that the required application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(e)  When any change occurs regarding the written information required by subsection (d) of this section prior to or after issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the chief of police within two (2) weeks after such change. 
(f)  If the applicant is an individual who intends to own, operate and drive his or her own ice cream truck, it is not necessary to pay a separate fee for the operator's permit application. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-456. - Investigation of applications. 
The chief of police shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application and background of the applicant for a vendor's permit or an operator's permit. The chief of police, or his representative, shall, within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the application, render a written recommendation to the city manager, as to approval or denial of the application for the permit or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-457. - Issuance of permit. 
The city manager, within ten (10) days after receiving the application and aforementioned recommendation from the chief of police, shall grant the vendor's permit or operator's permit only if he finds that all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  The required fees have been paid; 
(b)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of the application; 
(e)  The applicant if an individual; or any of the directors, officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) per cent of the stock of the corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from an ice cream truck or a natural person employed or contracted with to be a driver has not been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five (5) years prior to his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including but not limited to: the sale of a controlled substance specified in California Health Safety Code Sections 11054 through 11058; the sale, distribution or display of harmful or obscene matter; indecent exposure; selling or disposing of lottery tickets; permitting gambling, pool selling or bookmaking; or in the case of applications for an operator's permit, alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses. The investigating city employee is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the California Penal Code. Any complaint for the above-listed charges pending before a court of law shall cause the application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-458. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that all of the requirements set forth in section 36-457 have not been met, he shall deny the application for vendor's or operator's permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied by the city manager, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicants specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be deemed to have been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit. 
(b)  Any applicant whose application for an ice cream vendor's or operator's permit has been denied by the city manager may appeal such denial to the city manager, as provided by Chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84; Ord. No. NS-1731, § 1, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 36-459. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Any vendor's or operator's permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager or his designated representative for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based; 
(2)  Failure of the permittee to notify the chief of police within two (2) weeks, of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit in the information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based; 
(3)  Failure of the permittee, or of any employees or subcontractors of the permittee, to comply with the regulations set forth in sections 36-460 through 36-466, inclusive; 
(4)  Violation by the permittee, or any employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the permittee, of any state law or municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from ice cream truck pursuant to the permit. 
(b)  No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit holder to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. Notification of the permit holder shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a permit. If a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed and shall become effective only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise the suspension or revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has expired. 
(c)  No person whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84; Ord. No. NS-1731, § 2, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 36-460. - Ice cream truck regulations. 
(a)  Each ice cream truck shall have a current, valid County of Orange health inspection sticker affixed to the lower right side of the windshield and a current, valid Santa Ana Police Department inspection sticker affixed to the left side of the rear of the ice cream truck. 
(b)  Each individual who drives, operates or vends from an ice cream truck shall have on his person a current, valid California driver's license, which he shall make available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request. 
(c)  Each operator's permit holder shall be issued an identification card which will also serve as the operator's permit. The permit holder shall wear or carry such card in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while vending from an ice cream truck, and shall produce the same for inspection upon request. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the chief of police any operator's permit issued by the City of Santa Ana upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit or upon leaving employment as an ice cream truck operator. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-461. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall vend from an ice cream truck which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street, alley or highway: 
(1)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any school property, park, playground or recreational facility; 
(2)  When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley or highway is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater; 
(3)  When the ice cream truck is parked in violation of any other provision of this Code, including, but not limited to, section 36-136(c), or the California Vehicle Code; 
(4)  When any part of the ice cream truck is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right side of the street, alley or highway; 
(5)  When the ice cream truck is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street, alley or highway; 
(6)  When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle; or 
(7)  When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic. 
(b)  No person shall back an ice cream truck to make or attempt a sale. 
(c)  No minor shall ride in or on an ice cream truck. 
(d)  No more than two (2) individuals shall be in or on a vending ice cream truck. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-461.1. - Hours of operation. 
Vending from an ice cream truck, whether of a frozen dessert product or of any other good or product, shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daily. 
(Ord. No. NS-2702, § 1, 11-7-05)  
Sec. 36-462. - Insurance provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, drive, operate or cause or permit to be driven or operated any ice cream truck in the City of Santa Ana unless such person has submitted with his application for permit a motor vehicle liability insurance policy, covering each ice cream truck, issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State of California, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The required motor vehicle liability policy shall insure the owner, driver, and any other person using or responsible for the use of any ice cream truck with the consent, expressed or implied, of such owner, driver or person, against loss from the liability imposed upon such owner, driver or person by law for injury to, or death of, any person, or damage to property growing out of the maintenance, operation or ownership of any ice cream truck in an amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, no aggregate. 
(c)  Every insurance policy and every certificate of motor vehicle liability insurance filed within the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following endorsements: 
(1)  It is hereby understood and agreed that, notwithstanding expressions consistent with or contrary thereto in this policy contained, the policy is expressly issued to cover a motor vehicle regulated by the provisions of Chapter 36, Article X of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. This policy shall inure to, and be for the benefit and protection of, anyone who shall sustain any damages or injury, or to the heirs, personal representatives, administrators, executors or assigns of any such person who may be so damaged or injured or suffer death, by reason of the operation of the motor vehicle or from the defective condition thereof. Liability under this policy shall in no manner be abrogated or abated by the death or dissolution of the feasor or the insured. 
(2)  There is continuing liability up to the full amount of the policy, notwithstanding any action or recovery thereon. 
(3)  No cancellation or reduction in coverage of this policy for any reason whatsoever shall become effective until the expiration of thirty (30) days after written notice of such cancellation or reduction in coverage shall have been given to the clerk of the council of the City of Santa Ana. Said period of thirty (30) days to commence running from the date said notice is actually received in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-463. - Inspection of ice cream trucks. 
(a)  Each ice cream truck for which a permit or renewal is sought shall be inspected by the Santa Ana Police Department to insure that the vehicle can be safely operated. 
(b)  In addition to other equipment required by law, each ice cream truck shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A convex mirror mounted so that the occupant of the driver's seat can see the area in front of the truck which is obscured by the vehicle's hood. 
(2)  A back-up alarm audible for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-464. - Required signs and lettering. 
(a)  There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the front and back of the ice cream truck appropriate warning signs or lettering, e.g. "CAUTION CHILDREN." The lettering shall not be less than six (6) inches in height and the lettering shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed. 
(b)  There shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on both the right and left side of the ice cream truck lettering permanently affixed showing the name of the company or operator of the ice cream truck and the business address and telephone number of the owner or operator. The lettering shall not be less than four (4) inches in height, and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which they are placed. 
(c)  No other lettering, numbering, price lists, signs or insignia shall be displayed on the right and left side of the ice cream truck so as to interfere with the visibility of the lettering required in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-465. - Noise level. 
Ice cream vendors shall not operate any sound device or music system when stopped, standing, or parked.  
Sec. 36-466. - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article into law. All such persons and businesses shall have thirty (30) days from said effective date to file a completed application for vendors' or operators' permits with the chief of police or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Sec. 36-467. - Conducting as a nuisance. 
Any ice cream truck operated contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating an ice cream truck contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1710, § 3, 1-3-84)  
Secs. 36-468—36-479. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 36-480. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Director means the executive director of the public works agency of the City of Santa Ana. 
Permit parking district means an area established by resolution of the city council pursuant to this article. 
Guest means any person visiting or intending to visit a person residing in a permit parking district. 
Block means both sides of a street lying between two intersecting streets without interruption by any other intersecting street on either side, except that a resolution containing the provisions specified in section 36-482 may incorporate a map or maps designating blocks, in which case "block" means any block so designated. 
Nonresidential user means the owner or tenant-in-possession of any property in a permit parking district which is not used for residential purposes, and the officers, employees, agents, licensees, and invitees thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-481. - Designation of permit parking districts. 
The city council may establish permit parking districts by resolution. Any such resolution shall designate the boundaries of the permit parking district and shall specify the maximum parking limitations which apply within the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2430, § 1, 6-19-00)  
Sec. 36-482. - Block-specific districts. 
The resolution specified in section 36-481 may provide that parking restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall apply to any block within the permit parking district only after a petition signed by the owners of sixty-six (66) per cent or more of the residential lots abutting such block have filed a petition with the director expressing their desire for such parking restrictions. The director shall determine the adequacy of the petition in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  In the case of property owned by co-owners, the signature of any one co-owner on the petition shall be sufficient. 
(2)  In the case of property owned by a partnership, the signature of any general partner on the petition shall be sufficient. 
(3)  Ownership shall be determined by reference to the latest available tax assessment roll, or by such proof of subsequent acquisition of title as may be provided to the director by an owner. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2336, § 1, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 36-483. - Nonresidential users. 
The resolution specified in section 36-481 may specify the parking limitations applicable to the sides of streets adjacent to the property of nonresidential users within the permit parking district and the entitlement of nonresidential users to parking permits. The entitlement of any specified nonresidential user may be based upon the extent to which its parking needs exceeds its on-site parking capacity. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-484. - Signs. 
Upon the establishment of a permit parking district, the director shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in the district, indicating thereon the parking limitation applicable to the district and the exemption therefrom of vehicles with permits; provided, however, that the director shall not post such signs on any block within a permit parking district established by a resolution containing the provisions specified in section 36-482 until such time as the director has determined that an adequate petition has been filed for such block. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-485. - Exemption for permit holders. 
The parking limitations in effect within a permit parking district shall not apply to vehicles for which a parking permit pertaining to that district has been issued pursuant to this article, provided the permit is displayed in the manner prescribed in section 36-488. No such permit shall reserve any particular parking place within the district to the holder of the permit. Each such permit shall be valid only for the permit parking district for which it is issued or for such smaller area within that district as may be designated pursuant to the regulations applicable to that district. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2113, § 2, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 36-486. - Issuance of permits. 
Unless otherwise prescribed in the resolution establishing a permit parking district, applications for permits to park within a permit parking district may be made by any resident or any eligible nonresidential user residing or working within such district who is licensed to drive a vehicle. Such applications shall be filed with the director or his designated representatives. Unless otherwise prescribed by the resolution establishing the district, not more than three (3) permits (exclusive of guest parking permits) shall be issued to residents of any single dwelling unit. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may appeal such decision to the city manager, whose decision on the matter shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2113, § 3, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 36-487. - Guest parking permits. 
Unless otherwise prescribed in the resolution establishing a permit parking district, each resident holding a parking permit shall be entitled to receive guest parking permit forms from the director. Such resident may issue a guest parking permit to any guest of such resident by noting such resident's name and address on the form, dating and signing the form and identifying the vehicle for which the permit is issued by license number on the form. Each such guest permit parking permit shall be valid until 12:00 noon of the day following the date of issuance. Any vehicle for which a guest parking permit has been issued shall be exempt from the parking limitations within the district during the period for which it is valid, provided such permit is displayed in the manner prescribed in section 36-488. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-488. - Display of permits. 
(a)  A parking permit issued pursuant to this article (other than a guest parking permit) shall be permanently affixed to either the left rear bumper or the left rear window of the vehicle for which it was issued. 
(b)  Guest parking permits shall be displayed face-up on the left front dashboard of the vehicle for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2689, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 36-489. - Exempt vehicles. 
The following vehicles are exempt from the parking restrictions applicable to any permit parking district: 
(1)  Repair, maintenance, refuse collection, utility, fuel, delivery and service vehicles being used in the course of business. 
(2)  Vehicles owned or operated by any governmental agency, or contractor of a governmental agency, being used in the course of business. 
(3)  Emergency, life support and health care vehicles being used in the course of business. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-490. - Authority of the director. 
The director is authorized to establish rules and procedures and to produce signs, forms and other materials necessary or appropriate to implement the provisions of this article. The director is further authorized to establish the specific parking limitations which apply within the district, subject to the maximum parking limitations specified in the resolution for the district. The director shall post appropriate signs giving notice of the specific permit parking restrictions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2430, § 2, 6-19-00)  
Sec. 36-491. - Permit fees. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for permit applications under this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87)  
Sec. 36-492. - Removal of permit parking restrictions. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, terminate and dissolve any previously established permit parking district. The director shall remove parking restriction signs in accordance with any such resolution. 
(b)  Permit parking restrictions imposed on any block pursuant to section 36-482 shall be ended when a petition so requesting and signed by the owners of sixty-six (66) per cent of the residential lots abutting such block has been filed with the director. Upon his determination that the petition is adequate in accordance with the standards set forth in section 36-482, the director shall remove parking restriction signs from such block. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2336, § 2, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 36-493. - Penal provisions. 
(a)  Unless exempted by the provisions of this article, no person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in any permit parking district in violation of any parking restrictions established pursuant to this article. Police officers are authorized to remove a vehicle from the street when such vehicle is standing or parked in violation of this section, provided that a sign giving notice that the vehicle may be removed has been posted. 
(b)  No person shall falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or furnish false information to the director or his representatives in an application for a parking permit. 
(c)  No person who has been issued a parking permit shall thereafter allow the use thereof by any other person. 
(d)  No person shall copy, produce, create or use any facsimile or counterfeit parking permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1919, § 1, 7-20-87; Ord. No. NS-2146, § 2, 11-4-91)  
Secs. 36-494—36-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CRUISING 
 
Sec. 36-500. - Cruising—Defined. 
Cruising shall mean the driving of a motor vehicle three (3) or more times within a four-hour period, in a particular direction, past a traffic-control point established at or near a place where traffic is congested. 
(Ord. No. NS-2038, § 1, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 36-501. - Same—Signs. 
The director or his or her delegate shall cause signs to be placed at the beginning and end of the portion of any street he or she determines is subject to cruising controls, which briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of section 36-504 and Vehicle Code Section 21100(k). 
(Ord. No. NS-2038, § 2, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 36-502. - Same—Traffic-control point. 
The ranking peace officer on duty within an area affected by traffic congestion may establish one (1) or more traffic-control points at or near the area of traffic congestion and may post the signs required by section 36-501. 
(Ord. No. NS-2038, § 3, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 36-503. - Same—Written notice. 
Any person who, as the operator of or passenger in a motor vehicle driven in a particular direction, passes a traffic-control point established pursuant to section 36-502 at least two (2) times within a four-hour period may be given written notice that further driving past the control point will be a violation of section 36-504. 
(Ord. No. NS-2038, § 4, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 36-504. - Same—Prohibited. 
No person having driven a motor vehicle or having been a passenger in a motor vehicle driven past a traffic-control point established pursuant to section 36-502 where signs have been posted as required by section 36-501, and having received written notice as provided by section 36-503, shall drive past that control point within the time period while cruising controls are in effect. Each successive trip past the traffic-control point shall constitute a separate violation of this section, and no additional written notice shall be required for such separate violations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2038, § 5, 11-6-89)  
Secs. 36-505—36-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 36-600. - Findings. 
The city council of the city hereby finds and determines that: 
(a)  State law establishing requirements for development of a county wide congestion management program (AB 1791) mandates the inclusion of a trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance. 
(b)  Other transportation demand management (TDM) program requirements have been adopted for the region including South Coast Air Quality Management District Rule 2202, as amended, and Appendix IV-E Control Measures of the 1991 Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP). 
(c)  The growth management plan included in the revised traffic improvement and growth management ordinance (Measure M) requires jurisdictions to promote alternative forms of transportation and overall transportation system efficiency by maximizing use of the existing transportation network through transportation system management (TSM) and transportation demand management (TDM) and calls for the adoption of a TSM ordinance or alternative mitigation to reduce single occupancy automobile travel. 
(d)  Increased traffic congestion contributes to longer travel times, deterioration in air quality, and inefficient use of the existing transportation system. 
(e)  The congestion management program (CMP) recognizes and encourages the use of transportation demand management (TDM) strategies to promote alternative transportation methods and improve the general efficiency of the transportation system by enhancing vehicle flow and shifting demand on existing transportation facilities through encouraging changes in individual travel behavior. 
(f)  Implementation of TDM strategies at the local government level would provide public benefits by improving air quality and enhancing the effectiveness of the existing transportation system. 
(g)  Coordinated TDM efforts among all local jurisdictions in the county can contribute to improvements in air quality and the efficiency and effectiveness of the transportation system including reductions in traffic congestion. 
(h)  This article serves to codify standards of transportation demand management and transportation system management which, prior to its adoption, were imposed on development projects as conditions of approval through the city's environmental review process. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 2, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-601. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the definitions for the following terms shall apply: 
Alternative transportation mode means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking. 
Applicable development means any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in section 36-604 of this article. 
CC&R's means a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions applying to an applicable development site and running with the land, duly executed by the owner thereof, in a form allowing recordation in the office of the county recorder, which binds employers on such site to comply with the TDM program approved for such site and which cannot be amended or extinguished without the consent of the city. 
Development project means a development project as defined by section 41-668 of this Code. 
Director means the executive director of public works or any employee of the city within the public works agency who is designated by the executive director to act on his or her behalf in the enforcement of this article. 
Operational programs and strategies means a range of techniques that require ongoing monitoring, that can affect actual business operations and employee behavior at the facility or worksite to encourage reduction in peak hour vehicle trips and use of alternative transportation modes. These techniques may range from establishment of ridesharing programs to the use of parking fees, cash allowances or other incentives or disincentives. Operational programs and strategies are distinct from facility standards which encourage trip reduction through modifications in facility or worksite design. 
Peak hour means any four (4) consecutive fifteen-minute periods that occur during the peak period during which the highest vehicular volumes on the street system adjacent to the project are recorded. 
Peak period means those hours of the business day between 6 a.m. and 10 a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday. 
Performance requirement means a specified number of peak hour vehicle trips conforming to the trip generation estimates of a development project after a trip reduction credit has been applied. 
Property owner means the legal owner of the applicable development project who serves as the lessor to an employer or tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this article either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to an employer or tenant. 
Site plan means a plan submitted for a development project in accordance with Division 3 (commencing with section 41-668) of Article V of Chapter 41 of this Code. 
Tenant means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project who also serves as an employer. A tenant may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this article as determined by the property owner. 
TDM penalty fee schedule means a schedule of fees to be imposed if a trip reduction credit is granted and the performance requirement is not satisfied. 
TDM annual report means the annual report required to be submitted by the property owner(s) or its designee documenting TDM activities occurring over the past twelve (12) months and activities planned for the next twelve (12) months. 
TDM program means a program consisting of a TDM strategy plan and a TDM penalty fee schedule which is prepared by any development project applicant granted a trip reduction credit of up to ten (10) per cent. The TDM program is recorded with the project covenants, conditions and restrictions to assure perpetual operation of the plan regardless of changes in project ownership. 
TDM strategy plan means the plan, consisting of operational programs and strategies, prepared by all development project applicants and submitted to the city, whether or not a trip reduction credit is granted. 
Transportation demand management (TDM) means programs, plans, policies or projects designed to reduce demand on the transportation system or maximize its efficient use. TDM can include, but is not limited to, an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips; shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period; or programs and projects to increase capacity on the transportation system. 
Transportation system management (TSM) means programs and projects to increase the capacity of the existing transportation system. TSM can include, but is not limited to, an emphasis on maximizing the use of the existing transportation system through strategies such as signal coordination, bus turnouts, channelization, one-way street systems, and barrier systems. 
Trip reduction credit means the number of peak hour vehicle trips by which an environmental impact report or mitigated negative declaration prepared for a development project has reduced the estimated traffic generated by the project in anticipation of an effective TDM program. The trip reduction credit may not exceed ten (10) per cent of the total number of peak hour trips. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-602. - Intent of article. 
This article is intended to meet the requirements of: 
(a)  Government Code Section 65089 (b)(3) which requires development of a trip reduction and travel demand element as part of the congestion management program, and Government Code Section 65089.3(b) which requires adoption and implementation of a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance; 
(b)  The Orange County Revised Traffic Improvement and Growth Management Ordinance (approved as "Measure M" by the voters of Orange County in the general election of November 6, 1990) requirement for the adoption of a transportation system management (TSM) ordinance or alternative mitigation to reduce single occupancy automobile travel. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91)  
Sec. 36-603. - Policy. 
Any development project that creates a site having two hundred fifty (250) or more employees may adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in deteriorating levels of traffic service, increased motor vehicle emissions, and possibly significant additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing transportation system. All such projects shall be required to prepare and submit a TDM strategy plan to the city. In order to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the city to: 
(a)  Reduce the number of peak period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development. 
(b)  Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes. 
(c)  Promote and encourage the implementation of flexible working hours and parking management strategies. 
(d)  Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion and public expenditure and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing. 
(e)  Promote coordinated interjurisdictional implementation of strategies to reduce transportation demand and increase transportation system capacity. 
(f)  Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated regional and local TDM and TSM programs. 
(g)  Complement, not duplicate, the South Coast Air Quality Management District's Regulation XV and Appendix IV-E, Control Measures of the 1991 Air Quality Management Plan. 
(h)  Assure perpetual compliance with approved TDM programs regardless of changes in property ownership through recorded covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R's). 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-604. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all development projects which will result in places of employment that are, in the aggregate, estimated to employ a total of two hundred fifty (250) or more persons, as determined by the methodology in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  For purposes of determining whether a development project is subject to this article, the total employment figure shall be determined by using employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the city. The project applicant shall use employment generation factors generally consistent with the methodologies recommended by the Urban Land Institute, the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or other acceptable professional practices as determined appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-605. - Facility standards. 
All applicable development projects shall be subject to the facility standards as specified in this section. A site plan submitted for city approval by a project applicant shall include improvements and design features required by such facility standards. 
(a)  Facility improvements: 
(1)  Preferential parking for carpool vehicles: 
a.  A specified percentage of the employee parking spaces as determined by the project applicant and the city shall be reserved and designated for carpool vehicles by marking such spaces "Carpool Only." 
b.  Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool vehicles in which there are at least two (2) persons. 
c.  Such carpool spaces shall be located near the building's employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the city. 
(2)  Bicycle parking and shower facilities: 
a.  Bicycle parking and locker facilities may be provided in a secure location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle. The number of facilities/racks to be provided shall be defined on the approved site plan. 
b.  Bicycle accommodations shall be encouraged for those worksites near a regional bike trail and/or within a three-mile radius of residential housing. 
c.  Shower facilities may be provided, one (1) each for men and women. 
(3)  Information on transportation alternatives: 
a.  A commuter information area shall be provided that offers employees appropriate information on available transportation alternatives to the single occupancy vehicle. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees or tenants. 
b.  Information in the area may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit; 
(2)  Ridesharing match lists; 
(3)  Available employee incentives; 
(4)  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations. 
(4)  Rideshare vehicle loading areas: 
a.  The need for, design and location of areas to load and unload passengers from rideshare vehicles shall be determined by the city. 
b.  Passenger loading areas, where required, shall be on-site and shall not conflict with fire lanes or impede on-site circulation. 
(5)  Vanpool vehicle accessibility: 
a.  The design of all parking facilities shall incorporate provisions for access and parking of vanpool vehicles. 
b.  Where applicable, vanpool vehicle accessibility shall include a minimum seven feet two inches (7'2?) clear and unobstructed vertical for those parking spaces and ramps to be used by such vehicles. 
c.  Vanpool parking spaces shall be located near the building's employee entrance(s) or other preferential locations as approved by the city. 
d.  The number of accessible vanpool parking spaces shall be determined by the project applicant and the city. 
(6)  Bus stop improvements: 
a.  Bus stop improvements including but turnouts, bus pads, and right-of-way for bus shelters may be required for all applicable developments located along high traffic volume streets and established bus routes. 
b.  The location, type(s) of bus stop improvements, and improvement standards shall be determined by the city engineer. 
c.  On-site bus loading facilities may be required for projects which require bus loading. 
(7)  Pedestrian facilities: 
a.  To facilitate pedestrian access to the site, on-site sidewalks or other paved pathways following direct and safe routes from the off-site circulation system to each building in the development shall be provided. 
b.  Pedestrian grade separations over arterial streets connecting compatible facilities may be required. 
Compatible facilities include, but are not limited to, worksite to shopping, eating establishments, recreation, parking or transit facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-606. - TDM strategy plan. 
(a)  All applicable development projects which are approved by the city shall be approved subject to conditions designed to implement operational programs and strategies designed to reduce peak hour vehicle trips and promote the use of alternative transportation modes. It is intended that such operational programs and strategies complement the facility standards required in section 36-605. Those applicable development projects for which trip reduction credits are not granted shall not be required to prepare a TDM program and participate in a penalty fee program pursuant to section 36-607 of this article, but shall be required to obtain city approval of a TDM strategy plan pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  TDM strategy plans shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  The owner of any applicable development project site shall obtain the director's approval of a TDM strategy plan prior to the issuance of a site plan approval, building permit or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, or at such earlier time as the director may determine to be necessary for environmental review of the development project. 
(2)  The TDM strategy plan shall describe programs, plans, policies, strategies, actions and projects to reduce peak hour commuter related travel demand at the project site. These may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Establishment of carpool, buspool or vanpool programs. 
b.  Vanpool purchase incentives. 
c.  Cash allowances, passes or other public transit subsidies and purchase incentives. 
d.  Parking fees for single occupancy vehicles. 
e.  Full or partial parking subsidies for ridesharing vehicles. 
f.  Preferential parking for ridesharing vehicles. 
g.  Computerized commuter rideshare matching services. 
h.  Guaranteed ride-home program for ridesharing. 
i.  Alternative work week and flex-time schedules. 
j.  Telecommuting or work-at-home programs. 
k.  On-site lunch rooms/cafeterias. 
l.  On-site commercial services such as banks, restaurant, and small retail. 
m.  On-site day care facilities. 
n.  Designation of an on-site transportation coordinator for the project. 
(3)  The TDM strategy plan shall include a description of the proposed project and a system, parking availability, transit service, bicycle facilities, proximity to other activity centers, commuter characteristics in the project vicinity, and the existence of nearby transportation management association(s), if any. It shall also identify performance measures, TDM actions to be undertaken, trip reduction impacts, and recommended mitigation measures. 
(4)  Compliance with the approved TDM strategy plan shall be a condition of approval of the development project. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-607. - TDM program. 
(a)  The city may grant a trip reduction credit of up to ten (10) per cent to a property owner or its designee if a TDM program is prepared and submitted. Receipt of a trip reduction credit shall require participation in a TDM program with a penalty fee schedule approved by the director. The penalty fee schedule shall establish penalty fees in proportion to the excess of peak hour vehicle trips over the performance requirements. 
(b)  The TDM program shall describe actions to be taken to reduce peak hour commuter related travel demand, including a discussion of: 
(1)  Responsibilities of property owners and tenants. 
(2)  Facility improvements. 
(3)  Financial incentives. 
(4)  Vehicular operations. 
(5)  Monitoring, reporting, and enforcement. 
(6)  Contingency and remedial actions. 
(c)  The TDM program shall be designed and implemented to ensure that traffic generated by the proposed project does not exceed a specified number of peak hour vehicle trips (the performance requirement) conforming to the trip generation estimates in the environmental impact report or mitigated negative declaration issued for the project after the trip reduction credit has been applied. 
(d)  Adherence to the performance requirement shall be determined by conducting annual traffic counts at the driveway(s) of the project site. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or associated owners of the project site to provide traffic count documentation in accordance with standards set by the director. Such documentation shall be subject to city verification. Vehicles entering and leaving the project site during the peak period shall be counted on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday for two (2) consecutive weeks during the period of January 15 through May 20 or September 20 through November 20. The average peak hour total vehicular volumes shall be calculated and serve as the basis for evaluation. 
(e)  The city shall notify the property owner(s) or its designee, in writing, of failure to comply with the performance requirement. 
(f)  If the performance requirement is not satisfied, the property owner(s) shall: 
(1)  Submit to the city a list of TDM actions that will be implemented to reduce morning peak hour vehicle trips to meet the performance requirement within one hundred eighty (180) days of written notification by the city. 
(2)  Contingency actions to be taken in the event of not meeting the performance requirement shall be described in the TDM program. Remedies could include but are not limited to: 
a.  Increasing the level of effort (i.e. financial and other resources) for existing on-site TDM activities. 
b.  Initiating new on-site TDM activities. 
c.  Supporting off-site TDM efforts that have the effects of reducing traffic levels in the vicinity of the project. 
d.  Increasing the level of support for areawide TDM efforts. 
(3)  At the end of the one hundred eighty-day period, performance will be evaluated based upon compliance with the performance requirement. No further measures to reduce the project's peak hour vehicle trips will be necessary if the performance requirement is met and continues to be met as described from information provided in the TDM annual report. 
(4)  Should the performance requirement not be satisfied by the end of the one hundred eighty-day period, the property owner(s) shall pay a TDM penalty fee in proportion to the number of peak hour vehicle trips in excess of the performance requirement. The amount of the TDM penalty fee shall be determined in accordance with the penalty fee schedule specified in the TDM program. 
(5)  The TDM penalty fee shall be paid to the city and used as specified in the TDM program, or if no use is so specified, the fee shall be deposited in the appropriate transportation system improvement area fund established pursuant to Article XII of Chapter 13. 
(g)  The recorded CC&R's shall include provisions to: 
(1)  Guarantee adherence to the performance requirement; 
(2)  Assure perpetual operation of the TDM program regardless of property ownership; 
(3)  Inform all subsequent property owners of the requirements imposed by the TDM program; and 
(4)  Identify potential consequences of nonperformance, including the penalty fee schedule. 
(h)  Each space use agreement (i.e. lease document) shall include relevant clauses of the TDM strategy plan or TDM program as a means to inform and commit tenants to participate in helping the project meet the established performance requirements. 
(i)  The property owner(s) and tenants shall participate in an areawide transportation management association if one is established. 
(j)  The TDM program shall encourage the response of tenants to applicable regional and/or city transportation management regulations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-608. - TDM annual report. 
All owners of property which is subject to a TDM program shall prepare and submit an annual TDM report to the director within twelve (12) months of the certificate of occupancy, and each subsequent year by the date of each annual report approval. The annual TDM report shall, at a minimum, include: 
(1)  Building occupancy percentages; 
(2)  Morning peak hour vehicle trip counts; 
(3)  Documentation of the means of travel for employees as compiled from an annual survey of employees; and 
(4)  A description of TDM activities occurring over the past twelve (12) months and activities planned for the next twelve (12) months; 
(5)  Vehicle counts in accordance with section 36-607(d). 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-609. - Implementation and monitoring. 
For the purposes of determining whether applicable developments are complying with the provisions of this article, the city shall monitor such compliance in a manner it deems appropriate and reasonable. Monitoring mechanisms may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To verify compliance with the facility standards required under section 36-605: 
a.  Local procedures for site plan review, as appropriate; 
b.  Field/site inspections; 
c.  Other building site reports/surveys which the city may deem appropriate. 
(2)  To monitor compliance with the TDM strategy plan, TDM program and TDM annual report under sections 36-606, 36-607 and 36-608: 
a.  Review and, if appropriate, approve the TDM strategy plan submitted per section 36-606, following consultation with the property owner or its designee; 
b.  Review and, if appropriate, approve the TDM program submitted per section 36-607 following consultation with the property owner(s) or its designee; 
c.  Review the annual reports submitted per section 36-608; 
d.  Require the owner(s) or its designee to prepare and submit other reports, site surveys, or operational audits which may be deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91)  
Sec. 36-610. - Enforcement and penalties. 
For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this article, the city shall, following written notice to the property owner or its designee, initiate enforcement action(s) which may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To enforce compliance of multiphased developments with the facility standards under section 36-605, withhold issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  To enforcement compliance with the TDM strategy plan and TDM program under sections 36-606, 36-607 and 36-608: 
a.  Withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy until the initial TDM strategy plan as specified in section 36-606 and a report describing trip generation, level of service, and travel impacts on the street system in the vicinity of the project are submitted to the city; 
b.  Impose TDM penalty fees if the performance requirement established in the TDM program as specified in section 36-607 are not satisfied. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2505, § 3, 8-5-02)  
Sec. 36-611. - Appeals. 
Any decision of the director regarding the provisions of this article may be appealed to the planning commission for resolution. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2124, § 1, 4-15-91)  
Secs. 36-612—36-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FOOD VENDING VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, adopted September 19, 2017 , set out provisions for use herein as art. XIV, to read as set out herein. Prior to the adoption of those provisions Ord. No. NS-2922, § 3, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed art. XIV, §§ 36-700—36-720, in its entirety. Former art. XIV, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2241, § 1, adopted December 5, 1994 and Ord. No. NS-2251, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 5, 1995. 
Cross reference— Pushcarts, ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 36-700. - Purpose and intent. 
The city council expressly finds that vending vehicles pose traffic hazards and special dangers to the safety and welfare of children and residents of the city. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this article, to provide responsible companies and persons who engage in the operation of vending from vehicles with clear and concise regulations to ensure safety and prevent traffic hazards, as well as preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Sec. 36-701. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
A.  "Crosswalk" shall be defined by the California Vehicle Code, as that term may be amended from time to time. 
B.  "Business license" means a business license required by chapter 21. 
C.  "Food vending vehicle" or "vending vehicle" means any vehicle or trailer, as those terms are defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or used for retail sales of produce and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind on any public street, alley or highway or private street or alley within the city. The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to edible items and may include nonfood sundries. Food vending vehicle as used in this article does not refer to, nor include, ice cream trucks as regulated in article X of this chapter. 
D.  "Operator" as used in this article shall mean any entity and all person(s) that: 
(1)  Owns, controls, manages, and/or leases a food vending vehicle; and/or 
(2)  Contracts with any person(s) to drive, operate, prepare food in, and/or vend from, a food vending vehicle; and/or 
(3)  Drive, operate, vend and/or prepare food in or from a food vending vehicle. 
E.  "Goods" or "merchandise" shall include items and products of every kind and description, including all foods, produce, and beverage items. 
F.  "Park" shall be defined by chapter 31, as it may be amended from time to time. 
G.  "School" shall mean any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include either a vocational institution or a professional institution of higher educations, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
H.  "Street" shall be defined by the California Vehicle Code, as that term may be amended from time to time. 
I.  "Vend" or "vending" as used in this article means soliciting, displaying, offering for sale for monetary or other consideration, or sale, of any goods or merchandise to the public from a vehicle; offering produce, prepared food, prepackaged food or nonfood sundries of any kind for sale from a food vending vehicle on a public or private street, alley, highway or public place within the city and includes the movement or standing of a food vending vehicle for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of produce, prepared food, prepackaged food or nonfood sundries. 
J.  "Restocking" means the transfer of food, goods or merchandise to a food vending vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to, loading and delivery of food, goods and merchandise. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Sec. 36-702. - Operational requirements. 
A.  No person shall own, control, operate, manage, lease, or contract with any other person for the operation of a food vending vehicle in the city without a valid business license issued, in addition to any other license or permit required under any other chapter of this Code, for each and every food vending vehicle. 
B.  All operators shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Each operator vending any produce or other food item shall comply with all County of Orange Health Care Agency requirements for mobile food facilities, as well as all required food handling permits. Each operator shall possess and at all times display such permits in conspicuous view upon each vending vehicle. 
2.  Each operator shall possess and at all times display in conspicuous view upon each such vehicle a city business license. 
3.  Every food vending vehicle shall have the name, address, and telephone number of the holder of the business license permanently affixed on both the left and right sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be in letters and numerals not less than four (4) inches in height and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which the letters are placed. 
4.  No additional lighting other than that required by the California Vehicle Code may be installed or operated on a food vending vehicle. Any signage or display for a food vending vehicle must comply with the generally applicable sign regulations contained in chapter 41. 
5.  No operator of a food vending vehicle shall operate any sound amplification systems or other sound making devices or music systems to advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle while such vehicle is moving, stopped, standing, or parked upon any public or private street. 
6.  No owner or operator of a vending vehicle shall permit vending within two hundred fifty (250) feet from a school, park, community center or public playground facility. 
7.  No owner or operator shall permit the vending vehicle to vend within fifty (50) feet of a marked or unmarked crosswalk in an intersection. 
8.  No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon any public or private street. Vending shall only be permitted where the food vending vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and parked adjacent to the curb in a lawful manner. 
9.  Vending from a food vending vehicle while the vehicle is parked, stopped, or standing on any public or private street, alley, or highway is permitted only when that part of the food vending vehicle open to prospective customers is on the side of the vehicle immediately next to the right side of the public or private street, alley, or highway. Under no circumstances may vending occur from the left side of a food vending vehicle. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no person shall vend to any customer whose location creates a traffic hazard. 
10.  All food vending vehicles shall maintain and make refuse containers available large enough to contain all trash and refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle. The operator of the food vending vehicle shall pick up all trash and refuse generated by the operator's vending during the time the vehicle is stopped, that is within not less than a fifty-foot radius of the vehicle, before such vehicle is moved. 
11.  Restocking of a food vending vehicle shall only occur where the vehicle is lawfully parked and such restocking does not restrict vehicle or pedestrian traffic or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
12.  No food vending vehicle shall attach to or receive any electrical power or other utilities from any public or private property while the vehicle is located on any private or public street or alley without a permit issued by the city. 
13.  Vending is prohibited from a food vending vehicle that is parked, stopped, or standing on any public street, alley, or highway where the posted speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater. 
14.  No owner or operator of a vending vehicle shall permit objects, including but not limited to tables, chairs, or other furniture, trash receptacles, generators or equipment, to be placed into that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic, nor shall any object, including but not limited to tables, chairs, other furniture, trash receptacles, generators or equipment, be placed within or upon the parkway or sidewalk. 
15.  In conformance with the California Retail Food Code and County of Orange Health Care Agency/Environmental Health, food vending vehicles shall be stored at or within an approved commissary in order to have protection from unsanitary conditions. Food vending vehicles shall not be stored overnight outside of an approved commissary. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Sec. 36-703. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to any city-sponsored event where the operator of the food vending vehicle is operating pursuant to a valid contract with the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Sec. 36-704. - Land use certificate required for vending on private property. 
A.  Vending on private property—Zones. Food vending vehicles shall be allowed on private property in conjunction with a land use certificate and/or special event permit for activities on property in commercial, manufacturing, or planned development zones designated for commercial or manufacturing uses. Food vending vehicles operating on private property must obtain the consent of the person who is in legal control of the property and subject to the provisions of chapter 41. 
B.  Vending on private property—Activities. Food vending vehicles shall be allowed on private property in conjunction with a land use certificate and/or special event permit for activities such as filming for movies, a party, fair, or carnival. Food vending vehicles operating on private property must obtain the consent of the person who is in legal control of the property and subject to the provisions of chapter 41. 
C.  Pursuant to this section, the following restrictions apply to vending on private property: 
1.  A food vending vehicle may only vend and remain parked on private property for the period of time noted in the land use certificate and/or special event permit. 
2.  All food vending vehicles are required to have a city business license conspicuously displayed when vending. 
3.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse food vending vehicles from complying with all other provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Sec. 36-705. - Penalty for violation. 
Every violation of the provisions of this article shall be addressed through the use of an administrative citation as set forth in sections 1-21.1 through 1-21.9. Each day any violation of any said provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Use of an administrative citation shall not prevent or preclude the city from seeking additional criminal, civil or other legal remedy established by law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2924, § 3, 9-19-17 )  
Chapter 37 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, enacted Nov. 18, 1968 as adding Ch. 5 to Art. VI of the 1952 Code, §§ 6510—6523, has been codified as Ch. 37, §§ 37-1—37-13, at the discretion of the editors. Sec. 6523, severability, has been omitted, and internal references to sections have been revised, to preserve Code format. 
Cross reference— Underground utilities in subdivisions, § 34-82 et seq; electrical code reg. re underground installation, § 8-747; zoning reg. re underground installation, § 41-626; special tax financing improvement code, Ch. 20. 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
(a)  Commission : The public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
(b)  Underground utility district or district : That area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 37-4 of this chapter. 
(c)  Person : Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
(d)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures : Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
(e)  Utility : All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical and materials or devices. 
(Code 1952, § 6510; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-2. - Public hearing by city council. 
When council shall receive a recommendation from the director of public works, and said recommendation is placed on the agenda pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code, council may call a hearing or authorize a hearing officer pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Code to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric communication, or similar or associated service. The clerk of the council shall notify by mail, all affected property owners and utilities concerned as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the time and place of such hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1952, § 6511 ; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 16, 12-9-74)  
Sec. 37-3. - Report by director of public works. 
Prior to holding such public hearing, the director of public works shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the estimates of the extent of such utilities' participation and the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Code 1952, § 65-12; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-4. - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing the city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Code 1952, § 6513; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-5. - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in section 37-4 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in section 37-10 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 6514; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-6. - Exceptions for emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten (10) days without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Code 1952, § 6515; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-7. - Other exceptions to application of chapter. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to section 37-4 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(a)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(b)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
(c)  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing over any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(d)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(e)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
(f)  Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(g)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(h)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Code 1952, § 6516; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-8. - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 37-4 of this chapter, the clerk of the council shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said clerk of the council shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(b)  Notification by the clerk of the council shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 37-4, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Code 1952, § 6517; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-9. - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 37-4 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Code 1952, § 6518; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-10. - Responsibility of property owners. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in section 37-9 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(Code 1952, § 6519; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68; Ord. No. NS-1838, § 1, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 37-10.5. - Remedies of the city on failure of property owner to act. 
(a)  In the event a person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting property within a district does not comply with the provisions of section 37-10, the executive director of the public services agency shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the executive director of the public services agency works shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
The notice given by the executive director of the public services agency to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(b)  If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the executive director of the public services agency shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the executive director of the public services agency shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and supplying utility service to the property. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the work, the executive director of the public services agency shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
The executive director of the public services agency shall, after the time for hearing such protests has been fixed, give written notice to the person in possession of such premises, and to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for giving of notice to provide underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if any, and then affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(d)  If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the council, then pursuant to Section 38793 of the Government Code of the State of California, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made, and the executive director of the public service agency shall turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal ad valorem taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement on municipal ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1838, § 2, 3-3-86)  
Sec. 37-11. - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 37-4 of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 6520; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-12. - Extension of time for compliance. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 37-4 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Code 1952, § 6521; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Sec. 37-13. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 6522; Ord. No. NS-949, § 1, 11-18-68)  
Chapter 39 - WATER AND SEWERS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2921, 2, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed art. I, §§ 39-1—39-3, in its entirety; and § 3 enacted a new art. I, to read as set out herein. Former art. I pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 7504—7506; Ord. No. NS-465, § 1, 9-6-60 and Ord. No. NS-505, § 1, adopted February 20, 1961. 
 
Sec. 39-1. - Water and sewer service outside city limit. 
Except as provided by this chapter, no water or sewer service shall be made with the water or the sewer systems of the city for the rendering of service in any area not within the city limits, and no service to any area within the city limits shall provide water or sewer service to any area outside of the city limits, even though such areas outside the city limits may stand of record as owned by the same person or persons receiving water or sewer service on adjacent land within the city limits. The record owner of any parcel of land adjacent to the city's boundaries who desires to obtain water or sewer service shall make a request to the director of public works for such service and agree to execute with the city a legally binding agreement or contract in compliance with all conditions of water and sewer service in this chapter, California Government Code section 56133, and the rules of the Orange County Local Agency Formation Commission. Parcels adjacent to the city's boundaries that are being served by the city water or sewer systems at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall, by December 31, 2018, request and execute with the city a similarly compliant agreement for continued service. Failure to complete a water or sewer service agreement may result in the discontinuation of the sewer or water service. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 3, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-2. - Water and sewer systems development impact fees. 
Development impact fee(s) shall be imposed on development project(s) that require water and or sewer facilities necessary to accommodate growth resulting from the development(s). Development impact fee(s) may be established by ordinance or resolution of the city council in compliance with California Government Code section 66000 et seq. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 3, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-3. - Water and sewer systems design standards. 
(a)  All water system distribution, storage, and treatment system components, combined as one (1) functional unit or system or individually, regardless of ownership and location, that connect to the city's domestic water system, directly or indirectly, shall be designed, constructed, and inspected in accordance with this Code, the city standard plans, the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Green Book), the American Water Works Association Standards, and the California Waterworks Standards. 
(b)  All sewer mains, laterals, manholes, lift stations, and other sewer system appurtenances, regardless of location and ownership, that connect to the city's sewer collection system, directly or indirectly, shall be designed, constructed, and inspected in accordance with this Code, the city standard plans, and the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction (Green Book). 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 3, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-4. - Charges, fees, and deposits. 
All charges, fees, and deposits in this chapter shall be adjusted from time to time and established by the city council by resolution and as applicable shall be specified by the city's miscellaneous fee schedule. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 3, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-5. - Private water and sewer lines. 
(a)  Water distribution lines and sewer collection lines constructed in private streets or in local streets not meeting the design criteria established by the director of public works shall be designated as private lines. It is the sole responsibility of the owner to operate and maintain the private water distribution lines, including without limitation all routine and emergency repairs, operation, and upkeep of all above ground appurtenances and underground valves, fittings, pipes, and service connections up to and including the meter curb stop. It is the sole responsibility of the owner to operate and maintain the private sewer collection lines, including without limitation all routine and emergency repairs, operation, and upkeep of sewer manholes and sewerage lift pumps. 
(b)  The private line owner's responsibility starts at the property line of the development served. Before construction, engineering plans for the construction of private lines must be submitted to the public works agency and the planning and building agency for review and approval in a manner consistent with the city's water and sewer systems design standards as described in section 39-3. Private water lines not constructed in conformance with these standards will be declared unapproved water systems requiring a higher degree of protection against cross-connection. Looped water lines must be protected against backflow at each connection to the city's public water system. 
(c)  Any modifications to private lines and their appurtenances shall be performed in accordance with the city's standard plans and the California Waterworks Standards. This includes without limitation the renewal, addition, or removal of service connections. All work must be permitted by the public works agency and the planning and building agency. Private water lines with non-conforming modifications will be declared unapproved water systems requiring a higher degree of protection against cross-connection than a reduced pressure principle assembly. Upon completion of the project, and prior to gaining occupancy permits to any of the units served with water and sewer, as-built plans stamped by an engineer licensed by the state must be submitted and approved by the public works agency. 
(d)  The city shall require the installation of a water meter in accordance with section 39-23(b) on every service connection to each dwelling unit, irrigation system, common area amenity, and individual commercial unit tapped from the private water line. The city will be responsible for the maintenance of the water meters, including meter reading, meter testing, meter repair, and replacement. To maintain, inspect, test, and read the public water meters, both an access easement to the development and a maintenance easement, confined to the water service meter box, shall be granted to the city by the private property served. 
(e)  The allowance or permitting by the city of private water lines shall not in any way authorize the owner or private entity to resell water for profit within the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 3, 8-1-17 )  
Secs. 39-6—39-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2921, 4, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed art. II, §§ 39-15—39-46, in its entirety; and § 5 enacted a new art. II, to read as set out herein. Former art. II pertained to similar subject material, and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 7400—7416, 7418, 7419; Ord. No. NS-936, § 2, adopted September 16, 1968; Ord. No. NS-1084, § 1, adopted June 21, 1971; Ord. No. NS-1238, § 1, adopted November 18, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1624, § 1, adopted April 5, 1982; Ord. No. NS-2005, § 1, adopted May 1, 1989; Ord. No. NS-2045, §§ 1—11, adopted December 4, 1989; Ord. No. NS-2233, § 1, adopted September 19, 1994. 
Cross reference— Water pollution control, § 18-151 et seq.; draining water onto streets, abandoned wells to be capped, 10-1, § 18-17. 
State Law reference— For powers of city respecting water supply, see § 38742, Gov. Code. 
 
Sec. 39-15. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Afterhours means that period of time allotted by the finance director for the performance of unscheduled water service turn on or turn off, occurring after the regularly established hours for the performance of scheduled water service turn on or turn off, as set by the director of finance. 
Agency means public works agency, City of Santa Ana. 
Applicant means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, receivership, trust, trusteeship, or agency of government, or other legal entity recognized by the laws of the state or of the United States applying for water service. 
Backflow preventer means an approved device or means to prevent backflow into the city's potable water system. 
Common area amenities means areas within residential, commercial, or industrial developments for the common use of residents or workers managed by the owner or his agent, including but not limited to, rental offices, club houses, picnic areas, drinking fountains or filling stations, exercise rooms, and swimming pools. 
City means the City of Santa Ana. 
Cost means charges and/or fees which include the cost to the city of labor, materials, equipment, and overhead. 
Customer means an individual, partnership, association, corporation, receivership, trust, trusteeship, or an agency of government or other legal entity recognized by the laws of the state or of the United States receiving water service. 
Date of presentation means the date upon which a bill or notice is mailed to the customer at their mailing address of record, or in the event that a customer has signed up for electronic billing, the date upon which electronic notice is given to the customer at their electronic mailing address of record. 
Director of finance or finance director means the chief administrative officer of the department of finance and management services or his authorized designee. 
Director of public works means the chief administrative officer of the public works agency, City of Santa Ana, or his authorized designee. 
Department of public works or public works department means the public works agency. 
Department of finance or finance department means the finance and management services agency. 
Fee means the amount established by resolution of the city council which is intended solely to cover the reasonable administrative costs (time, materials, overhead) incurred in performing any specified act on behalf of any person or at any person's request for which said person shall be liable. 
Gender pronouns: The masculine includes the feminine and neutral genders. 
Greywater means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge; has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes; and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Greywater includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers, or as otherwise defined by the California Health and Safety Code. 
Main means the distribution pipe line located in a street, highway, public easement, or private right-of-way which is used to serve the general public. 
Master meter means a meter, read by the city, that measures water usage for an entire property or structure, which may include common areas. 
Meter means any suitable water measuring device or facility which measures or determines the volumetric flow of water. 
Multi-family dwelling/accommodation means an apartment building, apartment house, condominium complex, or any other group of residential units located upon a single premises, including mobile home parks, providing the residential units therein meet the requirements for a single family accommodation. Hotels or motels consisting primarily of guest rooms and/or transient accommodations are not classified as multifamily accommodations. 
Municipal utility services account/billing statement means the consolidated account and/or billing statement to which refuse service charges, sanitation service charges, sewerage service charges and other sewerage related charges and fees, water commodity consumption charges, and other related water service charges and fees (including fire line service charges), together with corresponding penalties, as applicable, shall accrue and/or are stated. 
Parcel means a division of land as shown in the Orange County Assessor's Book. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or an agency of any governmental organization, receivership, trust, trusteeship, or other legal entity recognized by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
Premises or service address means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is provided or for which an application for water service is filed. 
Private fire protection service means provision of stand-by readiness to serve water to premises through a separate fire service line connection for fire protection only, such fire service lines to be connected to automatic sprinkling system, hose attachments, or hydrants. 
Property owner or owner means the record owner of real property, as shown on the most recently issued equalized assessment roll. 
Recycled water means treated wastewater supplied by Orange County Water District from the Green Acres Project, or treated wastewater of comparable quality from such other water recycling system as the city shall designate. 
Service area means all area within the city limits and the area served outside the city limits. 
Service charge or service related charge shall mean any commodity consumption cost, whether measured by consumption or volume or whether applied as a pass-through adjustment rate, or any fixed amount or variable schedule of amounts authorized herein or authorized elsewhere in this chapter or Code relating to refuse, sanitation, sewerage, and water (including fire line service), as established by resolution of the city council. 
Submeter means a device that measures water consumption of an individual unit within a multiunit residential structure or mixed-use residential and commercial structure, and that is owned and operated by the owner of the structure or the owner's agent. 
Temporary service means a water service through a city-owned fire hydrant for special outdoor events, fairs, construction work, irrigation of vacant property, and similar uses which, because of their nature, will not be permanent. 
Tenant improvement means changes made to the interior and exterior of a commercial or industrial property to accommodate the needs of tenants, including but not limited to, partitions, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, fire protection, and security. 
Theft of water means the taking of water from any city water main, hydrant, service, or facility without a meter or the written permission of the city in the form of a permit or application as provided for in the provisions of this article. 
Unit of water means one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
Water facilities means water distribution and treatment components, individually or as a whole, operating to provide storage, flow, and pressurized domestic water. The following components make up water facilities: wells, reservoirs, pipelines, system valves, control valves, fire hydrants, interties, disinfection treatment, instrumentation and controls, power distribution, and supervisory control and data acquisition system. 
Water service means the tapping connection, pipe, valves, and other facilities by means of which water is conducted from the main water line, whether public or privately owned, to the meter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-16. - Application for turning on water and transfer of responsibility. 
(a)  Procedures; registration fee. An application to have water turned on or to transfer responsibility for water charges shall be made to the finance department of the city in conformance with the procedures established by the director of finance. A "registration fee" for the administrative cost therefore shall be made; provided, however, that the reversion of responsibility for water charges from a tenant to a previously registered property owner or other customer possessing the legal right to act as a lessor, at the time of the termination of such tenant's tenancy, shall not constitute a new application for turning on water or transfer of responsibility for water charges and shall not be subject to the "registration fee." 
(b)  Transfer of responsibility. Within the meaning of this chapter, a transfer of responsibility for water charges occurs when any of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner or other customer possessing the legal right to act as a lessor, or his authorized agent, informs the department of finance that a tenant has assumed lawful control of the property or premises or that there has been a change of lawful tenants; alternatively, the initial tenant or a new incoming tenant informs the department of finance that they have assumed lawful control of the property or premises. 
(2)  A lease or other rental agreement (signed by the owner or his authorized agent) is provided, clearly specifying that the named tenant shall be responsible for municipal utility services in tenant's own name. A triple-net lease or other written agreement obligating a tenant to pay charges for water services and other municipal utility services provided to the property or premises in the name of the owner or lessor shall not constitute a transfer in responsibility, and liability for the payment of water charges shall be deemed to remain with the owner or lessor. 
(c)  Deposit. Each applicant, except for the property owner of record, shall make a water service deposit at the time of making an application for turning on water or transfer of responsibility in an amount as set forth by resolution of the city council. The deposit may be refunded or applied as an account credit if and when all municipal utility services account bills rendered have been paid before their delinquent date for a period of one (1) year. 
(d)  In the event occupant(s) of any property or premises having registered a municipal utility services account and transferred municipal utility services into their own name as tenant(s), pursuant to a lease or other rental agreement (signed by the owner or his authorized agent) clearly specifying that the named tenant(s) shall be responsible for municipal utility services in tenant(s)' own name, thereafter quit or otherwise vacate the premises, then responsibility for future charges shall revert to the municipal utility services account of the property owner. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-17. - Applications for new water service and change in service size or relocation. 
(a)  Any person desiring to request a new water service or change the size or location of an existing water service shall make application to the agency for such addition or change. The agency, if in its judgment determines that the change in service size or location is advisable, will issue a permit authorizing the change. The agency reserves the right to make the final determination of the size of the service connection and its location. An applicant requesting the new water service or requesting the change in service size or location shall be liable for all costs. New locations and changes of the location or the size of water service must be built to city specifications by a private contractor, to be hired by applicant and inspected by city. 
(b)  Meters for new water service, resized service, or relocated service shall be installed by the city. Fees for the service application, meter and installation shall be payable in advance prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(c)  The city shall furnish the meters. 
(d)  The material used for the installation of new water service or change of the size or the location of water service shall conform to the water system design standards in accordance with section 39-3(a). 
(e)  Before new water service will be permitted by the city, the customer shall obtain any approval of facilities furnished or installed by customer, which may be required by the planning and building agency or the Orange County Fire Authority or any other authority whose approval is required by law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-18. - Facilities declared property of city; cost of repairs. 
All facilities, including but not limited to water meters, meter boxes, fire hydrants and fittings installed by the city, shall remain at all times the property of the city. Where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of any facility are rendered necessary by the act, omission, or negligence of the customer or of any person occupying the premises with the consent of the customer, any expense incurred by the city shall be charged against and collected from the customer. If the customer fails to pay such fees, the water may be shut off until such fees are paid. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-19. - Water rates, service charges, fees and costs. 
(a)  Water commodity consumption and service charges. 
(1)  Commodity charges. Quantitative consumption rates shall be charged in the amount which the city council shall establish by resolution and in accordance with applicable law. 
(2)  Basic service charges. Charges shall be made for services rendered to provide and maintain a potable water supply and to provide standby readiness in the amounts established by and for the purposes described in the resolution adopted by the city council and in accordance with applicable law. 
(3)  Multi-family per unit charge. Basic service charges shall be applied to developments that meet the definition of multi-family dwelling/accommodation where the individual units are not individually metered by the city. 
(4)  Private fire service protection charge (fire line charge). A charge shall be made for the service rendered to provide readiness to deliver relatively large quantities of water for short periods of time for on-site private fire protection and suppression systems in the amounts established by and for the purposes described in the resolution adopted by the city council and in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Fees to establish water service. All applicants, prior to connecting to a water main or prior to an increase in size of an existing water meter or service, shall apply and obtain a permit to do so and pay the following fees in amounts as established by resolution of the city council. 
(1)  New water service application fee — see section 39-17. 
(2)  Water meter cost and installation fee — see section 39-17. 
(c)  City is authorized to charge/levy the following administrative and other fees and deposits in an amount established by resolution of the city council: 
(1)  Meter turn on or meter turn off fee during weekdays for new water turn on services and delinquent accounts — see section 39-20(e). 
(2)  Afterhours turn on or turn off fee during afterhours and holidays for new water turn on services and delinquent accounts when requested by customer — see section 39-20(e). 
(3)  Special investigation/meter reread fee when requested by customer or when meter was inaccessible at the time the routine meter read was attempted by the city — see section 39-20(c). 
(4)  Meter removal fee or meter resetting fee (to re-install meter when meter was removed for non-payment or for violation of this Code) — see section 39-20(e). 
(5)  Meter test fee (when requested by customer) — see section 39-21(a). 
(6)  Temporary construction meter deposit — see section 39-24. 
(7)  Temporary construction meter daily rental fee — see section 39-24. 
(8)  Field collection fee — see section 39-20(j). 
(9)  Return payment service fee — see section 39-20(m). 
(10)  Fire flow test application fee — see section 39-28. 
(11)  Fire flow test witness fee — see section 39-28. 
(12)  Backflow preventer third-and-final notice generation fee — see section 39-29(e). 
(13)  Water service deposit — see section 39-16(c). 
(14)  Backflow device testing administrative fee — see section 39-29(e). 
(15)  Registration fee — application for turning on water and transfer of responsibility — see section 39-16(a). 
(16)  Tag fee — see Sec. 39-20(d). 
(17)  Removal of unauthorized "straight pipe" connections fee — see section 39-20(k). 
(18)  In street cut-off (of water services) fee — see section 39-20(l). 
(19)  Meter read trip fee — see section 39-20(e). 
(20)  Abstract of billing history fee — Whenever a customer of record or his agent requests a history of charges and/or fees billed to a municipal utility services account registered in the name of the customer, an abstract of billing history shall be provided and an "abstract of billing history fee" shall be added to the customer's next regularly scheduled municipal utility services account/billing statement. Whenever such request is made by a third party pursuant to customer's letter of authorization, the fee shall be payable in advance. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-20. - Payment of water bills and penalties; municipal utility services account/billing statement. 
(a)  Date payment due. Water commodity consumption charges, and related water service charges (including any fire line charges), and other fees and penalties shall be stated as part of a municipal utility services account/billing statement along with refuse related charges as established pursuant to section 16-38, sanitation related charges as established pursuant to section 18-601 et seq., sewerage related charges as established pursuant to section 39.55.1 et seq., and all above related corresponding associated penalties, and are due and payable to the department of finance on the date of presentation and become delinquent thirty (30) days after the date of such presentation, except that when the 30th day falls on a weekend, city holiday, or city hall closure day, such bills shall be due on the next following city working day. Any charge for water supplied to any customer, or any related charges or fees (including fire line charges), together with any refuse service, sanitation service, sewerage service charges, fees, or penalties due to the city from such customer, or due from any person who has applied for water service, as herein provided for, shall be added to any billing being currently rendered to such person, and the same shall become a part of his current municipal utility services account/billing statement for water service and subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. Partial payments made upon municipal utility services account/billing statements shall be applied in the following order: 
(1)  Refuse service related charges, 
(2)  Sanitation related charges, 
(3)  Sewerage service related charges, 
(4)  Water service commodity consumption charges and related charges (including fire line service charges) and fees established pursuant to section 39-19, and 
(5)  Corresponding penalties as provided respectively under sections 16-38(c), 18-603(b), 39-55.2(a), and 39-20(d). 
(b)  Failure of meter to register correctly. If a meter fails to register during any period, or is known to have registered inaccurately, the customer shall be charged for a seasonally adjusted average daily consumption for a period of similar duration determined when the meter was registering accurately. 
(c)  Meter reread and meter investigation. When a meter box is inaccessible at the time the routine meter read was attempted by the city or when consumption occurs in connection with a previously turned off meter, or when a customer requests that the city verify the accuracy of the read as shown on the bill, the customer shall be charged a "special investigation/meter reread fee" as established by resolution of the city council for sending a field representative to the service address to investigate the meter and obtain a reading or rereading of the meter. If the reading or rereading shows that the previous read is in error, no special investigation/meter reread fee will be imposed; otherwise such charge shall be added to the customer's next regularly scheduled water bill. 
(d)  Penalties. A penalty of ten (10) percent shall be assessed on the unpaid balance of all unsatisfied municipal utility services account/billing statement charges, fees, and penalties thirty (30) days after the presentation date, in accordance with subsection (a). Thereafter, a past due notice shall be presented to the customer. On the next city working day following the seventh (7th) day after the date of presentation of the past due notice, the water service shall be subject to turn off at the premises. Two (2) days before the intended turn off of water service, a discontinuance of service notice for non-payment "turn-off tag" shall be affixed to the premises and a "tag fee" imposed for such notification service. Thereafter, service may be discontinued if the bill is not satisfied within the time required by such notice. Once turned off, water service shall remain off until all charges, penalties and fines have been paid, unless an application to have the water turned on is received accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the department of finance of change of ownership or change in tenants. Upon the receipt of such evidence, the application for turning on water or transfer of responsibility for water charges shall be processed as provided for in section 39-16. 
(e)  Turn off and turn on of service. When the water has been turned off for non-payment or for the violation of any provision set forth in this code or any ordinance, regulation or requirement of the city, such water shall not be turned on again unless the violation has been corrected and all charges and penalties have been paid, unless the turn off is exempt from such payment by reason of change of person receiving service. A "meter turn on fee" and "meter turn off fee" shall be made for each separate trip to the premises for the purposes of turning on or turning off water service during weekdays for new water turn on services and delinquent accounts and whenever otherwise requested by customer; provided, however, that turn on or turn off of water service during afterhours and holidays for new water turn on services and delinquent accounts when requested by customer, shall be subject to a special "after hours turn on or turn off fee" as established by resolution of the city council. After a water meter has been turned off for a period of seven (7) days, the meter may be removed from the service. A "meter removal fee" as established by resolution of the city council shall be made for the cost of meter removal. A "meter resetting fee" as established by resolution of the city council shall be made for the reinstallation of the meter and the turning on of the water. A "meter read trip fee" as established by resolution of the city council shall be payable for each trip to a customer's premises for the purposes of performing a meter read for closing out of service, or for start of service, or for transfer of responsibility for service. Fees as herein provided shall be added to the next water bill issued after date of turn off, turn on, special investigation/reread, meter resetting/reinstallation or other designated trip, provided the amount is not collected in advance of the turn off, turn on, special investigation/reread, meter resetting/reinstallation, or other designated trip. For the purposes of this article, the term "trip" shall not include the regularly scheduled routine reading of customers' meters. 
(f)  Closing bill. Upon the rendering of the final bill for service, the city shall not refund any credit balance or deposit of less than one dollar ($1.00); any checks returned that cannot be delivered or are unclaimed shall be forfeited unless the applicant applies for refund within twelve (12) months. 
(g)  Individual liability for joint service. Two (2) or more persons who join in one (1) application or contract for service shall be jointly and severally liable thereunder and shall be billed by means of a single periodic bill presented to the person designated in the application process to receive the bill. 
(h)  Change of address. Water service shall not be given to any customer upon change of address until all delinquent charges owing thereon at a former place of residence or business have been paid. 
(i)  Transfer of charges. When a customer maintains separate water service at multiple premises in the city under the same name or identity of ownership or tenancy, and water service has been discontinued at one (1) premises for non-payment, the department of finance may transfer the unpaid balance owing from the account to which service has been discontinued to any other account belonging to the customer for which water service remains ongoing. 
(j)  Field collection fee. When a representative of the city collects payment of delinquent charges owing from a customer or customer's agent in the field, in lieu of performing a turn off or removal of customer's meter, a "field collection fee" shall be applied and collected from the customer or his agent at the same time as all other delinquent charges and fees owing are collected. 
(k)  Removal of unauthorized "straight pipe" connections. Whenever a customer has connected to the city's water service through an unauthorized straight pipe connection, the city shall cause such connection to be removed and a "removal of unauthorized straight pipe connections fee" as established by resolution of the city council shall be made and billed to the customer. 
(l)  In street cut-off of water services. Whenever, in the discretion of the director of public works any customer's access to the water service must be physically severed by means of an in street cut-off of water service, whether due to authorized turn on of water service, or unauthorized straight pipe connection, or other violation of city code, an "in street cut-off fee" as established by resolution of the city council shall be made and billed to the customer. 
(m)  Any charge, fee, or deposit owing to the city which has been paid by an instrument such as a check or draft which is dishonored upon presentation for payment, shall be void and of no effect from its inception. The director of finance, may, in his discretion, withhold the effect of this provision if the instrument is redeemed within fifteen (15) days of its return. Payment of charges, fees, or deposits following a dishonor of such instrument upon presentation for payment shall thereafter be made only by credit card, cashier's check, money order, or cash, which amount shall include any applicable penalty, as well as a "return payment service fee". The director of finance shall be authorized to reject payment other than by cash, cashier's check, or money order from such customer or such customer's agent for a period of two (2) years following any such dishonor. 
(n)  Water service commodity consumption charges and water related charges and fees established pursuant to section 39-19, and any corresponding penalties accrued for failure to make timely payment therefore pursuant to section 39-20 shall be a civil debt owing to the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-21. - Testing of meters; leaks. 
(a)  A customer may request the agency to test the meter serving his premises. The customer shall be charged a "meter test fee" to cover the cost of such test. The fee shall not be applied if the meter is found to register not more than two (2) percent fast. The customer shall have the right to observe the performance of the test, and a written report of the test will be given to him upon request. 
(b)  When upon test, a meter is found to be registering more than two (2) percent fast, the city will refund to the customer the amount of the overcharge based on corrected meter readings for the period the meter was in use, but not exceeding a period of six (6) months. 
(c)  When upon test a meter two (2) inches or less in size is found to be registering more than twenty-five (25) percent slow, the city may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings, seasonally adjusted for the period the meter was in service, but not exceeding a period of four (4) months. 
(d)  When upon test a meter three (3) inches or larger in size is found to be registering more than five (5) percent slow, the city may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings, seasonally adjusted for the period the meter was in service, but not exceeding a period of four (4) months. 
(e)  Customers are required to keep their plumbing pipes, service pipes, and all facilities on the customer's side of the meter in good order and are required, at their own expense, to locate and repair any leaks. It is not the city's responsibility to locate or repair any water facility on the customer's side of the meter. No allowance will be made on a customer's bill for loss of water, once the water is delivered to the customer's side of the water meter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-22. - Finance director; responsibility; administrative authority. 
(a)  The director of finance shall have responsibility for administering the city's consolidated municipal utility services accounts (refuse and refuse related, sanitation and sanitation related, sewerage and sewerage related, and water and water related, including fire line service) as they correlate to account establishment and maintenance, billing, payment processing, collection, and customer service operations. 
(b)  To efficiently and equitably implement the purpose and intent of the general provisions of this chapter subject to his administration, including those portions of chapters 16 and 18 relating respectively to refuse service charges and sanitation service charges in connection with municipal utility services accounts/billing statements, the director of finance may vary and adjust the strict procedural, billing, collection, enforcement, or other administrative requirements. In addition, the director of finance shall have the power, for good cause shown, to waive, abate, adjust, refund, or reduce any commodity consumption, charge, other charge, fee, or penalty imposed, or deposit demanded. The director of finance may in his discretion exercise this authority on a case-by-case basis in connection with any individual applicant or customer, or other person or legal entity, or on a class-by-class basis in connection with any category, class or subclass of applicants, customers, or other persons. 
(c)  In connection with the above described chapters and provisions subject to his administration, the director of finance shall have the authority to settle, discontinue, or waive the collection of any claim, or class of claims, for good cause shown, or if it appears that further proceedings would be without merit, or if the administrative or legal cost therefore would be excessive, or if the amount of the claim in question is de minimus. A claim, or class of claims, shall be deemed to be de minimus whenever the total amount of the claim is determined by the director of finance to be equal to or less than the total anticipated administrative costs associated with collecting the amount. The director of finance may in his discretion determine this amount on a case-by-case basis or on a class-by-class basis. 
(d)  The director of finance shall have the further authority to interpret, make rules and regulations, and establish guidelines not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, subject to his administration, or those portions of chapters 16 and 18 relating respectively to refuse service charges and sanitation service charges in connection with municipal utility services accounts/billing statements, as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the administration or enforcement of such provisions, including the establishment of service hours for scheduled water service turn on and turnoff, as well as afterhours periods for the performance of unscheduled water service turn on or turn off. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-23. - General regulations. 
(a)  There shall be the following types of water services: 
(1)  Domestic-residential. Domestic-residential water service shall be used to serve domestic water to residential units, including single-family detached homes, single family attached units, residential units within multi-family developments such as apartments, condominiums, and townhomes, residential units within a mixed-use development, and mobile home spaces. 
(2)  Domestic-commercial. Domestic-commercial water service shall be used to serve domestic water to motels, hotels, restaurants, office buildings, commercial centers, and strip malls. 
(3)  Domestic-municipal. Domestic-municipal water service shall be used to serve domestic water to federal, state, county, and city government offices, buildings and parks. 
(4)  Domestic-industrial. Domestic-industrial water service shall be used to serve domestic water to industries such as chemical and allied products, food, mining, paper and allied products, petroleum refining, and steel. 
(5)  Domestic-institutional. Domestic-institutional water service shall be used to serve domestic water to hospitals, convalescent homes, developmental facilities, long term care facilities, nursing homes, psychiatric facilities, rehabilitation facilities, and developmental disability facilities. 
(6)  Domestic-common area. Domestic-common area water service shall be used to serve domestic water to clubhouses, on-site laundry rooms, recreational areas, exercise rooms, drinking fountains, cooling equipment and make up water for recirculating decorative fountains. 
(7)  Irrigation. Irrigation water service shall be used for irrigation systems to establish and maintain landscape areas, lawns, trees, gardens, and shrubs; assist crop and pasture growth; or to maintain vegetation on recreational lands such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses. Irrigation includes water that is applied for pre-irrigation, chemical application, weed control, field preparation, harvesting, and dust suppression. Irrigation water service shall be used to irrigate all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet and residential irrigated landscape of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. 
(8)  Industrial. Industrial water service shall be used to serve water to industries that use water in their manufacturing or any portion of their fabrication or process systems. 
(9)  Recycled water. Recycled water service, if available, shall be used in accordance with section 39-38. 
(10)  Fire protection. Fire protection services shall be used for fire protection systems pursuant to the local fire code as specified in section 39-27. 
(b)  There shall be the following metering requirements: 
(1)  Each individual residential unit, commercial unit, industrial unit, and mobile home space shall be individually metered by city or submetered as required by applicable law. 
(2)  Residential lots with landscape area over five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be required to have a dedicated irrigation service and water meter. 
(3)  Non-residential lots with landscape area greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet shall have dedicated irrigation service and water meter. 
(4)  At the discretion of the director of public works, master metering can be allowed if site conditions prohibit the installation of individual meters, or submeters are proposed by the developer. 
(5)  Newly constructed multiunit residential structures or newly constructed mixed-use residential and commercial structures for which an application for a water connection, or more than one (1) connection, is submitted after January 1, 2018, shall at the owner's sole cost and responsibility have a measurement of the quantity of water supplied to each individual residential dwelling unit as a condition of new water service. The measurement may be by individual water meters or submeters. The owner shall be required to install and read such meters, unless otherwise agreed by the city. 
(6)  Multifamily dwellings and common interest developments including apartment complexes, condominiums, townhomes, mixed use developments, and mobile home parks with common area amenities shall have a dedicated domestic-common area water service and meter. 
(c)  Meter required. Every water service, except fire protection services meeting conditions of section 39-27, shall have a meter installed in the service line in the public right-of-way or a dedicated easement. 
(d)  Maintenance of customer's facilities. Customers shall prevent all waste of water and keep their service pipes, all plumbing fixtures, pipes, and other apparatus (except facilities owned by the city) in good repair and free from leakage and backflow at their own expense. Customers shall be liable for all damages which may result from the customer's failure to maintain such facilities in good repair and free from leakage and backflow. 
(e)  Vacated premises. Water rates will be charged for vacated premises until the city is notified of the discontinuance of the use of water, and is requested to turn off the water. 
(f)  Admittance to premises. Any authorized employee of the city shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to all appropriate parts of the premises supplied with water to see that the provisions of this article, resolutions adopted pursuant hereto, and administrative regulations published in accordance herewith are carried out. 
(g)  Unauthorized turn-on or tampering. No one except an authorized employee of the city shall turn the water on or off from or to any premises at any city curb stop, or connect or disconnect, or in any way tamper with, any pipes in the meter boxes or with any other part of the water system of the city. 
(h)  Resale or distribution. No customer supplied by the city shall commercially supply water to any other person on property other than the premises for which the customer has applied for service, except as may be permitted by special agreement with the agency. Water used by any customer shall be restricted to that use specified in the application or permit for such service. 
(i)  Utility emergency requirements. All faucets, sprinklers, hose nozzles, or other continuous streams must be shut off promptly upon the sounding of an alarm of fire or upon notice of other emergency or major disaster. The water shall not be turned on again until the fire is known to be extinguished or the required repairs have been made. 
(j)  Shut-offs for extensions and repairs. The city reserves the right upon reasonable notice, if possible, at any time to shut off the water in its mains for the purpose of making extensions or repairs, or for other purposes, and all persons having boilers within their premises not supplied with tanks or cisterns, but depending upon the pipes of the city to keep them supplied, shall caution against the danger of collapse. 
(k)  Responsible owner or applicant. In all cases where water is supplied to several tenants from one (1) connection or tap, the city contracts only with the person designated on the application. Failure by such person to comply with the provisions of this article, or with resolutions or regulations enacted or adopted pursuant hereto shall be sufficient cause to disconnect all service until such ordinances, resolutions or regulations are complied with. 
(l)  Right of agency to install facilities. The city shall have the right at any time, and at any point for good cause, to install or change any water meter, detector check, backflow preventer, and fittings as required by this article, and the customer shall bear all costs for work so performed. Failure to pay for these facilities as set forth in this article shall relieve the city of any responsibility to provide any service and the service shall be disconnected until full payment of costs, interest, and penalties has been made to the city. 
(m)  Nonliability of city for interruption in service. The city shall not be liable for damage resulting from interruption of service, shortage, insufficiency, or quality of supply. 
(n)  Notice to customer for shutdown of service. In case of emergency or during normal water system maintenance and repair operations, whenever possible, all consumers affected will be notified prior to any shutdown of service. 
(o)  Temporary shutdowns authorized. Temporary shutdowns may be restored by the city for improvements and repairs and the city shall not be liable for any loss or damage occasioned thereby. 
(p)  Inspecting apparatus—Right of city. The city reserves the right of inspection of customer's apparatus at all times. 
(q)  Resale of water prohibited. Where submeters are utilized, customer shall not resell to another person at any charge higher than his pro rata share of the total charges as rendered by the agency. 
(r)  Pressure and supply. The city assumes no responsibility for loss or damage because of high water pressure or lack of water or pressure and merely agrees to furnish such quantities and pressure as are present in its general distribution system. The service is subject to shut down and variations required by the operation of the system. Any pressure regulation to control water pressure greater than eighty (80) psi (pounds per square inch) shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(s)  Curb stops. There shall be a curb stop or valve in every attachment just inside the curb at a point to be designated by the city. The curb stop and box will be supplied by the city and shall be for its exclusive use and under its exclusive control. 
(t)  Damage to customer's property. The city will not be responsible for damages to buildings or their contents from any break in a water pipe beyond the street service box. Water customers shall, for their own protection, provide at their own expense another valve at the first suitable point beyond the meter. 
(u)  Unused service connection. Any service connection which has been installed for a period of ten (10) years or more and has not been activated for ten (10) years shall be considered inactive and obsolete. Any person desiring water service for such premises or any portion thereof formerly supplied by the inactive service shall make application for a new service connection and pay the current charge therefore. 
(v)  Meter box or hydrant obstruction. No person shall place trash, dirt, building materials, or other objects or obstructions on or around meter boxes or on, around, or adjacent to city hydrants. No person shall allow the meter boxes or hydrants to become obstructed or obscured by vines, trees shrubs, plants, or in any manner so as to make their location difficult to determine, or so as to interfere with or render difficult free access to, or use of, meter boxes or fire hydrants. In the event of obstruction or obscuring, notice shall be given by the agency to the property served by such meter, or adjacent to such hydrant; such notice shall contain the requirement that the obstruction be removed within twenty-four (24) hours. Where a meter box is obstructed or obscured so that it cannot be read, a "special investigation/meter reread fee" shall be made for returning to read the meter. 
(w)  Responsibility of city. The city's responsibility ends at the customer's side of the meter or where the city's facilities terminate. 
(x)  Above ground water system appurtenances. Fire hydrants and aboveground backflow prevention devices, fire connection stand pipes and above ground meters shall be entirely color coded as follows: 
Public fire hydrant 	White 
Private fire hydrants 	OSHA Red 
Irrigation meter and Backflow Prevention Device 	Green 
Domestic meter and Backflow Prevention Device 	Blue 
Fire Backflow Prevention Device and fire connection standpipes 	OSHA Red 
All colors shall follow the city's standard specification as established by the agency. 
 
(y)  Fire hydrant location. Fire hydrants shall be installed in locations specified by the agency. If an applicant requests, and the agency approves, a change in the size, type, or location of specified hydrants may be made. The applicant shall pay any additional costs required to comply with the request. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-24. - Temporary service; fire hydrant meters. 
(a)  Use of fire hydrants as temporary water service. City fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose of extinguishing fire and shall be opened and used only by the agency, fire department, or such persons as may be authorized by permit. No person shall draw water from any fire hydrant without a permit. Water shall be drawn from hydrants by use of a standard fire hydrant wrench, an auxiliary valve, and meter. Such auxiliary valve and meter shall be placed on the fire hydrant outlet with the auxiliary valve closed before any fire hydrant valve is opened. Any person using a fire hydrant without the required permit, tools, and meter may be charged with theft of water. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued in the following manner: 
(1)  Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Renewals for the same location or permits for a different location may be granted only after the city has inspected the meter for damage or tampering and has determined the amount of water used as recorded by the meter and that all bills due and payable have been paid or that the amount of deposit is adequate to cover all unpaid bills or cost of repairs. 
(2)  Permits shall not be granted to any individual business or agency known to be in violation of any provision of this Code. 
(3)  Permits shall show the name and address of the permittee, the date issued, the expiration date, the number and location of each hydrant from which water may be obtained, and the amount of money deposited. 
(4)  Deposits may be transferred from one (1) permit to another only if all the conditions of subsections (b)(1) and (2) have been met. 
(c)  Deposit and fees. Upon granting any permit under this section, the agency shall require the applicant to make a deposit as set by resolution of the city council sufficient to cover cost of meter with stand, auxiliary valve, and hydrant wrench. Deposits will be refunded upon the return of undamaged meter and tools and payment for water used. All or part of the deposit may be forfeited for failure to report the amount of water used monthly, for failure to pay any bill, or for failure to return any meter and tools issued to the permittee. 
(d)  Fees. A daily meter rental fee as set by resolution of the city council, in addition to the cost of water used, shall be charged for each day the meter is in possession of the permittee. A minimum fee equal to the total of the daily rental charge for five (5) days shall also be established. The rental and cost of the water used may be deducted from the deposit. 
(e)  Timing. Upon completing the fire hydrant meter permit application, a fire hydrant meter will be installed by the city at the location specified in the permit within forty-eight (48) hours of the completed application. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-25. - Water measurement. 
(a)  Every water service as defined in this chapter shall be metered. 
(b)  Water services shall be designated according to the type of use as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Only duly authorized employees or agents of the city shall be permitted to install water meters. Following the final acceptance of the water service and meter, the meter and the service connection shall belong to the city and are the sole property of the city. 
(d)  Meters will be read at regular intervals for the preparation of regular bills and as required for the preparation of opening bills, closing bills, and special bills. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-26. - Continuity of service. 
(a)  The city will exercise reasonable diligence to furnish a continuous and sufficient supply of water to its customers and to avoid any shortage or interruption of delivery thereof. It cannot, however, guarantee a continuous or sufficient supply or freedom of interruption. 
(b)  The city shall not be liable for interruptions or shortage of supply, nor for any loss or damage occasioned thereby. 
(c)  Whenever, in the operation of the city's water system, interruption in the delivery of water to customers results from or is occasioned by cause other than the exercise by the city of its right to temporarily suspend the delivery of water for the purpose of making repairs or improvement to its system, notice of any such interruption will not be given to the customers of the city, but the city shall exercise reasonable diligence to reinstitute delivery of water. 
(d)  The city, whenever it shall find it necessary for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system, shall have the right to temporarily suspend the delivery of water. In all such cases, as reasonable notice as circumstances will permit will be given to the customer, and the making of such repairs or improvements will be completed as rapidly as may be practicable and at such times as will cause the least inconvenience to its customers. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-27. - Private fire protection service. 
(a)  The use of separate fire protection services shall be limited to servicing structural and buildings fire sprinkler systems, fire hoses, on-site fire pumps, fire department connection standpipes, and fire hydrants. No such service shall be used for any purpose other than flushing, fire flow testing, and the extinguishment of fires. All such services shall be equipped with an approved double check valve assembly in accordance with section 39-29(i) at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  A private fire protection service required to be flow tested routinely shall be equipped with an appropriately sized fire service meter approved by the Orange County Fire Authority. 
(c)  For non-residential tenant improvement projects that require a permit, plan check, or design review costing fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, an approved double check valve assembly shall be installed on the existing private fire service. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-28. - Fire flow tests. 
Fire flow tests shall be performed by a certified fire protection professional. An application shall be submitted and a permit issued to the individual requesting the test prior to conducting the test. The flow test must be witnessed by a representative of the agency. A fire flow application fee and a fire flow witness fee, as set by resolution of the city council, shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-29. - Protection of public water supply. 
(a)  State regulations adopted. The regulations of the State of California related to Drinking Water Supplies, Title 17, as they are now in effect or as they may be amended in the future, insofar as the same are applicable to the protection of the water supply of this city, are hereby adopted, incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(b)  Purpose; applicability. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is: 
(A)  To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; 
(B)  To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; 
(C)  To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination; and 
(D)  To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. 
(2)  It is unlawful to make or maintain, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the agency and any other source of water supply, or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any customer of the city. 
(3)  No water service connection to any premises of a type specified in subsection (i) shall be installed or maintained unless the public water supply is protected as required by applicable state regulations and this section. 
(c)  Approval. 
(1)  Each backflow preventer required hereunder shall be approved by the agency prior to installation and shall be installed by and at the expense of the customer for continued service or before a new service will be granted. 
(2)  The agency shall approve a device when the device has received approval by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (or other qualified organization as designated by the agency), and will provide desired service and reliability. The agency shall provide, upon request, to any affected customer, a list of approved devices. 
(d)  Installation. 
(1)  Devices shall be installed as close as practical to the customer's service connection and shall be installed above grade in an accessible location approved by the agency. 
(2)  Devices shall have at least the same cross-sectional area as the water meter. In those instances where it is determined that a continuous water supply is necessary, two (2) sets of devices shall be installed in parallel. Where parallel devices are required, the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the devices shall be at least equivalent to the cross-sectional area of the meter. 
(e)  Maintenance, testing, and records. 
(1)  The customer shall test and service such devices at least once a year and immediately after installation, relocation, or repair. A report, in a form acceptable to the agency, which sets forth the results of such test(s) shall be filed immediately with the agency. The agency may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary and all costs shall be borne by the customer. 
(2)  Devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective. All costs of such service, overhaul or replacement, including testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the customer. The agency may require device information, such as location and pictures, to be submitted with the test forms. 
(3)  The agency will supply affected customers with a list of persons acceptable to the agency to test devices. 
(4)  The agency will notify affected customers when annual testing of a device is needed. Failure to notify shall not relieve the customer of the obligation to test and service its devices. 
(5)  Upon the issuance of a third and final notice to test a device, the agency may impose a backflow preventer third-and-final-notice generation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(6)  The city reserves the right to hire a private tester to test the device and bill the customer for the cost of the test plus a backflow device testing administrative fee as set by resolution of the city council, which shall be the responsibility of the applicant, if a device has not been maintained and tested within six (6) months, or one hundred eighty (180) days, from the date when the first notice regarding testing was mailed. Reasonable efforts to notify the customer of the impending testing will be made. 
(f)  Backflow prevention device removal. 
(1)  Notification and approval. The agency must be notified and approval must be obtained from the agency before a device is removed. 
(2)  Removal in general. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the agency to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. 
(3)  Removal for relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the agency that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection to satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required, prior to return to service, following the relocation of the device. 
(4)  Temporary removal for repair. A device may be removed for repair or service, provided water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with backflow protection approved by the agency. A retest will be required, prior to return to service, following the repair or service of the device. 
(5)  Temporary removal for replacement. A device may be removed and replaced, provided water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the agency prior to being put into service and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. A retest will be required, prior to return to service, following the replacement of the device. 
(g)  Water system survey. 
(1)  Plans and specifications must be submitted to the agency upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards for new or existing service connections. If it is determined that a device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be provided or continued. 
(2)  The agency may conduct an on-premises inspection or reinspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the device the agency considers necessary. 
(h)  User supervisor. At each premises where it is necessary in the opinion of the agency, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the customer. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the agency shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The customer shall inform the agency of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(i)  Type of protection required. 
(1)  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the customer's premises. The type of device shall be one (1) of the following: 
(A)  Approved air gap separation (hereinafter "AG"); 
(B)  Approved double check valve assembly (hereinafter "DC"); or 
(C)  Approved reduced pressure principle assembly (hereinafter "RP"). 
(2)  The customer may choose a higher level of protection than required by the agency. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply at the customer's water connection to premises, with varying degrees of hazard, are provided in Table 1. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the agency. 
(3)  In those instances where conditions warrant, the agency may modify the minimum installation herein indicated as appropriate to provide a degree of protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
TABLE 1. TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED 
Degree of Hazard 	Minimum 
Type of 
Backflow 
Protection 
1. 	Aircraft and missile plants 	RP 
2. 	Automotive plants 	RP 
3. 	Auxiliary water systems (interconnected) 	RP 
4. 	Auxiliary water systems (not interconnected) 	RP 
5. 	Beverage bottling plants 	RP 
6. 	Boilers 	RP 
7. 	Breweries 	RP 
8. 	Buildings greater than three (3) stories or greater than thirty-four (34) feet in height from curb level 	DC 
9. 	Buildings with two (2) or more service connections (interconnected) 	DC 
10. 	Buildings with house pumps and/or potable water storage tank 	DC 
11. 	Buildings with wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants (not interconnected) 	RP 
12. 	Canneries 	RP 
13. 	Car wash facilities 	RP 
14. 	Centralized heating and air conditioning plants 	RP 
15. 	Chemical plants 	RP 
16. 	Chemically treated potable water systems 	RP 
17. 	Civil works (facilities not subject to city plumbing inspection) 	RP 
18. 	Commercial laundries 	RP 
19. 	Cooling towers 	AG 
20. 	Dairies and cold storage plants 	RP 
21. 	Dye works 	RP 
22. 	Film processing laboratories 	RP 
23. 	Fire protection system with biological or chemical additives 	RP 
24. 	Fire protection system with unapproved auxiliary water supply (not interconnected) 	DC 
25. 	Fire protection system with unapproved auxiliary water supply (interconnected) 	RP 
26. 	Fire protection system with storage tanks or private reservoirs 	DC 
27. 	Fire protection systems with two (2) or more service connections (interconnected) 	DC 
28. 	Food processing plants 	RP 
29. 	High schools and colleges 	RP 
30. 	Holding tank disposal stations 	RP 
31. 	Hospitals (major complexes) 	RP 
32. 	Irrigation systems 	RP 
33. 	Laboratories using toxic materials 	RP 
34. 	Manufacturing, processing, and fabricating plants using toxic materials 	RP 
35. 	Manufacturing, processing, and fabricating plants using nontoxic materials 	RP 
36. 	Medical and dental buildings 	RP 
37. 	Mobile home parks 	DC 
38. 	Motion picture studios 	RP 
39. 	Oil and gas production facilities 	RP 
40. 	Paper and paper production plants 	RP 
41. 	Plating plants 	RP 
42. 	Premises where recycled water is used (not interconnected) 	RP 
43. 	Radioactive materials processing facilities 	RP 
44. 	Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities 	RP 
45. 	Rubber plants 	RP 
46. 	Sand and gravel plants 	RP 
47. 	Sewage and storm drainage facilities 	RP 
48. 	Any premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished 	RP 
49. 	Unapproved water systems or private piping systems constructed without the approval of the agency or the city's planning and building agency 	AG 
50. 	Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that they do not exist 	RP 
 
(j)  Discontinuance of water service. 
(1)  Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the agency, after notice, if a device is not installed, tested, and maintained as required by this section, or if any defect is found in an installed device, or it is found that a device has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, or if the agency determines a hazard or potential hazard exists. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(2)  When the agency encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply, the agency shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service. 
(3)  Conditions or water uses that create a basis for refusal to provide or termination of water service shall include, but are not limited to, any of the following items: 
(A)  Refusal to install a required device. 
(B)  Refusal to test a device. 
(C)  Refusal to repair a faulty device. 
(D)  Refusal to replace a faulty device. 
(E)  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line. 
(F)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants. 
(G)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system. 
(H)  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
(4)  Water service termination procedures shall include the following items: 
(A)  For conditions (3)(A), (3)(B), (3)(C) or (3)(D) of subsection (j) above, the agency will terminate service to a customer's premises after written notice has been sent, specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated. 
(B)  For conditions (3)(E), (3)(F), (3)(G) or (3)(H) of subsection (j) above, the agency will take the following steps: 
(i)  Make a reasonable effort to advise customer of intent to terminate water service. 
(ii)  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the agency. 
(k)  Information requests. Upon request, the agency will provide interested parties with copies of section 39-29, rules and regulations for the testing and maintenance of devices, and such other advice, information, illustrative sketches, drawings and data as may be necessary to familiarize the customers, engineers, architects and others with agency requirements. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-30. - Certification of water supply. 
Before the issuance of any permit or variance or the signing of any tract map, parcel map, lot split, or improvement plans, a certification must be obtained from the agency stating that the water system supplying the property meets the requirements for the last rate classification of the city by the American Insurance Association in supply, distribution facilities and fire hydrants, or that the property is or will be served by the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-31. - Greywater systems. 
No person shall construct or maintain a greywater system, as defined by the Water Code of the State of California. In order to avoid the potential health hazard presented by a greywater system, the public works agency may discontinue water service to any premises on which a greywater system has been installed until such system is removed. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-32. - Recycled water—Source of recycled water. 
(a)  The city has agreed to buy recycled water from the Orange County Water District (OCWD) and to resell such recycled water, as contractor for OCWD, to water users located within the jurisdictional and service boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Any city obligation to deliver recycled water is conditioned upon OCWD's completing and making operational the recycled water treatment and distribution system known as the Green Acres Project, including the distribution pipeline system necessary to provide recycled water to users; upon OCWD's making recycled water available for sale to users; and upon issuance of all necessary permits, certificates, and approvals by all federal, state and local regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the construction and operation of water recycling facilities and over the production, distribution, sale and use of recycled water. Any obligation is further conditioned upon OCWD being able to acquire acceptable right-of-way access from the Green Acres Project facilities to the users' property for distribution pipeline purposes, and upon approval of all federal, state, and local agencies having regulatory jurisdiction or grant-funding responsibilities with regard to the Green Acres Project facilities. 
(c)  The city shall have no obligation to supply recycled water beyond that usable by the user on the property set forth in any recycled water user agreement. Recycled water furnished by the city shall be provided solely for the user's use, and the user shall not resell any such recycled water. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-33. - Same—Pressure and quality of water purchased by user. 
Subject to compliance by OCWD, all recycled water delivered to users from Green Acres Project facilities shall conform to the current and future requirements established by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Santa Ana Region, state and local health departments, and federal, state and county agencies having jurisdiction to establish minimum standards for the quality of recycled water. Recycled water shall be delivered on a continuous basis at the minimum and maximum pressures set forth in the user's recycled water user agreement. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-34. - Same—Ownership of valves and meters. 
(a)  The city shall own, operate, and maintain the control valves located on each side of the meter and the metering device installed on the service line to the user's property. At locations where recycled water is used exclusively, the city may convert existing service connections (including control valves and meters) from potable to recycled water system connections. The user will own and maintain all facilities on the user's side of the customer control valve. The user shall be held responsible and charged for all water passing through meters at its property. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to determine the size of the recycled water pipeline, the type of pipe, the service connection required, and any and all other appurtenances related to recycled water usage which are located on the property location to which recycled water will be delivered. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-35. - Same—Purchase of water by user. 
(a)  The city will supply recycled water to the user, and the user shall purchase recycled water for the location(s) and purposes and in the estimated amounts set forth in its recycled water user agreement. 
(b)  The user shall commence taking deliveries of recycled water after receiving written notice of availability from the city. To the extent that the user's then-current use of its property necessitates the use of recycled water, the user will continue to purchase recycled water from the city. In the event that the current use of the property is discontinued or is modified, recycled water service may be terminated by mutual agreement in writing by the city and the user. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to control and schedule the use, distribution, and delivery of recycled water if, in its reasonable discretion, control and scheduling are necessary to maintain the recycled water distribution system in acceptable working condition. Scheduling may include, but is not limited to, varying rates of pressure and programming deliveries to the user and/or to portions of the user's property. 
(d)  If at any time during the construction or operation of the Green Acres Project facilities, real or potential hazards, or evidence of a hazard, are found to exist, the city reserves the right and has the authority to terminate recycled water service to the user's property in the interest of protecting the public health. Service shall be reinstated upon abatement of the hazard. If service is terminated pursuant to this section, the city may supply the user with water from its potable water sources or an alternative recycled water system at the then-current recycled water rate for up to thirty (30) days; after thirty (30) days and until such time as the delivery of recycled water is reinstated, the user shall pay the potable water rate if potable water is supplied or the recycled water rate if an alternative source of recycled water is used. 
(e)  In the event the lack of delivery of recycled water is the result of an operational fault of the city, the rate for the water delivered through the system will be equal to the then-current rate for recycled water for a period of up to thirty (30) days; thereafter, the user shall pay the regular potable rate. If the inability to deliver is beyond the control of the city, the city shall charge and the user shall pay the regular potable rate. 
(f)  In the event that OCWD ceases the production and distribution of recycled water or in the event that the treatment criteria imposed by any regulatory authority exceed or differ significantly from those existing as of the date of the execution of the recycled water user agreement and application for water service, the city shall supply potable water at the then-established potable water price. The city shall incur no liability to the user by reason of the temporary cessation of delivery of recycled water or by reason of the termination of such delivery. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-36. - Same—Price of recycled water. 
The price to be paid by the user for all recycled water delivered by the city shall be established by resolution of the city council, subject to the provision of the user's recycled water user agreement. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-37. - Same—Payment. 
Recycled water accounts shall be subject to section 39-20. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-38. - Same—Limitation on use. 
Recycled water delivered from OCWD's Green Acres Project facilities has restricted uses. The user shall use recycled water only upon the property of the user and only for those uses and purposes provided for in the recycled water user agreement and which are legally permissible under the laws of the state, as well as the rules and regulations adopted by the city, by OCWD and by all regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-Santa Ana Region, and by state and local health departments. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-39. - Same—Rules and regulations. 
The user shall comply with all rules and regulations, including the "Green Acres Project, Project Rules and Regulations for the Use of Recycled Water," promulgated now and in the future by OCWD, the city, the State of California or the federal government relating to the sale, distribution, transportation, and use of recycled water. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-40. - Same—Responsibility. 
(a)  The city's responsibility for the recycled water delivered to the user ends at the user's side of the meter or, in the case of an unmetered or other special installation, where the city's facilities terminate. Operation, management, maintenance, and monitoring with respect to the storage, distribution, and other facilities under the control of the user shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(b)  The user shall allow the city and/or OCWD's representatives to enter the user's premises for monitoring, inspecting, sampling, analysis, and observation of the user's recycled water facilities at all reasonable times. The user, its personnel, representatives, and agents shall cooperate with the city and/or OCWD in such activities and assist in the performance of operational tests as required. If a determination is made that the user's facilities are not in compliance with city and/or OCWD requirements, the user shall promptly initiate and diligently pursue to completion action that will correct the conditions causing the noncompliance. If the user shall fail to comply with its obligations specified herein, the city may, at the user's expense, make such repairs, improvements, changes, or undertake such other activities as are necessary to comply with the user's obligations. Such expense shall be payable to the city by the user upon demand, or the city may discontinue recycled water service until such time as the user makes appropriate repairs and the city inspects the user's system to assure conformance with applicable rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-41. - Same—Applicability of chapter. 
Recycled water accounts and service shall be subject to and shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter, except as specified in sections 39-32 through 39-40. In the event of conflict between sections 39-32 through 39-40 and the other portions of this chapter, the provisions of sections 39-32 through 39-40 shall control. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-42. - Same—Agreement to be signed. 
Before any recycled water service is provided, the user shall sign a recycled water user agreement with the director of public works, who is hereby designated as the agent of the city to enter into such agreements, in addition to filing or obtaining any applications or permits required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 5, 8-1-17 )  
Secs. 39-43—39-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2921, 6, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed art. III, §§ 39-50—39-58, in its entirety; and § 7 enacted a new art. III, to read as set out herein. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1952, §§ 7500—7502; Ord. No. NS-1497, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 6, 1979; Ord. No. NS-2065, § 1, adopted June 18, 1990; Ord. No. NS-2479, § 2, adopted September 17, 2001; Ord. No. NS-2670, § 2, adopted November 15, 2004 and Ord. No. NS-2887, §§ 5—7, adopted December 15, 2015 . 
 
Sec. 39-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Agency means Public Works Agency, City of Santa Ana. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by FSEs in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur. 
Director of public works means the chief administrative officer of the Department of Public Works, City of Santa Ana. 
Discharger means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger shall mean the same as user or customer. 
Enforcing attorney means the city attorney or district attorney acting as counsel to the city and his/her designee. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
FOG control program means the FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to statewide general waste discharge requirements for sanitary sewer systems (State Water Resources Control Board Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ). 
FOG control program manager means the agency's water resources manager and persons designated by and under his/her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to administer the FOG control program. A consultant retained under contract by the city may be designated as the FOG control program manager. 
Food grinder means any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding, chopping, macerating, or pressing food waste or food preparation byproducts for the purpose of disposing some or all food waste into the sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means food facilities defined in the California Retail Food Code, and any commercial entity, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members, or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a type I or type II hood, as defined in the California Retail Food Code. 
Grease control device means any grease interceptor, grease trap, or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. A grease control device may also include any other method proven to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
Grease interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located outdoors and underground between a FSE and the connection to the sewer system. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG regularly removed and disposed of in a proper manner to be effective. Also referred to as gravity grease interceptor or GGI. 
Grease removal device means a type of hydro-mechanical grease interceptor that automatically and mechanically removes non-petroleum fats, oils, and grease from the interceptor, the control of which is either automatic or manually initiated. Also referred to as GRD. 
Grease trap means a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures. These have a limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible or impracticable. Also referred to as hydro-mechanical grease interceptor or HGI. 
Hot spots means areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of sewer system, or require maintenance that otherwise would be unnecessary. 
Inflow means water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows. 
Infiltration means water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
Interference means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city's sewer system or is a cause of violation of federal or state environmental laws. 
New construction means any structure planned or under construction for which sewer connection permits have not been issued. 
Lower sewer lateral means that portion of the sewer lateral that extends from the sewer main to the private property line. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the state and the United States of America. 
Private sanitary sewer overflow means any surface spill, loss, or discharge of untreated or partially treated wastewater resulting from blockages or other problems within a privately owned sewer lateral. 
Remodeling means a physical or operational change causing generation of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharged to the sewer system by the FSE in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for FOG discharge to the sewer system; or requires either a discretionary land use approval, building permit, or plumbing permit, and involves any one (1) or combination of the following: 
(1)  Under slab plumbing in the food processing area; 
(2)  An increase in the net public seating area; 
(3)  An increase in the size of the kitchen area; or 
(4)  Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. 
Rules and regulations means non-punitive rules and regulations as established by the director of public works to implement this section and the FOG control program. 
Upper sewer lateral means that portion of the sewer lateral that extends from the private property line to the structure to which it connects. 
Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) means a surface sewer spill, loss, or discharge of wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. 
Sewer district means sewer assessment districts formed for the purpose of financing and constructing public sewer systems owned and operated by the city. 
Sewer facilities means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, and disposing of wastewater. Sewer facilities shall mean the same as sewer system. 
Sewer lateral means that entire connecting sewer line running from the sewer main to the private property line and extending to the structure to which it connects. 
Sewer main means the main line sewer, used as a trunk line or major channel of passage for transporting sewage and waste, constructed in a street, highway, alley, place, or right-or-way dedicated to public use. It shall not include sewer laterals or any portion of them. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human and animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-50.1. - Ownership. 
(a)  The city shall in no way whatsoever be responsible for any damage to persons or property because of any leakage, breakage, or seepage from, or accident or damage to, any sewer pipe or its appurtenances located on any private premises; nor shall the city be responsible for or on account of any damage, injury, or loss caused directly or indirectly by the existence on private premises of any sewer pipe or its appurtenances. 
(b)  A sewer lateral from its connection to a building on the property to its point of connection with the sewer main, inclusive of both the upper and lower sewer lateral, shall remain the responsibility of the property owner or user with regard to maintenance, repair and upkeep. All sewer laterals shall be maintained by the owner of the property or user served by such lateral in a safe and sanitary condition so that there is no seepage of waste at any point up to and including the junction of the sewer lateral and the sewer main and so that passage of waste through the lateral to the sewer main is free from stoppage and obstruction. All devices and safeguards that are required by this chapter for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-50.2. - Repair by city forces. 
(a)  Repair and maintenance of all sewer mains dedicated to the city shall be the responsibility of the city's sewer enterprise. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, repair and maintenance of all privately owned sewer mains and all lateral lines, equipment, and appurtenances connected to the city sewer mains shall be the responsibility of the owner/user, and shall meet the requirements contained in this article. 
(c)  The city's sewer enterprise may perform the repair and maintenance of all lower sewer lateral lines within the public right-of-way, at the discretion of the director of public works and so long as funds are available in the sewer enterprise to perform such repair and maintenance in accordance with Resolution NS-2479. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-51. - Mandatory connections. 
(a)  All buildings or other structures which contain any plumbing fixtures and which are located within any sewer district or district serviced by a public sewer must be connected to a public sewer. 
(b)  Whenever any property shall be included in a sewer district or area served by a public sewer, every building or other structure located on such property and containing any plumbing fixtures shall, within ninety (90) days after completion of the public sewer in such district or area, have all such fixtures connected to the such public sewer, and all cesspools or septic tanks on such property shall be disconnected and completely filled with good, sound earth at the time the sewer connection is made; provided, however, if the property has been, previous to its inclusion in a sewer district, connected to a public sewer and if such connection is approved by the director of public works, such connection shall be considered as complying with the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-52. - Connection outside of a sewer district; permit required. 
Any lot or any building or structure on any lot located within the city, but outside of an existing sewer district or area served by a public sewer, may be connected with a public sewer, but no person shall make any such connection unless and until he shall have been granted a sewer permit for such connection and unless and until such person or the owner of such lot or parcel or his duly authorized agent, shall have paid to the agency an amount equal to that which would have been assessed to such lot or parcel had it been in the district assessed for the existing sewer to which the connection is to be made. The amount may be reduced at the discretion of the director of public works to allow for extra length of house sewer or connecting sewer if necessary. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-53. - Connection permit required; determination of fee. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), no person shall make any sewer connection unless a permit shall have been applied for and issued by the director of public works. No permit for such connection shall be issued by the director of public works as provided in this section unless the application is accompanied by the payment of a fee to the agency in an amount which the director of public works shall determine to be the applicant's proportionate share of the cost of construction of such public sewer, as prescribed in subsection (c). 
(b)  Whenever a main sewer line is replaced by a new line, the laterals connected to the former line shall be connected to the new line and the entire lower lateral shall be reconstructed or rehabilitated as part of the installation thereof. In such event, no permit shall be required from the owner or occupant of any existing premises thus reconnected. 
(c)  The sewer connection fee for the applicant's proportionate share of the cost of public sewer construction shall be computed on the following basis: 
(1)  The fee shall be an amount equal to the assessment per fixture unit, multiplied by the net increase in fixture units on the parcel or parcels for which sewer connection application is made over the total fixture units previously serviced by any sewer line to which such parcel or parcels were connected. The number of fixture units assigned to each plumbing fixture shall be as provided in the California Plumbing Code. 
(2)  In all cases of sewer connection application for the servicing of a commercial laundry or restaurant, a fee in the amount of the standard cost per fixture unit multiplied by thirty (30) fixture units per clothes washing or dishwashing machine shall be assessed in addition to other fee assessments pursuant to subsection (c)(1). 
(3)  The city council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution the current assessment per fixture unit and the sewer connection application fees resulting therefrom in accordance with this section. 
(4)  All fees collected shall be deposited into the sewer connection fee fund pursuant to article VII of chapter 13. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-54. - Development conditioned upon sewer line construction. 
The director of public works shall review building permit applications for the purpose of determining whether the proposed development would result in an overload of existing sewer line capacity. No building permit which would result in such overload shall be approved unless a sewer line of sufficient capacity be first constructed or unless the city and the applicant enter into an agreement for its subsequent construction. In determining the necessary sewer line capacity, the director of public works shall take into account the anticipated future development of all parcels that use or will use the sewer line to be constructed. The city may enter into an agreement with any person constructing a sewer line pursuant to this section by which such person, or his successor-in-interest, shall be reimbursed for costs of construction of a sewer line, to the extent they exceed such person's own sewer connection fees due under section 39-53, solely from revenues in the sewer connection fee fund established by article VII of chapter 13. Any such agreement may provide that any fee that would otherwise be due pursuant to section 39-53 from the contracting party shall be a credit on the contracting party's right to receive reimbursement, in which case no payment of the fee to the city shall be required from the contracting party. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55. - General regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance of discharger's facilities. Dischargers shall prevent the discharge of FOG and prohibited wastes pursuant to section 39-58 and keep their sewer laterals, cleanouts, and other apparatus (except facilities owned by the city) in good repair and free from leakage and blockages at their own expense. Customers shall be liable for all damages which may result from the customer's failure to maintain such facilities in good repair and free from leakage and blockages. 
(b)  Vacated premises. Sewerage rates will be charged for vacated premises until the city is notified of the discontinuance of the use of water and is requested to turn off the water. 
(c)  Admittance to premises. Any authorized employee of the city shall be admitted at all reasonable hours to all appropriate parts of the premises supplied with sewerage service to see that the provisions of this article, resolutions adopted pursuant hereto, and administrative regulations published in accordance herewith are carried out. 
(d)  Responsible owner or applicant. In all cases where sewerage service is being provided to several tenants from one (1) connection, the city contracts only with the person designated on the application. Failure by such person to comply with the provisions of this article, or with resolutions or regulations enacted or adopted pursuant hereto, shall be sufficient cause to disconnect all service until such ordinances, resolutions, or regulations are complied with. 
(e)  Damage to discharger's property. The city will not be responsible for damages to buildings or their contents from any blockage in any portion of a sewer lateral. 
(f)  Unused sewer lateral. Any sewer lateral connection which has been installed for a period of ten (10) years or more and has not been activated for ten (10) years shall be considered inactive and obsolete. Any person desiring sewerage service for such premises or any portion thereof formerly served by the inactive sewer lateral shall make application for a new sewer lateral connection and pay the current charge therefore. 
(g)  Facilities owned by city. The city's ownership of sewer facilities ends at the point of connection between the sewer main and the sewer lateral, or, in other special installations, where the city's facilities terminate. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55.1. - Sewerage service charge—Purpose. 
In order to reimburse the city, in part, for its service in transporting sewerage from a water utility customer or other person using the city-owned sewer system and facilities to Orange County's publicly owned treatment works and related infrastructure, and to operate, maintain, repair, and replace the city-owned sewer system and facilities, it is appropriate for the city to charge a sewerage service fee. This charge does not duplicate any existing fee, charge, levy, or other toll currently collected by any public agency, and is intended to be, and shall be interpreted as, distinct and separate from any current or future (a) sewer standby or availability charge or assessment; (b) special benefit assessment or special tax imposed pursuant to state or local law; (c) sewer connection charge or sewer capacity charge paid in connection with or as a condition of approving an application for sewer service; or (d) mitigation fee imposed on new development pursuant to state law (California Government Code section 66000 et seq.) or local law. Where appropriate, words and phrases used in sections 39-55.1—39.55.5 shall have the same meaning as given them under article II. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55.2. - Same—Establishment. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 39-55.3, upon each water utility customer of the city there shall be imposed, in addition to the commodity charge for usage of city water, a sewerage service charge. All sewerage service charges imposed pursuant to this subsection, together with all charges imposed pursuant to subsections (b) and (c), shall be due and payable at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties for unsatisfied fees, charges, and penalties as provided in section 39-20 for payment of municipal utility services account/billing statements for water utility services pursuant to article II, but shall be listed as separate line items on the municipal utility services account/billing statement. The sewerage service fee shall be charged based upon the volume of usage of the city's sewer system by the water utility customer, as measured by metered water service. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 39-55.3, a sewerage service charge shall be imposed upon any person who receives potable water service from a municipal water provider other than the city or from a private water provider, and who discharges into the city-owned sewer system and facilities. The sewerage service charge shall be made upon the volume of usage of the city's sewer system by the person, as measured by metered water service or other means approved by the director of public works or designee. 
(c)  Sewer system capital recovery charge. Customers receiving sewer service will be charged a sewer system capital recovery fee as established by resolution. 
(d)  Lower sewer lateral replacement charge. Customers receiving sewer service will be charged a sewer lateral repair fee as established by resolution. 
(e)  Fats, oils, and grease control program. Food service establishments and food facilities receiving sewer service will be charged a fats, oils, and grease control program charge as established by resolution. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55.3. - Same—Exceptions. 
The following types of connections shall not be liable for payment of the sewerage service charge: 
(a)  Fire protection service connections when separately metered; 
(b)  Irrigation service connections when separately metered; 
(c)  Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or agency of government that is not connected to the city's sewerage system; provided, however, that it shall be the obligation of the individual, partnership, association, corporation or agency of government to present evidence of this fact to the city; or 
(d)  Any water utility customer who has not received city-supplied water during a billing period. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55.4. - Same—Setting charge. 
The city council shall, from time to time, set a sewerage service charge in accordance with applicable law. All monies collected from the sewerage service charge, including penalties and interest for late payment, shall be deposited into the sewerage enterprise fund established pursuant to chapter 13. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-55.5. - Same—Delinquencies. 
(a)  Sewerage service charges and other sewerage service related charges established under section 39-55.2 and any penalties accrued for failure to make timely payment therefore shall be a civil debt owing to the city. 
(b)  In the event that the owner and occupant of the premises or property receiving sewerage service are the same, then said civil debt against such customer shall constitute a lien against said property upon recordation following appropriate action by the city council following substantial compliance with all provisions of California Government Code section 54354 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, including notice and an opportunity to be heard; except as may be provided therein. As a separate and distinct remedy, the city attorney is authorized to bring suit pursuant to California Government Code section 54356. 
(c)  Establishment of a lien against the property shall remove said sewerage charge(s) from the city's regular consolidated municipal utility services account/billing statement and toll the accrual of additional penalties therefore under section 39-20. 
(d)  The city shall not disconnect water utility service for failure to pay the sewer service charge, unless such failure is accompanied by a customer's failure to pay the water utility service, in which case disconnection of water utility service shall be governed by article II. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56. - Fats, oils, and grease control—Purpose and policy. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to allow the maximum beneficial public use of the city's sewer services and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils, and grease (FOG) to the sewer facilities and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs. 
(b)  The purpose of this section is to comply with federal, state, and local policies regarding sanitary sewer overflows and to allow the city to meet applicable standards and provisions for the regulations of wastewater or waste containing FOG discharges to the sewer facilities. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.1. - Same—Rule and regulations and interpretations. 
(a)  The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this section as may be necessary or desirable to aid in administration of this section and the FOG control program. Any such rule or regulation may be added, modified, or deleted as necessitated by changes in law, increased demands of regulatory agencies, or technological improvements or advances. The rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the director of public works and maintained in an orderly manner readily accessible to the public. Further, the city will provide a copy of the rules and regulations to all FSEs at the time of initial inspection for compliance with this section. The burden to secure and comply with the rules and regulations shall be upon the FSE and in accordance with the goals and purposes of the FOG control program. 
(b)  The city manager, the director of public works, and persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may investigate compliance of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.2. - Same—Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibitions. The following prohibitions shall apply to all FSEs: 
(1)  The discharge into the sewer system of FOG that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral, except as provided herein. 
(2)  The installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new constructions of FSEs. All existing food grinders shall be removed from FSEs within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this section. 
(3)  The introduction of any additives into a FSE's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG, unless a specific written authorization from the FOG control program manager is obtained. 
(4)  The disposal of cooking oil into drainage pipes. 
(5)  The discharge of wastewater from dishwashers into any grease trap or grease interceptor. 
(6)  The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors. 
(7)  The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance, without prior authorization from the FOG control program manager. 
(8)  The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service. 
(9)  The discharge of any waste, including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device, to the sewer system. 
(b)  Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.3. - Same—Best management practices required. 
All FSEs shall implement best management practices (BMPs) in their operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. The requirements and guidelines for BMPs are specified in the rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.4. - Same—FOG pretreatment. 
(a)  FOG pretreatment required. Waste containing FOG shall be discharged into the sewer system only under the conditions of this section. The following facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks, dishwashers, drains, and any other fixtures through which grease may be discharged, into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge enters the sewer system, as well as provide a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port. 
(b)  Newly constructed FSEs. 
(1)  A newly constructed FSE(s) shall install grease interceptors prior to commencing the discharge of wastewater to the sewer system. 
(2)  Existing FSEs undergoing remodeling or a change in operations shall be required to install a grease interceptor prior to commencing the discharge of wastewater to the sewer system. 
(c)  Existing FSEs. Existing FSEs are not required to install a grease interceptor unless the FOG control program manager makes a determination that the existing FSE currently or potentially adversely impacts the sewer system by causing or contributing to: 
(1)  FOG hot spots; 
(2)  Interference; 
(3)  SSOs; or 
(4)  The FSE is not implementing or complying with BMPs as listed in the rules and regulations. 
(5)  The FSE(s) shall install grease interceptors within one hundred eighty (180) days after receipt of official notice to install the interceptor unless the FSE obtains a conditional waiver as discussed below. 
(d)  Conditional waiver of interceptor requirement. The FOG control program manager may provide a written waiver of the requirement to install a grease interceptor, listing the conditions upon which the waiver is granted, upon a finding of one or more of the following conditions set forth in subsections (1), (2), and (3): 
(1)  The FSE can substantively demonstrate that it employs an alternative pretreatment technology that is equivalent to or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge. 
(2)  There is no potential for FOG from the FSEs to cause or contribute to SSOs. 
(3)  The FSE discharges of FOG are negligible and do not cause a significant impact to the sewer system. 
(4)  The FSE may use or may be required to install grease traps in lieu of installation of a grease interceptor when: 
(A)  Installation of an interceptor cannot physically be accomplished; 
(B)  There is not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer; and 
(C)  No alternative pretreatment can be installed. Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by periodic removal of their full content, including sewage, FOG, floating materials, sludge, and solids. The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with grease traps is specified in FOG Control Program Rules and Regulations. 
(e)  Revocation of waiver. The program manager may revoke a waiver upon a determination of one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Quantity of FOG discharge, as measured or as indicated by the size of FSEs based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food, and other conditions, has changed since the granting of the waiver such that the FSE is contributing to FOG discharges. 
(2)  Adequacy of implementation and compliance with BMPs. 
(3)  Change in sewer size, grade, and condition based on visual information. 
(4)  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
(5)  Failure to comply with any of the conditions set forth in the waiver. 
(6)  Any other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges by the FOG control program manager. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.5. - Same—Grease interceptor requirements. 
(a)  All interceptors shall be of an approved type and adequately sized in conformance with the current edition of the California Plumbing Code and shall be installed, operated, and maintained as necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this section. 
(b)  Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and cleanup areas of FSEs that are sources of FOG discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor. 
(c)  Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the FOG control program manager and in accordance with the current edition of the California Plumbing Code design requirements and shall have a minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. 
(d)  The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease. 
(e)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.6. - Same—Grease interceptor maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor. The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with a grease interceptor is specified in the rules and regulations. 
(b)  No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities. 
(c)  FSEs with grease interceptors are required to maintain data and information necessary to establish the maintenance grease interceptors. This documentation shall be provided to the program manager as requested. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.7. - Same—Multiple FSEs on same property. 
Property owners with more than one (1) FSE located on the same property shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of a grease interceptor(s) and shall be responsible for compliance of the interceptor(s) with FOG program requirements. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.8. - Same—Monitoring for compliance. 
In an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system, the FOG control program manager may require the FSE to monitor and/or sample wastewater for compliance with the rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.9. - Same—Recordkeeping requirements. 
All FSEs shall be required to keep records in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the city under its FOG control program for no less than two (2) years. Required records include, but are not limited to, grease interceptor/trap maintenance and cleaning logs, employee-training logs, waste hauling manifest, interceptor sampling data, and facility plumbing and mechanical plans. The FSE shall, upon reasonable request, make the records available to the program manager or his designee. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.10. - Same—Inspection and sampling conditions. 
(a)  The FOG control program manager or his designee may inspect or order the inspection of and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the FSE is complying with all requirements of this section. The FSE shall allow the city access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE's grease control devices or interceptor, or reviewing the manifests, receipts, and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance, and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor. Where a FSE has security measures in force, the FSE shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities/inspections. 
(b)  The FOG control program manager or his designee shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. The FSE shall, without restriction, make available for inspection and copying by the program manager or his designee all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal. All such records shall be kept by the FSE for a minimum of two (2) years. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.11. - Same—Right of entry. 
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the FOG control program manager or his designee reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger's facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city's sewer system. If entry is refused, the FOG control manager or his designee shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.12. - Same—Emergency notification requirements. 
(a)  In the event a FSE is unable to comply with any section condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the FSE has reasonable opportunity to know that its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the this section, the discharger shall immediately notify the program control manager. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department and the city. 
(b)  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the FOG control program manager no later than five (5) working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve the FSE of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the FSE of any charges, fees or other liability which may be imposed by this section or other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.13. - Same—Emergency suspension order. 
The city may, by order of the director of public works, suspend sewer service when the director of public works determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment; or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages, or interference to the city's sewer facilities; or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and design the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.14. - Same—Nuisance. 
Any condition that the FOG control manager determines may result in the discharge of waste, which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city's sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.15. - Same—Violation of other laws. 
Any person acting in violation of this section also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify the Environmental Protection Agency, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this section. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-56.16. - Same—Other civil remedies. 
(a)  The enforcing attorney may file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: 
(1)  All costs incurred in enforcement of the section, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; 
(2)  All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and 
(3)  Damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
(b)  The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not limit the city's right to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-57. - Infiltration and inflow into sewer system. 
All city-owned sewer lines and private on-site sewer lines and laterals should be constructed and maintained to prevent water infiltration into the sewer system. Private on-site sewer lines and public sewer lines shall be used only to convey raw sewage. Rainfall runoff sources (including but not limited to roof drains, site drains, inlets, uncovered wash area drains, etc.) are prohibited from connecting to any public or private sanitary sewer pipeline. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-58. - Introduction of pollutants prohibited. 
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced any of the following into the city's sewer system: 
(a)  Pollutants that create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer collection system or the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), including but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° Fahrenheit or 60° Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations) section 261.21. 
(b)  Pollutants that will cause corrosive structural damage to the sewer collection pipes and structures, but in no case discharges with pH lower than five (5.0), unless the sewer system is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(c)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer collection system or the POTW, resulting in interference. 
(d)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, exerting biological oxygen demand, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(e)  Heat in amounts, which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40° Centigrade (104° Fahrenheit) unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(f)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(g)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewer collection system or the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(h)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants. 
(i)  Large volume discharges in a short period of time (slug flows) that adversely affect the operational capacity of the sewer. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
Sec. 39-59. - Private sewer overflows prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall cause or create a condition which causes a private sanitary sewer overflow. When a private sanitary overflow is found to occur, it shall be the responsibility of the private property owner to: 
(1)  Immediately prevent the continued discharge of wastewater onto the public right-of-way; 
(2)  Capture and collect any overflowed or spilled wastewater and return it to the appropriate sewer facilities; 
(3)  Clean and sanitize all affected areas, both within private property and public right-of-way, to the satisfaction of the director of public works; and 
(4)  Comply with all other federal, state, and local health department requirements. 
(b)  Any private property owner who causes or creates a condition which causes a private sanitary sewer overflow and or fails to satisfy the above mitigation responsibilities will be subject to administrative citations under section 1-21. If city personnel are dispatched to perform any of the actions outlined in this section, for any reason, the city reserves the right to charge the private property owner for staff time, equipment, and material spent. Such charges may be billed directly to the private property owner or his/her designee or added to the owner's sewerage service utility account if one (1) exists. 
(c)  The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not limit the city's right to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
( Ord. No. NS-2921, 7, 8-1-17 )  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT OF WELLS 
 
Sec. 39-60. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to control the construction and reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of this city will not be impaired in quality and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city and to provide for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-61. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this section. 
Abandoned and abandonment. The terms "abandoned" or "abandonment" shall apply to a well which has not been used for a period of one (1) year, unless the owner declares in writing to the advisory agency his intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well) and receives approval of such declaration from the advisory agency. All such declarations shall be renewed annually and at such time be resubmitted to the advisory agency for approval. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned twenty-four (24) hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the enforcement officer. 
Advisory agency. At all such times as an agreement is in effect between the City of Santa Ana and the County of Orange providing for the enforcement of the provisions of this article by the County of Orange, the advisory agency shall be as set forth in that agreement; otherwise, the advisory agency shall be the city council of the City of Santa Ana. 
Agricultural well. A water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called stock wells. 
Cathodic protection well. Any artificial excavation in excess of fifty (50) feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep anode. 
Community water supply well. A water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part I of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
Construct, reconstruct (construction, reconstruction). To dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace, or extend a well casing. 
Destruction. The proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the ground water is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard. 
Electrical grounding well. Any artificial excavation in excess of fifty (50) feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground. 
Enforcement officer. At all such times as an agreement is in effect between the City of Santa Ana and the County of Orange providing for the enforcement of the provisions of this article by the County of Orange, the enforcement officer shall be as set forth in that agreement; otherwise, the enforcement officer shall be the director of public works of the City of Santa Ana or his designee. 
Individual domestic well. A water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment. 
Industrial well. A water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis. 
Observation well. A well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifier, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality. 
Permit. A written permit issued by the enforcement officer permitting the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of a well. 
Person. Any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency. 
Public nuisance. The term "public nuisance," when applied to a well, shall mean any well which threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public. 
Salt water (hydraulic) barrier well. A well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer. 
Test or exploratory hole. An excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means. 
Well. Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. Wells shall include, but shall not be limited to, community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to fulfill the purpose of this article as determined by the advisory agency. Wells shall not include: 
(a)  Oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the state department of conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; 
(b)  Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; or 
(c)  Other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this article as determined by the advisory agency. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-62. - Acts prohibited; permit required. 
No person shall, within the City of Santa Ana, construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued for that purpose by the enforcement officer as provided in this article. 
Nor shall any such person abandon a well unless it has been destroyed pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the enforcement officer. 
Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued by the advisory agency or the enforcement officer, issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-63. - Applications for permits; contents, fee; term, conditions, cancellation of permit. 
Applications for permits shall be made to the enforcement officer containing such information as he shall require. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Orange County Board of Supervisors on the basis of the cost incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article. Fifty (50) per cent of the fee shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the permit is cancelled within sixty (60) days after issuance and no work has been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one (1) year from date of issuance. 
Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement found by the enforcement officer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
A permit may be cancelled or the conditions amended by the enforcement officer if he determines that to proceed with the work would result in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the permit or this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74; Ord. No. NS-2145, § 6, 9-16-91)  
Sec. 39-64. - Notification of completion of work; inspection. 
The permittee shall notify the enforcement officer in writing upon completion of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the enforcement officer and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this article or his permit until such inspection has been performed. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-65. - Notice of denial or cancellation of permit. 
In the event a permit is denied or cancelled, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice by the enforcement officer, which notice shall specify the reasons for his action and shall notify the applicant or permit holder of his right to request a hearing before the advisory agency within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-66. - Notice that well constitutes public nuisance; posting, contents. 
In the event the enforcement officer determines that a well constitutes a public nuisance, he shall mail a written notice to the landowner and the permit holder, if other than the landowner. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the specific facts giving rise to such nuisance; the corrective measures deemed necessary; the time, date, and place at which a hearing shall be held by the advisory agency relating thereto, which date shall be not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the date such notice is mailed. The notice shall state that in the event the advisory agency determines that a public nuisance exists a special assessment shall be imposed upon the land for any costs of abatement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-67. - Immediate abatement of nuisance. 
If the enforcement officer finds that immediate action is necessary to prevent impairment of the ground water or a threat to the health or safety of the public, he may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within twenty-four (24) hours after initiating such abatement, the enforcement officer shall give notice of a hearing before the advisory agency in the manner prescribed in section 39-66. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-68. - Board hearing. 
At the time fixed for the hearing, the advisory agency shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner and by any other interested person. In the event the advisory agency finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall direct the enforcement officer to take any necessary action to protect the ground water or the health and safety of the public, unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a date to be specified by the advisory agency. The costs of such corrective work by the enforcement officer shall become a special assessment upon the land pursuant to section 39-69. 
If the advisory agency finds that a permit was improperly denied or cancelled, it shall order the enforcement officer to issue or reinstate such permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-69. - Abatement costs a special assessment. 
Upon a finding by the advisory agency that a well constitutes a public nuisance, all cost of abatement carried out under the terms of this article shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within sixty (60) days, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code, Section 28773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. The city shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-70. - Standards. 
Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of wells shall be the standards recommended in the state department of water resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II, and future amendments thereto. Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment of cathodic protection wells and electrical grounding wells shall be the standards recommended in the state department of water resources Bulletin No. 74-1, and future amendments thereto. Well standards may be modified by the enforcement officer, with the advice and concurrence of the advisory agency, where required to cope with the local geological and ground water conditions. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Sec. 39-71. - Penalty for article violation. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article or any permit issued hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any such violation is committed, continued or permitted and shall be subject to the same punishment as for the original offense. 
(Ord. No. NS-1219, § 1, 9-16-74)  
Secs. 39-72—39-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2921, § 9, adopted August 1, 2017 , repealed art. IV, §§ 39-80—39-83.5, in its entirety. Former art. IV pertained to "Memory Lane Interceptor Sewer Development Fee," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2178, § 1, adopted October 5, 1992. 
 
Secs. 39-80—39-83.5. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER SHORTAGE CONTINGENCY PLAN[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 5, adopted May 19, 2015 , amended the title of art. VI to read as set out herein. Previously art. VI was titled "Conservation of public water supply." 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-84. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prevent the waste or unreasonable use of water and to provide a mandatory water conservation plan during a proclaimed water shortage. Because of the water supply conditions prevailing in the city and in the area of this state from which the city obtains a portion of its supply, the general welfare requires that the conservation of such water be practiced for the benefit of the people of the city and for the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 39-85. - Authorization. 
The director of public works is authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 39-86. - Public health and safety not to be affected. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the department to curtail the supply of water to any customer when such water is required by that customer to maintain an adequate level of public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 39-87. - Environment. 
This article and the actions hereafter taken pursuant thereto are exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 as a project undertaken as immediate action necessary to prevent or mitigate an emergency pursuant to Section 507(c) of the State EIR Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, 9-4-90)  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 39-88. - General. 
The words and phrases used in this article shall be construed as defined in section 39-15, unless separately defined in this article or the context clearly requires otherwise. Unless a different definition is set forth in section 39-15 or elsewhere in this article, the definitions set forth in the other provisions of this Code shall likewise apply. 
(Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, 9-4-90)  
Sec. 39-89. - Phasing. 
Phasing shall refer to the city council action of declaring water conservation Phase 1, 2, or 3 by resolution. 
( Ord. No. NS-2877, § 6, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 6, adopted May 19, 2015 , set out provisions for use herein as § 39-89. Prior to the adoption of those provisions § 39-89 was repealed by Ord. No. NS-2781, § 3, adopted April 20, 2009. Former § 39-89 pertained to phasing, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, adopted September 4, 1990.  
Sec. 39-90. - Billing unit. 
Billing unit means the unit of water rates for purpose of calculating water charges for a person's water usage and equals one hundred (100) cubic feet or seven hundred forty-eight (748) gallons of water. 
( Ord. No. NS-2877, § 7, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-91. - Base year. 
Base year is the twelve (12) month period designated by council to be the reference period for the water consumption reduction goal. 
( Ord. No. NS-2877, § 8, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-92. - Measurable rainfall. 
For the purpose of this article, measurable rainfall is defined as a rain storm that causes one-half (½) inches of precipitation over a twenty-four (24) hour period on all or a portion of the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2877, § 9, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-93. - Newly constructed homes and buildings. 
Newly constructed homes and buildings means homes and buildings that have been issued a building permit by the city after May 31, 2015. 
( Ord. No. NS-2877, § 10, 5-19-15 )  
Secs. 39-94, 39-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2781, §§ 4—6, adopted April 20, 2009, repealed the former division 3, §§ 39-96—39-98 in its entirety, which pertained to general prohibitions, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, adopted September 4, 1990. 
 
Secs. 39-96—39-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS GOVERNING WATER CONSERVATION PHASES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2781, §§ 7—18, adopted April 20, 2009, amended division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 4 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2073, § 1, adopted September 4, 1990. 
 
Sec. 39-105. - Determination of conservation phase. 
The city council shall make findings of water supply shortage and declare the applicable water conservation phase by resolution. 
The implemented phase of the water supply shortage shall be in effect until the city council declares that the water supply shortage has ended or until another phase has been implemented. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 7, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 11, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 11, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-105, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-105 was titled "Determination of conservation level."  
Sec. 39-106. - Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against water wasting. 
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water: 
(1)  Washing down sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas or other paved surfaces, except as is required to dispose of dangerous liquids or alleviate safety or sanitary hazards and then only by use of a hand-held bucket, or hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device is prohibited. 
(2)  Watering of lawn, landscape or other turf areas except between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. is prohibited, except by use of a hand-water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
(3)  The use of water to clean, fill or maintain levels in decorative fountains, ponds, lakes or other similar aesthetic structures unless such water is part of a re-circulating system is prohibited. 
(4)  No restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria or other public place where food is sold, served or offered for sale shall serve drinking water to any customer unless expressly requested. 
(5)  Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility. 
(6)  Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clean and easily understood language. 
(7)  Food preparation establishments such as restaurants or cafes are prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves. 
(8)  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of notification by the city, unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(9)  No installation of single pass cooling system. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service. 
(10)  Commercial car wash system. Effective on January 1, 2012, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational re-circulating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city. 
(11)  Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley gutter or ditch is prohibited. 
(12)  No installation of non-recirculating in commercial car wash and laundry systems. Installation of non-re-circulating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems. 
(13)  The use of water to irrigate outdoor landscapes during or within forty-eight (48) hours after measurable rainfall. 
(14)  The irrigation with potable water of ornamental turf on public street medians. 
(15)  The irrigation with potable water outside of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings in a manner inconsistent with regulations or other requirements established by the California Building Standards Commission and the Department of Housing and Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 8, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 12, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 12, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-106, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-106 was titled "Permanent water conservation requirements."  
Sec. 39-107. - Phase 1 water supply shortage. 
Upon the declaration by the council of a Phase 1 water supply shortage, council will implement the mandatory Phase 1 conservation measures identified in this section. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 39-106, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Phase 1 water supply shortage: 
(1)  Restrictions on watering lawn, landscape or other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit watering more often than every other day or Monday, Thursday, and Saturday. Such areas shall only be watered between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision shall not apply to commercial nurseries and golf courses. 
(2)  The watering of lawn, landscape or other turf areas of commercial nurseries or golf courses shall be allowed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. There shall be no restriction on watering utilizing reclaimed water. 
(3)  No customer shall make, cause, use or permit the use of water for any purpose in excess of the applicable percentage of the amount used in the customer's premises during the corresponding billing period of the base year as set by council, such percentage to be determined by city council and set forth in the resolution declaring Phase 1. There shall be no restriction on the use of reclaimed water under this provision. 
(4)  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of notification by the city, unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 9, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 13, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 13, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-107, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-107 was titled "Water conservation level 1 water shortage."  
Sec. 39-108. - Phase 2 water supply shortage. 
Upon the declaration by the council of a Phase 2 water supply shortage, council will implement the mandatory Phase 2 conservation measures identified in this section. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 39-106 and section 39-107, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Phase 2 water supply shortage: 
(1)  Watering lawn, landscape or other turf areas shall be modified to prohibit watering more often than two (2) days per week or Monday and Thursday. Such areas shall only be watered between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This provision shall not apply to commercial nurseries and golf courses. 
(2)  It is prohibited to water lawn, landscape or other turf areas of commercial nurseries or golf courses more often than every other day and watering shall only occur between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. There shall be no restriction on watering utilizing reclaimed water. 
(3)  It is prohibited to use water from fire hydrants except for firefighting and related activities. Other uses of water for municipal purposes shall be limited to activities necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  No customer shall make, cause, use or permit the use of water for any purpose in excess of the applicable percentage of the amount used in the customer's premises during the corresponding billing period of the base year as set by council, such percentage to be determined by city council and set forth in the resolution declaring Phase 2 water supply shortage. There shall be no restriction on the use of reclaimed water under this provision. 
(5)  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired with forty-eight (48) hours of notification by the city, unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(6)  Re-filling of more than one (1) foot and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 10, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 14, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 14, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-108, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-108 was titled "Water conservation level 2 water shortage."  
Sec. 39-109. - Phase 3 water supply shortage—Emergency condition. 
Upon the declaration of a Phase 3 water supply shortage, the council will implement the mandatory Phase 3 conservation measures identified in this section. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in section 39-106, section 39-107 and section 39-108, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Phase 3 water supply shortage: 
(1)  Watering or irrigation of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. The restriction does not apply to the following categories of use, unless the council has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to use: 
a.  Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or devise; 
b.  Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection; 
c.  Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion; 
d.  Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two (2) days per week according to the schedule and time restriction established in section 39-108. 
(2)  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the city, unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
(3)  No new potable water service will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided and no statement of immediate ability to serve or provide water service (such as, will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) will be issued, except under the following circumstances: 
a.  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or 
b.  The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
c.  The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city. 
This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one (1) year or less. 
(4)  No customer shall make, cause, use or permit the use of water for any purpose in excess of the applicable percentage of the amount used in the customer's premises during the corresponding billing period of the base year as set by council, such percentage to be determined by city council and set forth in the resolution declaring Phase 3. There shall be no restriction on the use of reclaimed water under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 11, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 15, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 15, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-109, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-109 was titled "Emergency condition, level 3 water shortage."  
Sec. 39-110. - Implementation of water conservation phases. 
(a)  Each month the department shall monitor and evaluate the demand for water by customers and the projected available supply. Upon determination of potential or actual water supply shortage, the director of public works shall recommend to the city council the extent of the conservation phase required by customers in order for the department to prudently supply water to customers. 
(b)  The city council shall make findings of shortage and declare the conservation phase by resolution. Said resolution shall specify the start date of the conservation phase. The resolution shall be published once in a daily newspaper of general circulation within the city and shall become effective immediately upon such publication 
(c)  The provision of section 39-107(3) and 39-108(4) and 39-109(4) requiring curtailment in the use of water shall be effective the first full billing period commencing on or after the date of such publication. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining compliance with the water use reductions in sections 39-107(3), 39-108(4), and 39-109(4), commercial, industrial and institutional users can request that water use reduction is calculated on an aggregate basis on all accounts owned by the same user. The request shall be considered and approved by the director of the public works agency. 
(e)  For new water accounts and accounts without historical water use in the base year, water use reduction level shall be based on the average base year use of similar types of users in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 12, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 16, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-111. - Cumulative penalties. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the penalties set forth in section 39-112 for violations relating to the curtailment in the use of water shall be cumulative with any other section of this Code or state law. 
All monies collected by the city pursuant to any of the penalty provisions of this article shall be deposited in the water stewardship fund, to be used for water conservation outreach and education activities. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 13, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 17, 5-19-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2877, § 17, adopted May 19, 2015, amended the title of § 39-111, to read as set out herein. Previously § 39-111 was titled "Exclusivity of penalties."  
Sec. 39-112. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of water allocation requirements. 
Violation by any customer of sections 39-107(3) and 39-108(4) and 39-109(4) requiring curtailment in the use of water shall be penalized as follows: 
(1)  First violation. The director of public works or his designee shall issue a written notice in the utility bill of the fact of a first violation to the customer. 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations. The director of public works or his designee shall issue a written notice in the utility bill of the fact of a second and subsequent violation to the customer. For violations, within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months, the director of public works or his designee shall impose a surcharge in an amount, set by the city council, on the water use in excess of the water allocation requirements. 
(3)  Gross violations. Customers who have three (3) violations within a twelve (12) month period shall be deemed gross violators and shall be subject to the installation of a flow restrictor device as determined by the director of public works or his designee. The charge for installing and removing a flow-restricting device and any other penalties or charges due the city from the customer or due from any person who has applied for water service, shall be paid before normal service can be restored. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 14, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 18, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-113. - Relief from compliance. 
(a)  A customer may file an application for relief from any provision of this article. The director of public works shall develop such procedures as necessary to determine such application and shall, upon the filing by the customer of an application for relief, take such steps as reasonably necessary to determine the application for relief. 
(b)  The application for relief may include a request that the customer be relieved, in whole or in part, from the water use curtailment provisions of sections 39-96 through 39-109 and shall contain the basis for such request. 
(c)  In determining whether to grant relief and the nature of any relief, the director of public works shall take into consideration all relevant factors including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Whether any additional reduction in water consumption will result in unemployment; 
(2)  Whether additional members have been added to the household; 
(3)  Whether any additional landscaped property has been added to the property since the corresponding billing period of the prior calendar year; 
(4)  Changes in vacancy factors in multifamily housing; 
(5)  Increased number of employees in commercial, industrial and governmental offices; 
(6)  Increased production requiring increased process water; 
(7)  Water uses during new construction; 
(8)  Adjustments to water use caused by emergency health or safety hazards; 
(9)  First filling of a permit-constructed swimming pool; and 
(10)  Water use necessary for reasons related to family illness or health. 
(d)  In order to be considered, an application for relief from a resolution must be filed with the department within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the most recent water bill following adoption of such resolution. No relief shall be granted unless the customer shows that he has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption other than in the specific areas in which relief is being sought. No relief shall be granted to any customer who, when requested by the department, fails to provide any information necessary for resolution of the customer's application for relief. 
(e)  The decision of the director of public works shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 15, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 39-114. - Exemption. 
Single-family residential customers shall not be required to reduce consumption below eighteen (18) billing units per bi-monthly billing period during water supply shortage Phase 1. Multi-family residential customers shall not be required to reduce consumption below eighteen (18) billing units per bi-monthly billing period for each dwelling unit during water supply shortage Phase 1. 
For water shortage Phases 2 and 3, the bi-monthly exemption amount for single family and multi-family customers shall be determined by the city council as set forth in the resolution declaring a water supply shortage Phase 2 or 3. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 16, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 19, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-115. - Notice of violation of provisions other than water allocation requirements. 
For violations of this article not related to sections 39-107(3) and 39-108(4) and 39-109(4) requiring curtailment in the use of water, the director of public works or his designee shall give notice of violation to the customer committing the violation as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation shall be given in writing in the following manner: 
a.  By giving the notice to the customer personally; or 
b.  If the customer is absent from or unavailable at the premises at which the violation occurred, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at the premises and sending a copy through the regular mail to the address at which the customer is normally billed; or 
c.  If a person of suitable age or discretion cannot be found, then by affixing copy in a conspicuous place at the premises at which the violation occurred and also sending a copy through the regular mail to the address at which the customer is normally billed. 
(2)  The notice shall contain a description of the facts of the violation, a statement of the possible penalties for each violation and a statement informing the customer of his right to a hearing on the merits of the violation pursuant to section 39-116. 
(3)  A second and subsequent violation, within the preceding twelve (12) calendar months of the first notice of violation, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per notice. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 17, 4-20-09; Ord. No. NS-2877, § 20, 5-19-15 )  
Sec. 39-116. - Hearing regarding violation. 
(a)  Any customer receiving notice of a second or subsequent violation shall have a right to an informal hearing by the director of public works or his designee, provided that a written request for hearing is filed within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation and the customer deposits with the city a sum equal to the billed surcharge and pays all other outstanding water charges. 
(b)  The customer's timely written request for a hearing shall automatically stay installation of a flow-restricting device on the customer's premises until the department renders a decision. 
(c)  If it is determined that the surcharge was wrongly assessed, the city will refund any money deposited to the customer. 
(d)  The decision of the director of public works or his designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2781, § 18, 4-20-09)  
Chapter 40 - REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES OTHER THAN MEDICINAL CANNABIS RETAIL ACTIVITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, adopted May 1, 2018 , amended ch. 40, art. I, §§ 40-1—40-15 in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 40 was titled "Regulation of Adult-Use Commercial Cannabis Retail Activities." 
 
ARTICLE I. - REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES OTHER THAN MEDICINAL CANNABIS RETAIL ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate commercial cannabis business activities, as defined in this article, in order to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Santa Ana by establishing regulations necessary for commercial cannabis business operating in the City of Santa Ana to obtain and maintain a Regulatory Safety Permit ("RSP"). Any commercial cannabis businesses operating in the City of Santa Ana shall at all times be in compliance with current State Law and this article. All commercial cannabis facilities shall operate in accordance with the regulations in this article and with the conditions of approval associated with the applicable zone for the parcel of real property upon which the commercial cannabis activities are conducted. Any commercial cannabis business shall qualify for and receive a Regulatory Safety Permit from the City of Santa Ana as provided by this article and operate only in a zone in compliance with Santa Ana Municipal Code before commencing with any commercial cannabis business activity. Any commercial cannabis business without a Regulatory Safety Permit is in violation of this article. The regulations in this article, in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act, the Medicinal Marijuana Program Act, SB 94, AB 133, Proposition 64, and the California Health and Safety Code (collectively referred to as "State Law") do not interfere with the right to use adult-use cannabis or medicinal cannabis as authorized under State Law, nor do they criminalize the possession of cannabis as authorized under State Law. 
B.  Any person operating a medicinal marijuana collective/cooperative (as defined in Chapter 18 of this Code) as of December 14, 2017, or who has a RSP application pending to operate a medicinal collective/cooperative, and has met all of the requirements of Chapter 18, shall be allowed to apply for a Regulatory Safety Permit for the sale of Adult-Use cannabis provided that they enter into the Adult-Use Cannabis Retailer Operating Agreement with the City. 
C.  The Commercial Cannabis Operating Agreement shall be a legally binding written agreement between each commercial cannabis business operator and the City, executed by the City Manager, or his or her designee, and in a form and substance satisfactory to the Executive Director of Planning and Building and the City Attorney, and containing those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied. A distinct Commercial Cannabis Operating Agreement shall be required for each location and type of commercial cannabis business activity taking place at an approved Commercial Cannabis Business. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions. 
The definitions are incorporated herein as fully set forth and are applicable to this article. All definitions are intended to comply with those set forth by the State of California for all commercial cannabis business activities. 
1.  "Applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this article, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of a commercial cannabis business. 
2.  "Adult-Use" means cannabis or cannabis products that are intended to be used for non-medicinal purposes by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
3.  "Adult-Use Cannabis Retailer Operating Agreement" or "Operating Agreement" means the agreement entered into by and between the City and the commercial cannabis business operator which will specify terms for local hiring and sourcing, community benefit plans, and fees to compensate for authorized impacts on City services. 
4.  "Adult-Use cannabis retail business" means an Adult-Use retail business that obtains a Regulatory Safety Permit and engages in the delivery or sale of Adult-Use cannabis, or an Adult-Use cannabis product, except as related Business and Professions Code Section 19319, or Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45, as amended from time to time, excepting medicinal cannabis retail. 
5.  "Authorized City of Santa Ana representative" means any police officer, city employee, contractor or agent of the city designated by the director of any city department which has the authority and responsibility to enforce provisions as set forth in this article. 
6.  "Business owner" means any of the following: 
a.  A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty (20) percent or more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance. 
b.  The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity. 
c.  A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit. 
d.  An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the person applying for a license. 
7.  "Cannabis" or "cannabis product" means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis Ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 14017 of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
8.  "City" means the City of Santa Ana, a charter city and municipal corporation. 
9.  "Commercial cannabis activity" means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for this Chapter. Permitted commercial cannabis activities are listed in Land Use Table 40-5 of this Chapter. 
10.  "Commercial cannabis business" means a business that obtains a Regulatory Safety Permit and engages in the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, distribution, delivery, or sale of adult-use cannabis, medicinal cannabis or an adult-use cannabis or medicinal cannabis product, except as related Business and Professions Code Section 19319, or Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45, as amended from time to time. 
11.  "Cultivation" means to plant, grow, harvest, dry, cure, grade or trim cannabis, as defined by California Business and Professional Code Section 26001, as amended from time to time. 
12.  "Customer" means a natural person twenty-one (21) years of age or over. 
13.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from a retail cannabis business to a customer up to an amount determined to be authorized by the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retail cannabis business of any technology platform owned, controlled, and/ or licensed by the retail cannabis business, or independently licensed by the State of California under the State law (as amended from time to time), that enables anyone to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retail cannabis business of cannabis or cannabis products. For the purposes of this article, "delivery" does not include distribution or purchase of cannabis from a licensed cultivator, and cannabis products from a licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed cannabis retail business. 
14.  "Delivery employee" means an individual employed by a licensed retail cannabis business who delivers cannabis goods from the permitted retail premises to a customer at a physical address. 
15.  "Display" means cannabis goods that are stored in the licensed retail business during the hours of operation. 
16.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between Licensees. 
17.  "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for consumption. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the California Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
18.  "Free sample" means any amount of commercial cannabis goods provided to a purchaser of cannabis without cost or payment or exchange of any other thing of value. 
19.  "Labor Peace Agreement" means a legally binding agreement between an employer and a labor organization in which the employer agrees to remain neutral in the event its employees wish to unionize, as described more fully in Business and Professions Code 26001(x), as amended from time to time. 
20.  "License/Licensee" means a license issued by the State and includes both an A-license (Adult-Use) and an M-license (Medicinal), and the holder of such license. 
21.  "Manufacturer" means a Licensee that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
22.  "Manufacturing" means all aspects of the extraction and/or infusion processes, including processing, preparing, holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products. Manufacturing also includes any processing, preparing, propagating, holding, or storing of components and ingredients. 
23.  "Medicinal cannabis patient" is a person whose physician has recommended the use of cannabis to treat a serious illness, including cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other illness for which cannabis provides relief. 
24.  "Micro-Business" means a commercial cannabis business that cultivates cannabis on an area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and acts as a licensed distributor, Level 1 manufacturer, and retailer. 
25.  "Non-volatile solvent" means any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent. For purposes of this chapter, a non-volatile solvent includes carbon dioxide used for extraction, or as it may be defined and amended by the State. 
26.  "Nursery" means a commercial cannabis Licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
27.  "Medicinal/medical cannabis" or "Medicinal cannabis product", means cannabis or a product containing cannabis, including, but not limited to, concentrates, and extractions, intended to be sold for use by medicinal cannabis patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Medicinal cannabis retail is regulated by Chapter 18 and Chapter 21 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
28.  "Outdoor cultivation" means the cultivation of cannabis outside a permanent enclosed building. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited within the City of Santa Ana. 
29.  "Ownership interest" means an interest held by a person who is an owner as defined by State of California commercial cannabis regulations or who has a financial interest in the commercial cannabis business of twenty (20) percent or more. 
30.  "Package" and "Packaging" means any container or wrapper that may be used for enclosing or containing any cannabis goods for final retail sale. "Package" and "packaging" does not include a shipping container or outer wrapping used solely for the transport of cannabis goods in bulk quantity to a Licensee. 
31.  "Person" includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
32.  "Premises" means the designated structure(s) and land specified in the application that are in possession of and used by the applicant or Licensee to conduct the commercial cannabis activity. 
33.  "Primary Caregiver" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time. 
34.  "Private Residence" shall have the same definition as that contained in Health and Safety Code section 11362.2(5) and also means a lawfully established structure, suitable for human occupancy as required by section 17922 and 17958 of the California Health and Safety Code. A recreational vehicle does not constitute a lawfully established structure for the purposes of this article. 
35.  "Private security officer" has the same meaning as that term as defined in the State of California Business and Professions Code section 7574.01. 
36.  "Purchase" means obtaining cannabis goods in exchange for consideration. 
37.  "Purchaser" means a person who is engaged in a transaction with a Licensee for purposes of obtaining cannabis goods. 
38.  "Qualified patient" has the same meaning as such term is defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5, as amended from time to time, and means a person whose physician has recommended the use of cannabis to treat a serious illness, including cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other illness for which cannabis provides relief. 
39.  "Responsible person" means any of the following: 
a)  A person who causes a Code violation to occur. 
b)  A person who maintains or allows a Code violation to continue by way of his or her action or failure to act. 
c)  A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a Code violation by its failure to act. 
d)  A person who is the owner of, and/or a person who is a lessee or sub lessee with the current right of possession of, real property where property-related Code violation occurs. 
e)  A person who is the on-site manager of a business who normally works daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities of such premises. 
40.  "Retail business" means a premises where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers cannabis or cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
41.  "Regulatory Safety Permit (RSP)" means a permit issued by the City pursuant to this article to a commercial cannabis business. 
42.  "Sell," "sale," and "to sell" include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis is transferred from one (1) person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis goods pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis goods by a Licensee to the Licensee from whom such cannabis goods were purchased. 
43.  "State" means the State of California. 
44.  "Testing Facility" or "Testing Laboratory" defined in the Business and Professions Code section 26001, as amended from time to time, means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the State that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
a)  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the State; and, 
b)  Licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control. 
45.  "Volatile solvent" means any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. Examples of volatile solvents include but are not limited to, butane, hexane, propane, and ethanol, or as it may be defined and amended by the State. 
46.  "Wholesale" means the sale of cannabis goods to a distributor for resale to one (1) or more retail cannabis businesses. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-3. - Compliance with state and local licensing requirements. 
Any commercial cannabis business as defined by the State of California and the City of Santa Ana shall operate in conformance with all regulations and standards set forth in this article to assure that the operations of any commercial cannabis business as defined by the State of California and allowed by the City of Santa Ana are in compliance with local and State law and are established to mitigate any adverse secondary effects from its operations. 
Commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to obtain a Regulatory Safety Permit (RSP) from the City of Santa Ana and a State license, and shall comply with any applicable State licensing requirements, such as operational standards and locational criteria. 
Co-location of commercial cannabis businesses proposed on any one (1) site shall occur only if authorized by the State and the City of Santa Ana and only if allowed pursuant to the City's Zoning Code. Any commercial cannabis activity not specifically permitted by this article is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-4. - Maximum number of regulatory safety permits for commercial cannabis retail businesses. 
The total number of cannabis retail businesses in operation shall be determined based on the number of locations which have been issued a Regulatory Safety Permit by the City of Santa Ana. In no case shall the City of Santa Ana allow more the than the following commercial cannabis retail businesses to operate within City limits, regardless of the location's compliance with any other Section specified in this article: 
A.  Twenty (20) total medicinal cannabis retail businesses (as regulated by Article XIII of Chapter 18); 
B.  Thirty (30) total adult-use cannabis retail businesses (which could include any or all of the medicinal cannabis retail businesses) 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-5. - Zoning compliance and regulatory safety permit requirements. 
Commercial cannabis activities are expressly prohibited in all zones in the City of Santa Ana; however, specific commercial cannabis businesses are allowed as a special use in the Industrial zone (M-1, M-2). The allowed current permit types are described in Table 40-5 and the City of Santa Ana's zoning ordinance as a requisite for obtaining a Regulatory Safety Permit. No commercial cannabis business may operate in the City of Santa Ana without a Regulatory Safety Permit. 
This Land Use Table 40-5 shall be used to determine whether a commercial cannabis business is permitted — "P", or not permitted — "X". Any commercial cannabis business in the City of Santa Ana shall also operate in compliance with the City's zoning ordinance. If a Zoning District is not listed in the Land Use Table in this section then the use is expressly not permitted. 
Commercial Cannabis Business Activities Use Type 	City of Santa Ana Municipal Code Table 40-5 
	Land Use
Classification 	M-1
Zone 	M-2
Zone 	Regulatory
Permit
Required 
Cultivator 	Indoor only 	P 	P 	Yes 
Cultivator 	Outdoor or mixed-light 	X 	X 	NA 
Nursery 	Indoor/Outdoor — Type D 	X 	X 	NA 
Manufacturing 	Manufacturing 	P 	P 	Yes 
Retail 	Medicinal Retail
(SAMC Chapter 18) 	P 	P 	Yes 
Retail 	Adult-Use Retail 	P 	P 	Yes 
Testing Laboratory 	Adult-Use and/or Medicinal Industrial 	P 	P 	Yes 
Distribution 	Freight/Transport 	P 	P 	Yes 
Micro-Business 	Cultivation/Retail/Manufacture/Distribution 	X 	X 	NA 
 
Land Use Classifications: 
Commercial A — Permitted cultivation area: Zero (0) to five thousand (5,000) square feet 
Commercial B — Permitted cultivation area: Five thousand and one (5,001) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet 
Commercial C — Permitted cultivation area: Ten thousand (10,000) to twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet 
Commercial D — Permitted cultivation area: Twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-6. - Separation requirements for commercial cannabis retail businesses. 
(a)  No commercial cannabis retail business shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any: 
(1)  School (K-12) as defined by Section 11362.768 of the Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  Park; or 
(3)  Existing Residential zones in place on November 4, 2014. 
(b)  No commercial cannabis retail business shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another retail cannabis business, except for permitted co-location. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-7. - Separation requirements for non-retail (cultivation, manufacturing, testing laboratory, and distribution) commercial cannabis businesses. 
(a)  No non-retail commercial cannabis business shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any: 
(1)  School (K-12) as defined by Section 11362.768 of the Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  Park; or 
(3)  Existing Residential zones in place on November 4, 2014. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-8. - General provisions for commercial cannabis activities in the City of Santa Ana. 
1.  Regulatory Safety Permit Required. 
a.  Each commercial cannabis business shall obtain a Regulatory Safety Permit (RSP) specific to the business activity defined by the State pertaining to that activity. The only allowed current permit types pursuant to this article are for commercial cannabis retail sales and cultivation, distribution, manufacturing, and testing laboratories/facilities. Co-location is permitted pursuant to Section 40-9.3.1. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined by this ordinance, to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the City of Santa Ana any commercial cannabis business without a RSP. A commercial cannabis business shall register and obtain a RSP from the City of Santa Ana prior to operation. The RSP applicant shall pay an annual non-refundable application fee in an amount established by the City Council. 
c.  A copy of the RSP shall be displayed at all times in a place visible to the public. 
d.  A RSP shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the above-referenced period. 
2.  Maintenance of Records and Reporting. All records shall be maintained by the commercial cannabis business for a period of five (5) years and shall be made available by the commercial cannabis business to an authorized City of Santa Ana representative upon request. If they are not produced as requested, the City may seek a search warrant, subpoena, or court order. In addition to all other formats that the commercial cannabis business may maintain, these records shall be stored by the business at the location in a printed format in a fire-proof safe or filing cabinet. Any loss, damage or destruction of the records shall be reported to the Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours of the loss, destruction or damage. 
a.  The business shall obtain and maintain a valid Seller's Permit from the State Board of Equalization. 
b.  Financial records include, but are not limited to: bank statements, sales invoices, receipts, tax records, and all records required by the California State Board of Equalization under Title 18 California Code of Regulations section 1968. 
c.  Personnel records, including each employee's full name, address, phone number, social security, or individual tax payer identification number, date of beginning employment, and date of termination of employment if applicable. 
d.  Training records, including, but not limited to, the content of the training provided and the names of the employees that received the training. 
e.  Contracts with other businesses regarding commercial cannabis business activity. 
f.  Permits, licenses, and other local authorizations to conduct the commercial cannabis business activity. 
g.  Security records, as outlined in the Operational Standards for All Commercial Cannabis Business Activities. 
h.  Proof of building ownership or landlord letter acknowledging business type. 
i.  Proof of insurance. 
3.  Operational Standards for All Commercial Cannabis Business Activities. 
a.  The location, interior and exterior, shall be monitored at all times by web-based closed circuit television for security purposes. The camera and recording system must be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the ready identification of any individual committing a crime anywhere on or adjacent to the location. The recordings shall be maintained unaltered in a secure location for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. The Police Department may request the recordings in connection with an investigation. 
b.  All controlled access areas, security rooms and all points of ingress/egress to limited access areas and all point of sale (POS) areas shall have fixed camera coverage capable of identifying activity occurring within a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
c.  The surveillance system storage device or cameras shall be transmission control protocol/TCP capable of being accessed through the internet by the police department or their designee on request. 
d.  If applicable, the applicant shall conduct and pay for any required CEQA reviews and analyses, and pay for all costs, including those of the City, associated with project review under CEQA. 
e.  Commercial cannabis businesses shall create and maintain an active account within the State's track and trace system prior to commencing any commercial cannabis retail activity. In the event of system failure, the business shall keep a hard copy record and transfer the information to the track and trace system within twenty-four (24) hours of the system being available. 
f.  No physical modification of the licensed premises is allowed without written prior permission by the City of Santa Ana and payment of any additional fees required by the City. 
g.  Commercial cannabis business businesses shall provide adequate off-street parking and comply with the City of Santa Ana Municipal Code parking requirements in order to service customers without causing negative impact. 
h.  The commercial cannabis business shall provide adequate disabled access parking per the requirements in the California Building Code. 
i.  The commercial cannabis business shall minimize nuisances such as trash, litter, and graffiti. 
j.  Any and all signage, packaging, and facilities shall not be "attractive", as it is defined by the State, to minors. 
k.  Commercial cannabis business facilities shall be required to provide an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result from its operations. This requirement at a minimum means that the facility shall be designed to provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the location is not detected outside the building, in any adjacent tenant suites, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the facility if the use occupies only a portion of a building. 
l.  The commercial cannabis business shall comply with all State regulations regarding: 
i.  Testing, labeling and storage of all cannabis products. 
ii.  Use of appropriate weighing devices. 
iii.  Electrical and plumbing regulations subject to periodic and unannounced inspections to ensure compliance. 
iv.  State deadlines for applying for a State license and receiving a State license within six (6) months after the date the State begins issuing licenses. This may be waived if the State has longer delays in issuing licenses of the type the commercial cannabis business seeks. 
m.  The commercial cannabis business shall maintain a comprehensive general liability combined single occurrence insurance policy issued by an "A" rated insurance carrier in an amount no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00), with primary coverage, naming the City of Santa Ana as additional insured. 
n.  No free samples of any cannabis or cannabis product may be distributed at any time. 
o.  All agents, private security officers or other persons acting for or employed by a commercial cannabis business shall display a laminated identification badge at least two (2) inces by two (2) inches size, issued by the business. The badge, at a minimum, shall include the business's "doing business as" name and license number, the employee's first and last name, and a color photo of the employee that shows the full front of the employee's face. 
p.  All private security officers acting for or employed by a commercial cannabis business shall be licensed by the State and issued a business license from the City of Santa Ana. 
q.  The commercial cannabis business shall have a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system which shall include all perimeter entry points and perimeter windows and the building or portion of the building where the business is located shall contain a fire-proof safe or fire proof filing cabinet and include a safety and security plan. 
r.  The commercial cannabis business shall ensure a licensed alarm company operator or one (1) or more of its registered alarm agents installs, maintains, monitors and responds to the alarm system. The alarm company shall obtain a City of Santa Ana business license. 
s.  The commercial cannabis business shall provide the name and phone number of an on-site staff person to the police department and the Code Enforcement Division of the Planning and Building Agency for notification if there are operational problems with the establishment. 
t.  The commercial cannabis business must obtain and maintain a valid City business license at all times as a condition for receiving, renewing, and maintaining its regulatory safety permit. 
u.  Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
v.  For any commercial cannabis business with two (2) or more employees, the business owner shall attest that he/she has entered into a labor peace agreement and provide a copy of the agreement to the City. 
w.  Each commercial cannabis business owner, operator(s) and employee(s) shall complete a criminal background check and wear a visible photo ID at all times during working hours. Owners, operators, employees, managers or volunteers may not have been convicted of, or pled guilty/no-contest to a felony or misdemeanor drug charge within the past four (4) years; nor shall they be a person required to register as a controlled substance offender pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 11590. 
x.  All signage for the commercial cannabis business must comply with Article XI of Chapter 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
y.  Inspections by an authorized City of Santa Ana representative may be conducted anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
4.  Additional Operational Standards for Adult-Use Cannabis Retail Business. 
a.  At all times the Adult-Use cannabis retail business is open, it shall provide at least one (1) private security guard who is licensed, possesses a valid Department of Consumer Affairs "security guard card", and has a valid business license from the City of Santa Ana. 
b.  The private security guard and adult-use retail cannabis business personnel shall monitor the site and the immediate vicinity of the site to ensure that patrons immediately leave the site and do not consume cannabis in the vicinity of the retail business or on the property or in the parking lot. 
c.  Exterior signage shall comply with Article XI of Chapter 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Interior signage or advertising may not be visible from the exterior. Retail cannabis businesses must comply with the advertising and marketing provisions of Business and Professions Code §§ 26150—26155. 
d.  There shall be no on-site sales of alcohol or tobacco products, (excluding rolling papers and lighters) and no on-site consumption of food, alcohol or tobacco by patrons. 
e.  Hours of operation shall be limited to: 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily. No licensed retail business shall be open to the public between the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. of any day. 
f.  The Adult-Use cannabis retail business shall notify patrons of the following both verbally and through posting of a sign in a conspicuous location: 
i.  Secondary sale, barter or distribution of adult-use cannabis is a crime and can lead to arrest. 
ii.  That loitering on and around the retail site is prohibited by California Penal Code § 647(e) and that patrons must immediately leave the site and not consume cannabis in the vicinity of the retail site or on the property or in the parking lot. 
iii.  A warning that patrons may be subject to prosecution under federal cannabis laws. 
iv.  That the use of cannabis may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery. 
g.  No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed to enter an Adult-Use cannabis facility unless the licensed Adult-Use cannabis facility holds a medicinal use cannabis RSP issued by the City and retail license issued by the State, and the licensed premises for the adult-use cannabis license and medicinal cannabis license are the same in accordance with Business and Professions Code section 26140. 
h.  If non-cannabis food is distributed, the retail business shall comply with all relevant State laws, County and City ordinances pertaining to the preparation, distribution and sale of food. 
i.  All Adult-Use cannabis retail businesses shall establish and implement a program to incentivize the recycling of used containers. Failure to establish and implement a program to incentivize the recycling of used containers will result in a violation of the terms of the required commercial cannabis Operating Agreement requiring sustainable building or business practices. 
j.  Adult-Use cannabis retail businesses shall also record on the video surveillance system point-of-sale areas and areas where cannabis goods are displayed for sale. 
k.  Adequate signage shall clearly state who has inspected any cannabis product for pesticides, or other regulated contaminants, distributed at this location. 
l.  Shipments of cannabis goods may only be accepted during regular business hours. 
m.  Inventory shall be secured using a lockable storage system during non-business hours. 
n.  No cannabis product shall be visible from the exterior of the business. 
o.  All required labelling shall be maintained on all product, as required by State law, at all times. 
p.  Educational tours of adult-use retail cannabis businesses shall be allowed. 
q.  A permitted commercial cannabis retail business shall have one hundred eighty (180) days after permit issuance by the City of Santa Ana to operate. A permitted commercial cannabis retail business that ceases to operate for more than ninety (90) calendar days shall be deemed "abandoned" and the permit shall be forfeited. A permitted commercial cannabis business may temporarily suspend operations for a period of time as may be reasonably required to affect upgrades, modifications, repairs, or other property issue mitigations as approved by the Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee. For the purposes of this section, "operate" shall mean that the gross receipts fees charged for the business exceed the fee per square foot calculations by the end of the one hundred eighty (180) day period. 
5.  Additional Operational Standards for Commercial Cannabis Retail Delivery Services. 
a.  Commercial cannabis retail deliveries may be made only from a commercial cannabis retail business permitted by the City in compliance with this article, and in compliance with all State regulations. 
b.  All employees who deliver cannabis shall have valid identification and a copy of the commercial cannabis retail business' Regulatory Safety Permit and State license at all times while making deliveries. 
c.  All commercial cannabis retail businesses shall maintain proof of vehicle insurance for any and all vehicles being used to transport cannabis goods as required by State law. 
d.  Deliveries may only take place during normal business hours of the commercial cannabis retail business. 
e.  During delivery, the delivery employee shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of the delivery request and shall make it available upon request by the licensing authority and law enforcement officers. The delivery request documentation shall comply with State law. 
f.  A licensed delivery employee shall not leave the State of California while possessing cannabis products. 
g.  A commercial cannabis retail business shall maintain a list of all deliveries, including the address delivered to, the amount and type of product delivered, and any other information required by the State. 
h.  A manifest with all information required in this section shall accompany any delivery person at all times during the delivery process and delivery hours. 
i.  Any delivery method shall be made in compliance with State law, as amended, including use of a vehicle that has a dedicated GPS device for identifying the location of the vehicle (cell phones and tablets are not sufficient). 
j.  Each delivery request shall have a receipt prepared by the commercial cannabis retail business with the following information: 
i.  Name and address of the commercial cannabis retail business. 
ii.  The name of the employee who delivered the order. 
iii.  The date and time the delivery request was made. 
iv.  The complete delivery addresses. 
v.  A detailed description of the cannabis goods requested for delivery including the weight or volume, or any accurate measure of the amount of cannabis goods requested. 
vi.  The total amount paid for the delivery including any fees or taxes. 
k.  At the time of the delivery, the date and time delivery was made, and the signature of the person who received the delivery. 
l.  No cannabis delivery vehicle shall display signs, decals or any other form of advertisement with the exception of a maximum four-inch by four-inch decal. 
m.  Inspections by an authorized City of Santa Ana representative may be conducted anytime during regular business hours. 
6.  Additional Operational Standards for Commercial Cannabis Testing Facilities or Laboratories. 
a.  A licensed cannabis testing facility or laboratory business, its owners and employees may not hold an interest in any other cannabis business except another testing laboratory business. 
b.  Inspections by an authorized City of Santa Ana representative may be conducted anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
c.  Educational tours of cannabis testing facility/laboratory businesses shall be allowed. 
7.  Additional Operational Standards for Commercial Cannabis Manufacturing Facilities. 
a.  Commercial cannabis manufacturing facilities are prohibited from using volatile solvents in the manufacturing process as defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 11362.3(d) and as further defined in the California Health and Safety Code § 11362.775(b)(1)(A) and as amended from time to time, unless a conditional use permit (CUP) for volatile solvents is applied for and granted pursuant to Chapter 41 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
b.  A licensed commercial cannabis non-volatile manufacturing facility may conduct all activities permitted by the State. This includes, but is not limited to: non-volatile extractions, repackaging and relabeling, infusions and extractions. 
c.  Any manufacturing that will be conducted by the commercial cannabis business shall be included on the application. No additional manufacturing activity can be conducted without notifying the Executive Director of the Planning and Building Agency or his or her designee, after which a determination will be made if the new activity may commence with or without modification to the RSP or if a new RSP is required. 
d.  At all times, the commercial cannabis manufacturing facility will be compliant with all State regulations for cannabis manufacturing including Health and Safety Code § 11362.775, as amended from time to time. Signage shall be posted regarding the type(s) of chemicals being used at the manufacturing facility. 
e.  Cannabis manufacturing facilities shall not contain an exhibition or product sales area or allow for retail distribution of products at that location unless the facility is co-located with an approved commercial cannabis retail business with a RSP. 
f.  Extraction equipment and extraction process utilizing hydrocarbon solvents shall be located in a room or area dedicated to extraction. 
g.  All commercial cannabis manufacturing/processing facilities shall comply with any and all applicable safety guidelines adopted by the Orange County Fire Authority, the State of California, and/or the City of Santa Ana for cannabis plant processing and extraction. 
8.  Additional Operational Standards for Indoor Commercial Cannabis Cultivation Facilities. 
a.  There shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation from a public right-of-way. 
b.  The Building Official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including but not limited to installation of fire suppression sprinklers. 
c.  Compliance with Section 13149 of Water Code as enforced by the State Water Resources Control Board is required. 
d.  All commercial cannabis cultivation facilities shall comply with any and all applicable safety guidelines adopted by the Orange County Fire Authority, the State of California, and/or the City of Santa Ana for cannabis carbon dioxide enrichment systems. 
e.  Cannabis cultivation facilities shall not contain an exhibition or product sales area or allow for retail distribution of products at that location unless the facility is co-located with an approved commercial cannabis retail business with a RSP. 
9.  Additional Operational Standards for Commercial Cannabis Distribution Facilities. 
a.  Inspections by an authorized City of Santa Ana representative may be conducted anytime during the business's regular business hours. 
b.  A distributor shall ensure that all cannabis goods stored in compliance with all applicable State regulations to ensure conformance to any and all applicable Track and Trace systems required by the State. 
c.  Employee breakrooms, eating areas, changing facilities, locker rooms and bathrooms shall be completely separated from the storage areas. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-9. - Commercial cannabis selection process. 
1.  Commercial Cannabis — Registration Application and Regulatory Safety Permit Required. 
a.  Existing medicinal cannabis business operators, or those with pending applications for a medicinal RSP, who desire to operate an adult cannabis retail business shall apply for the cannabis Regulatory Safety Permit ("RSP") on or before December 14, 2017. The Director of Planning and Building shall review such application and issue the RSP, without consideration of the merit based point system, so long as they satisfy all other requirements of this article and Chapter 18. 
b.  The Regulatory Safety Permit ("RSP") selection process will be conducted in two (2) phases, Phase 1 (Registration Application) and Phase 2 (Regulatory Safety Permit Application). Registration Applications will be reviewed by the Director of Planning and Building or designees(s) for completeness and compliance, and if eligible, will be placed on the "Regulatory Safety Permit ("RSP") Eligibility List" and entered into the Phase 2 Regulatory Safety Permit Application process. In Phase 2, the City of Santa Ana has established a merit based point system for commercial cannabis retail businesses to objectively award permits as described in the Regulatory Safety Permit Application. 
2.  Phase 1 — Registration Application. 
a.  Following the adoption of this article, the Director of Planning and Building shall prepare commercial cannabis business registration application forms and a related administrative policy. Each commercial cannabis business interested in operating pursuant to this article may submit an application together with a non-refundable processing fee in an amount established by the City Council. 
b.  The Registration Application period shall be thirty (30) calendar days from the date the applications are released. Following the application period, the Director of Planning and Building or designee(s) shall stop accepting applications and review all applications received in Phase 1. Each application that is complete and in compliance with the application requirements in Phase 1 shall be placed on the "RSP Eligibility List" and shall be notified in writing whether they are a "RSP Eligible Applicant" or not. Each applicant on the RSP Eligibility List may then choose to file an application for a RSP in Phase 2. 
c.  The requirements for Phase 1 include, but are not limited to: 
i.  All application documents required in the City's Phase 1 Registration Application package. 
ii.  Application was submitted during the application period. 
iii.  Application forms are filled out completely. 
iv.  Business Owner(s)/Applicant(s) referenced on the application provides a Live Scan that was conducted within fourteen (14) days prior to submitting the application. 
v.  Phase 1 application fee is paid. 
vi.  A signed statement that the proposed location of the commercial cannabis business on the application meets the zoning criteria established in this article including, but not limited to, any and all sensitive use separation criteria required by this article. 
vii.  Proof of site control for commercial cannabis retail businesses submitting Phase 1 applications on or after July 1, 2018. 
d.  The Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee(s) shall determine whether each application demonstrates compliance with the minimum requirements (above) and be placed on the RSP Eligibility List and entered into the Phase 2 application and review process. 
e.  The Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee(s) shall review each application upon submission and ensure that the application is complete. Incomplete applications will be promptly rejected and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies. The applicant shall be given an opportunity to cure any incomplete or deficient application prior to the conclusion of the application processing term, if such time period is applicable. 
3.  Phase 2 — Regulatory Safety Permit Application. 
a.  Each applicant identified on the RSP Eligibility List may choose to complete and file a RSP application to the Director of Planning and Building. The application shall be filed together with a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of investigation required by this article. 
b.  The RSP application period shall be open for thirty (30) calendar days and may run concurrently with the Phase 1 review period. Following the RSP application period, the Director of Planning and Building or designee(s) shall stop accepting applications and review all applications received in Phase 2. 
c.  The Director of Planning and Building or designee(s) will review all application documents required in the City's Phase 2 application package plus the additional requirements in subsection (d) below. The Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee(s) will use a merit based point system to review and rank each of applications from the most to the least points and objectively award the top applicants a RSP. A complete description of the merit based point system and all merit based point considerations shall be included with the application forms. 
d.  Phase 2 requirements include, but are not limited to: 
i.  All application documents required in the City's Phase 2 RSP application package. 
ii.  Phase 2 application fee is paid and a comprehensive owner background check is completed. 
iii.  The Building Official or designee has inspected all structures in which the use is located to determine that all applicable standards and requirements are met. If a building permit is required for site improvements, Permit issuance will be deferred until a certificate of occupancy or other building permit approval is issued. Additionally, the Building Official has determined that there are no notices of nuisance or other code compliance issues recorded or on the property. 
iv.  The Planning Manager or designee has issued zoning clearance documenting compliance with the following: 
1.  The use is permitted; 
2.  All land use permits, if any, have been approved and all conditions of approval have been met or are in good standing; and, 
3.  No zoning violations exist on the property. 
e.  The Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee(s) shall review each application upon submission and ensure that the application is complete. Incomplete applications will be promptly rejected and the applicant shall be notified that business day of the deficiencies. The applicant shall be given an opportunity to cure any incomplete or deficient application prior to the conclusion of the application processing term, if such time period is applicable. 
3.1  Commercial Cannabis — Registration Application and Regulatory Safety Permit for Additional Commercial Cannabis Business Activities on the Same Premises (Co-Location). 
a.  An existing commercial cannabis business with an RSP may co-locate additional non-retail commercial cannabis business activities (cultivation, distribution, and/or manufacturing) by applying for a new RSP for the additional use(s). The new RSP must meet the all requirements of the Santa Ana Municipal Code except that background checks (live scans) shall only be required for any new staff as outlined in Section 40-8. A single RSP that lists any and all approved cannabis business activity/activities may be renewed annually thereafter. 
b.  Pending RSP applicants wishing to co-locate additional non-retail (cultivation, distribution, and/or manufacturing) uses may submit a new RSP for any of the non-retail commercial cannabis business activities. The additional RSP must meet the all requirements of the RSP except that background checks (live scans) shall only be required for any new staff as outlined in Section 40-8. A single RSP that lists any and all approved cannabis business activity/activities may be renewed annually thereafter. 
c.  New commercial cannabis business applicants — co-location. 
1.  New commercial cannabis retail applicants wishing to co-locate additional non-retail (cultivation, distribution, and/or manufacturing) uses shall submit a separate RSP for the proposed retail activity and another RSP for any of the non-retail commercial cannabis business activities. Each RSP application will be evaluated independently and must meet any applicable requirements of the RSP as outlined in Sections 40-8 and 40-9, including, but not limited to, merit evaluation and additional separation requirements for the retail RSP. A single RSP that lists any and all approved cannabis business activity/activities may be renewed annually thereafter. 
2.  New non-retail commercial cannabis applicants wishing to co-locate additional non-retail (cultivation, distribution, and/or manufacturing) uses may submit a single RSP for the proposed activity or activities. The RSP application must meet any applicable requirements of the RSP as outlined in Sections 40-8 and 40-9. A single RSP that lists any and all approved cannabis business activity/activities may be renewed annually thereafter. 
4.  Regulatory Safety Permit Annual Renewal. 
a.  Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building or designee(s) at least sixty (60) calendar days before the expiration of the current permit. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee allowing their permit to lapse or which permit expired during a suspension shall be required to submit a new application, pay the corresponding original application fees and be subject to all aspects of the selection process. 
b.  Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of their respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the Director of Planning and Building or her or her designee(s) who will conduct a review. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by the City Council to defray the cost of the review required by this article. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in their original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the Director of Planning and Building or designee(s) in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed based on compliance with all applicable provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
5.  Appeal of Denial of Regulatory Safety Permit/Denial of RSP Renewal. The City Manager or his or her designee(s) will review all Regulatory Safety Permit applications and renewal requests, along with all other relevant information, and determine if a RSP should be granted and/or renewed based on compliance with all applicable provisions of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. If the City Manager determines that the permit shall not be granted and/or renewed, the reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant. No such denial shall become effective until the applicant for the regulatory safety permit and/or renewal has been notified in writing by certified mail of the right to appeal the denial decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. If a timely appeal is filed, the denial shall be effective only upon decision of a hearing officer as provided for in Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Otherwise, the denial shall become effective after the timely appeal period has passed. The matter may be subject to judicial review under the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-9.1. - Non-retail commercial cannabis business (cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, and testing facility/laboratory) selection process. 
1.  Non-Retail Commercial Cannabis Businesses — Registration Application (Phase 1) and Regulatory Safety Permit (Phase 2) Required. 
a.  Every Non-Retail Commercial Cannabis Business shall apply for the Phase 1 (Registration Application) and Phase 2 (Regulatory Safety Permit Application) in the manner described in Section 40-9, except that the Director of Planning and Building may accept Phase 1 and Phase 2 applications for a Non-Retail Commercial Cannabis Business concurrently, and shall review such applications and issue the Regulatory Safety Permit Application without consideration of the merit based point system, insofar as the applications satisfy all other requirements of this article and Chapter 18. 
b.  Applications for a Non-Retail Commercial Cannabis Business shall be accepted during normal City Hall business hours and are not subject to the thirty (30) day Phase 1 or Phase 2 application periods. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-10. - Audits. 
Annual audits. No later than June 30th of every year, each licensed commercial cannabis business shall file with the City an audit or financial review of its operations of the previous calendar year. The form and contents of the document shall be specified by the Executive Director of Finance and Management Services, or his or her designee(s). 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-11. - Inspection and enforcement responsibilities. 
The Code Enforcement Division of the Planning and Building Agency may enter and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or at any reasonable time, to ensure compliance with this article. In addition, any police officer may enter and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business and the recordings and records maintained as required by this article, except that the inspection and copying of private medical records shall be made available to the police department only pursuant to a properly executed search warrant, subpoena, or court order. It is unlawful for any owner, responsible person, landlord, lessee, member including, but not limited to, a member engaged in the management), or any other person having any responsibility over the operation of the commercial cannabis business to refuse to allow, impede, obstruct or interfere with an inspection, review or copying of records and closed-circuit monitoring authorized and required under this article, including, but not limited to, the concealment, destruction, and falsification of any recordings, records, or monitoring. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-12. - Violation and enforcement. 
1.  Violation/enforcement. Each and every violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by this Code. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this article shall be subject to injunctive relief, revocation of the commercial cannabis business Regulatory Safety Permit, revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the location, disgorgement and payment to the City of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The City may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and State laws for any violations committed by the commercial cannabis business and persons related or associated with the business. 
2.  Suspension or revocation. When an authorized City of Santa Ana representative finds that any person holding a Regulatory Safety Permit under the provisions of Chapter 40 has violated the provisions of this chapter or is found guilty of conduct which would form the basis of denial of the Regulatory Safety Permit as set forth in Article XIII of Chapter 18, s/he may revoke or suspend the permit. No such revocation shall become effective until the Regulatory Safety Permit holder has been notified in writing by certified mail of the right to appeal the revocation decision pursuant to the provisions or Chapter 3 of this Code. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be effective only upon decision of a hearing officer as provided for in Chapter 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective after the timely appeal period has passed. 
3.  State License Suspension/Revocation. Revocation or suspension of a Licensee's State issued commercial cannabis business permit or license by the State shall constitute a violation of this article and result in revocation of the Licensee's RSP. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-13. - Transfer of ownership. 
1.  Upon the transfer of any interest in a commercial cannabis business, the Regulatory Safety Permit shall be null and void. Any person, firm or entity desiring to own and operate the commercial cannabis business shall make a new Regulatory Safety Permit application. Prior to or concurrent with the submission of said application the transferee shall obtain all required business licenses, post all required security deposits, acquire all necessary, certificates, permits or other licenses allowing the doing of any act which the person paying or holding the same would not otherwise be entitled to do; and any permit, license, variance or other instrument of approval or evidence that any conditions exist as required by any other section of this Code or by any statute or code provisions of the state must first be obtained or complied with before the doing of any act or thing for which it is required. A fee as established by resolution of the City Council shall be payable for each such application involving transfer of any interest in an existing commercial cannabis retail business. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person, firm, or entity applying for a Regulatory Safety Permit for premises previously used as such establishment. 
2.  Any such transfer of any interest in an existing commercial cannabis business or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the commercial cannabis retail business shall require inspection and compliance with section 40-11 of this article. 
3.  The owner or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall be responsible for notifying the City of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person/entity. Notification to the City must be made a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to such transfer. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-14. - Limitations on the city's liability. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any Regulatory Safety Permits pursuant to this article or the operation of any commercial cannabis business approved pursuant to this chapter. As a condition of approval of a Regulatory Safety Permit as provided in this chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall: 
1.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the City from any claims, damages, injuries or liabilities of any kind associated with the registration or operation of the commercial cannabis business or the prosecution of the applicant or business or its members for violation of federal or State laws; 
2.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and types that are acceptable to the City Attorney or his or her designee; 
3.  Name the City as an additionally insured on all City required insurance policies; 
4.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action against the City, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval of a Regulatory Safety Permit; and, 
5.  Agree to indemnify and reimburse the City for any court costs and attorney fees that the City may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to this ordinance and/or the City's approval of a Regulatory Safety Permit. The City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the operator of its obligation hereunder. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Sec. 40-15. - Fees and taxes. 
All commercial cannabis businesses shall pay applicable fees and taxes, which shall include one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Application Fees. The business owner shall submit a non-refundable fee to cover the cost of processing an application for the commercial cannabis business. These fees may be divided into two (2) fees according to Registration Application Fee (Phase 1) and RSP Application Fee (Phase 2). 
2.  Regulatory Safety Permit Renewal Fees. The business owner shall submit a non-refundable fee to cover the cost of processing an application renewal annually. 
3.  Business License Taxes. The business owner shall at all times maintain a current and valid City of Santa Ana business license and shall pay all business license taxes, deposits, charges, fees, deficiencies, penalties, interest, and other associated assessments as may be required pursuant to ordinances of the City of Santa Ana and/or the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
4.  Operating Agreement Fees. 
5.  Additional cannabis-specific gross receipts, excise taxes, or other municipal tax approved by the voters of the City of Santa Ana. 
6.  All required state taxes including sales and use taxes, business/franchise or income taxes, payroll taxes, etc. 
7.  All required federal taxes. 
( Ord. No. NS-2929, § 4, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2941, § 6, 3-20-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2942, § 3, 4-3-18 ; Ord. No. NS-2944, § 5, 5-1-18 )  
Chapter 41 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-350 et seq.; redevelopment agency, § 2-616 et seq.; community redevelopment commission, § 2-621 et seq.; setback requirements for commercial kennels, § 5-18; floodplain management, Ch. 7; buildings and structures, Ch. 8; mobile home occupancy outside established parks, § 10-89; planning, Ch. 27; places of historical and architectural significance, Ch. 30; subdivisions, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference— For authority and procedure, see § 65800 et seq., Gov. Code. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Purpose. 
Because of the necessity of segregating the location of residences, businesses, trades and industries; and regulating the use of buildings, structures, and land; and regulating the location, height, bulk, and size of buildings and structures, the size of yards and other open spaces; the city is divided into land-use districts of such number, shape and area as may be considered best suited to carry out these regulations and provide for their enforcement. The regulations are considered necessary in order to: 
(a)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land. 
(b)  Conserve and stabilize property value. 
(c)  Provide adequate open spaces for light and air and to prevent and fight fires. 
(d)  Prevent the undue concentration of population. 
(e)  Lessen congestion on streets and highways. 
(f)  Promote the health, safety and the general welfare of the people, all as part of the general plan of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9200; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-2—41-10. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 41-11. - General. 
The words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this division, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. The words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(Code 1952, § 9210; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-11.1. - Accessory dwelling unit. 
An accessory dwelling unit is an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated. It shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in California Government Code section 65852.2 as it may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 3, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-12. - Accessory structure or building. 
An accessory structure or building is a detached building or structure, part of building or structure that is incidental or subordinate to the main building, structure or use on the same lot or parcel of land, without cooking facilities and is used exclusively by the occupant of the main building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 1, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1395, § 1, 12-12-77; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 2, 6-21-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2803, § 2, adopted June 21, 2010, changed the title of section 41-12 from "Accessory building" to "Accessory structure or building."  
Sec. 41-12.1. - Adult day care facility. 
An adult day care facility is a facility that provides nonmedical care to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis, as currently defined by California Health and Safety code section 1502(a)(2), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. NS-2446, § 3, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-12.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2373, § 3, adopted Dec. 7, 1998, repealed § 41-12.2 which pertained to adult entertainment business and derived from Ord. No. NS-1395, § 3, adopted Dec. 12, 1977; and Ord. No. NS-2209, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 1993.  
Sec. 41-12.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2373, § 3, adopted Dec. 7, 1998, repealed § 41-12.3 which pertained to adult motels and derived from Ord. No. NS-1395, § 4, adopted Dec. 12, 1977; and Ord. No. NS-2209, § 2, adopted Dec. 20, 1993.  
Sec. 41-12.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2373, § 3, adopted Dec. 7, 1998, repealed § 41-12.4 which pertained to adult theater and derived from Ord. No. NS-2209, § 3, adopted Dec. 20, 1993.  
Sec. 41-13. - Alley. 
An alley is any public or private thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians or vehicles, not less than ten (10) feet nor more than thirty (30) feet in width, and which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-13.5. - Ancillary use. 
An ancillary use is a use which is supportive of and subordinate to any primary use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 1, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-14. - Apartment. 
An apartment is one (1) or more rooms in an apartment house or dwelling occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by one (1) family for sleeping or living purposes and containing one (1) kitchen. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-15. - Apartment, bachelor. 
A bachelor apartment is one (1) or more rooms in an apartment house or dwelling occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by one (1) family for sleeping or living purposes and containing not more than one (1) kitchen and utility room, one (1) sleeping room, one (1) bathroom and incidental closet space. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-16. - Apartment house. 
An apartment house is a building other than a hotel or motel, designed for or used to house three (3) or more families, living independently of each other, including all necessary employees of such families. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-16.5. - Assemble. 
Assemble means to fit or put together the parts of materials or products. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 2, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-17. - Auto park or market. 
An auto park or market is an open land area used for the storage and sale of complete and operative automobiles, new or used. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.6; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-18. - Automobile house trailer; camp car. 
An automobile house trailer or camp car is any building or structure with or without motive power designed for living purposes or the conduct of any business, profession, occupation, or trade, and containing plumbing, heating, or electrical equipment and designed so that it is, or may be, mounted on wheels for traveling on public thoroughfares. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.7; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-19. - Automobile repair. 
Automobile repair is the repair of motor vehicles, including the repair or replacement of engines and transmissions, body and fender repair, and the installation of nonfactory-installed products except those specified in section 41-20. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 1, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-20. - Automobile servicing. 
Automobile servicing is the servicing and minor repair of motor vehicles, including the replacement of belts, hoses, batteries, tires, shock absorbers, oil and air filters, chassis lubrication, air conditioning servicing, wheel alignments, replacement of brake pads, and engine tuneups. 
(Ord. No. NS-2103, § 1, 12-17-90)  
Secs. 41-21—41-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-24. - Bail bond use. 
"Bail bond use" shall mean any use or business, whether primary or ancillary, that is subject to regulation pursuant to California Insurance Code Section 1800, et. seq., as such sections may be amended from time to time, including but limited to a use or business of a bail agent, a bail permittee, or a bail solicitor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2661, § 3, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 41-25. - Banquet facility. 
A banquet facility is a facility available for rental and used for the purpose of meetings, parties, ceremonious gatherings, dining or entertainment. For the purposes of this definition, the term rental shall mean to obtain the possession and use of a facility, or a portion of a facility, on a short-term, hourly or daily basis, where occupancy is closed to the general public, in exchange for monetary or other form of compensation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2445, § 3, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-25.5. - Bar. 
A commercial establishment whose primary use is the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, with or without food service, from which minors are excluded by law and which requires a "public premises"-type license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 17, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-26. - Basement or cellar. 
A basement or cellar is that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is either totally or partly below grade. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.8; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-27. - Bedroom. 
A bedroom is any room or segment of a dwelling unit separated from other portions of such dwelling unit by walls or other partitions, which is designed or used as sleeping quarters, provided that in determining the number of bedrooms in a dwelling unit all such rooms or segments having an area in excess of eighty (80) square feet (exclusive of one (1) living room, one (1) dining room and all rooms clearly designed as kitchens, bathrooms, closets and hallways) shall be deemed bedrooms regardless of any description or use for purposes other than sleeping quarters, such as dens, family rooms or guest rooms. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 1, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-27.5. - Superstore. 
A superstore is any retail use that sells from the premises goods and merchandise, primarily for personal and household use, and whose total interior space exceeds one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet, and which devotes more than ten (10) per cent of its total interior space to the sale of merchandise which are not subject to state sales tax. For purposes of determining the total interior space, restrooms, office space, storage space, and service areas (e.g., automobile service, doctor or dental service, or restaurant/fast food service) shall be excluded, but the aggregate space of adjacent stores that share common check stands, management, operation, controlling ownership, or warehouse or distribution facilitates shall be included. 
(Ord. No. NS-2734, § 2, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 41-28. - Building. 
A building is any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, or animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.10; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-29. - Building height. 
Building height is the vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the roof surface. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.11; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-30. - Building, main. 
The main building is the principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which such area is devoted; where a permissible use involves more than one (1) structure designed or used for the same primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one (1) lot as defined by this chapter shall be considered a main building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.12; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-31. - Building site. 
A building site is the ground area of a building or group of buildings together with all yard and open spaces as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.13; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-32. - Bulk merchandise store. 
A bulk merchandise store is a store which exceeds sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in floor area where grocery and/or sundry goods are displayed for sale in bulk quantities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1939, § 1, 1-4-88)  
Sec. 41-33. - Business; business activity. 
Business is any enterprise or livelihood whereby goods, services, use of property or facilities, or other valuable consideration is offered, or advertised as available, to the public, or any segment thereof, in exchange for payment of money or other valuable consideration, whether or not such enterprise or livelihood is carried out for profit, and includes, but is not limited to, the ownership or management of stores, shops, offices and recreational or amusement centers, and the use of offices by members of professions and trades rendering services. A business activity is any conduct or practice which forms part of, or is incidental to, the operation of a business, including but not limited to, the store or display of goods for purposes of future sales, or the dispatching of vehicles for business purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.15; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-2457, § 4, 1-2-01)  
Secs. 41-34—41-40. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-41. - Cabana. 
A cabana is any portable, demountable or permanent cabin, small house, room, enclosure, or other building erected, constructed or placed to be used in conjunction with any automobile house trailer or camp car. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.16; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-41.5. - Care home. 
A care home is any facility, place, or building, social rehabilitation facility or similar facility which is maintained and operated to provide living accommodations for and twenty-four-hour nonmedical care to persons in need of personal services, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual, such as the elderly, convalescents, invalids, dependent or neglected children, or physically handicapped, mentally impaired or incompetent persons. 
(Ord. No. NS-1532, § 1, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 41-42. - Carport. 
A carport is a permanent roofed structure with not more than two (2) enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.17; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-42.5. - Child care facilities. 
A child care facility is a place where persons under eighteen (18) years of age are supervised, educated, or left for care on less than a 24-hour basis. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 2446, § 4, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-42.6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-42.7. - Check cashing facility. 
As used in this Code, a check cashing facility is any business, company, corporation, establishment, organization, private enterprise, shop, or store whose primary or ancillary service is that of a check casher, as currently defined, and as may be amended from time to time by Title 1.6F, section 1789.31(a) of the California Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2412, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 41-43. - Club; fraternity; lodge. 
A club, fraternity or lodge shall have the same meaning as that given to the word "club" pursuant to California Business and Professions Code section 23425, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.18; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2473, § 3, 6-18-01)  
Sec. 41-43.5. - Commercial storage. 
Commercial storage is a structure or building whose primary function is for collecting, maintaining or storing goods, materials, records or documents which do not belong to the owner or operator of the structure or building but are kept in trust. 
(Ord. No. NS-2494, § 3, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 41-44. - Compound. 
Compound means to prepare by combining or mixing the parts of materials and products. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 3, 12-18-95) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 41-44 by Ord. No. NS-2275, the section had been repealed by Ord. No. NS-1532, § 4, enacted June 16, 1980. The repealed § 41-44 set forth the definition of "convalescent home" and derived from Code 1952, § 9210.19, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-44.5. - Concert venue. 
A commercial establishment of eleven thousand (11,000) square feet or larger where people go to primarily listen to and observe various forms of live concerts or entertainment, which includes dancing or other form of personal interaction with the performance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 18, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-45. - Cyber cafe. 
Cyber cafe shall mean an establishment that provides more than six (6) computers and/or other electronic devices for access to the Internet, e-mail, video games or computer software programs which are networked (via LAN or WAN) or which function as a client/server program, and which seeks compensation in any form from users. Cyber cafe is synonymous with PC cafe, internet cafe or cyber centers, but does not include a cyber learning center as defined in section 41-46. 
(Ord. No. NS-2513, § 3, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 41-46. - Cyber learning center. 
Cyber learning center shall mean an establishment that provides computer access, which is operated by the city, a school district, or a college district, or is operated by a non-profit organization without monetary charge. 
(Ord. No. NS-2513, § 4, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 41-47. - Data center. 
A data center is a use whose primary purpose is to house computer servers or telecommunications switching facilities or internet nodes for entities, including but not limited to web hosting organizations, large enterprises or any other internet service organizations and whose gross floor area exceeds fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet. A server farm, telecom hotel, carrier hotel, darkened datacenter, co-location center or any other term applicable to facilities which are used for these specified purposes shall be deemed to be a data center. 
(Ord. No. NS-2494, § 4, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 41-48. - Dish antenna. 
A dish antenna is an antenna characterized by a round parabolic surface having a diameter of more than two (2) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-1755, § 1, 12-17-84)  
Sec. 41-49. - Disabled person. 
For purposes of the reasonable accommodation process detailed in sections 41-652, et seq., any person who has a medical condition, physical disability, or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or, anyone who has a record of such impairment. People who are currently using illegal substances are not covered unless they have a separate disability. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 2, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 41-50. - District. 
A district is a portion of the city within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted or prohibited and within which certain yards and other open spaces are required and certain limits are established, and certain off-street parking areas are required, all as set forth and specified in this chapter concerning districts and the modification thereof by suffix or prefix. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.20; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-51. - Dwelling, one-family. 
A residential building containing one (1) or more habitable rooms with only one (1) kitchen, designed for occupancy by one (1) independent household unit with common access to, and common use of all living, kitchen and bathroom areas. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.21; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 3, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-52. - Dwelling, two-family. 
A two-family dwelling is a single building containing not more than two (2) families living independently of each other in separate living areas, which has a common roof and common interior or party walls, and which contains no more than two (2) kitchens. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.22; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 2, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-53. - Dwelling, multiple-family. 
For definitions of multiple-family dwelling see definition of apartment house. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.23; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-54. - Long-term stay business hotel. 
A long-term stay business hotel is a hotel/motel which is designed and operated to primarily accommodate business travelers whose guest stays vary in general from one (1) week to a month or more. Any hotel/motel that contains a kitchen in guest rooms shall be considered a long-term stay business hotel. No long-term stay business hotel may be established in the city after July 1, 2001 except as permitted by a SP (Specific Plan) or SD (Specific Development) district and then only as a conditional use. Long-term stay business hotels shall not include transient/residential hotels. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 5, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-55. - Emergency shelter for homeless. 
Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person, where no individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay; as defined and used in Section 50801(e) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 3, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 41-56. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-57. - Eating establishment. 
A commercial establishment whose primary use is the sale and service of meals on-site to guests and which has suitable kitchen facilities containing the necessary appliances required for cooking unpackaged foods, and which complies with all of the requirements of the local department of health and the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for a bona fide public eating place pursuant to the Section 23038 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 19, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-58. - Equipment rental yard. 
An equipment rental yard is a permanent establishment dedicated to the rental of building or construction tools, equipment, or other related supplies where the storage and display of said equipment and supplies may occur both within a structure, as well as in an outdoor yard area associated with said structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-2812, § 2, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 41-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2126, § 2, adopted May 6, 1991, repealed § 41-59, definition of family, which derived from § 9210.24 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960, and Ord. No. NS-1482, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1979.  
Sec. 41-60. - Freight, bus and truck terminals. 
A freight, bus and truck terminal is a facility used for the storage and dispatch of larger scale vehicles including but not limited to semi-trailers, waste haulers, cement trucks, tow trucks and buses with a capacity greater than fifteen (15) persons. This may include facilities used to receive, sort, transfer and ship freight, such as packages by an overnight delivery service. This may also include vehicle maintenance, repair, and fueling to service the fleet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2470, § 3, 5-21-01)  
Secs. 41-61—41-63. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-64. - Garage, private. 
A private garage is an accessory building or portion of a main building, enclosed on three (3) or more sides and designed or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupant of the main building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.25; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-65. - Garage, public. 
A public garage is a building, other than a private garage, used for the storage, care, repair or equipping of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.26; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-65.5. - Garage sale. 
A garage sale is a sale of goods, wares or merchandise from residential property where the public is invited onto such property to purchase such items; provided, however, that "garage sale" shall not include any sale of the personal belongings of a recently deceased resident of such property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2096, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2218, § 1, 6-20-94)  
Sec. 41-66. - Gross floor area. 
The gross floor area is the total floor area included within the outer walls of a building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.27; Ord. No. NS-455, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, § 1, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-635, § 1, 3-4-63, Ord. No. NS-1674, § 2, 3-21-83)  
Sec. 41-67. - Guesthouse. 
A guesthouse is living quarters within an accessory building for the use of persons employed on the premises, or for the temporary use by guests of the occupants of the main building, and having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a dwelling unit. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.28; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-67.5. - Hazardous material. 
Hazardous material is any material, other than hazardous waste, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the work place or the environment, including, but not limited to, any "hazardous substance," as defined in Section 25500 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-2122, § 1, 4-15-91)  
Sec. 41-67.7. - Hazardous waste. 
Hazardous waste is any material which is "hazardous waste" as defined in Section 25500 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-2122, § 2, 4-15-91)  
Sec. 41-67.9. - Health clubs and gymnasiums. 
A health club and gymnasium shall mean a commercial facility providing instruction and equipment designed to promote or improve the health of the clients. 
(Ord. No. NS-2776, § 3, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 41-68. - Helicopter. 
A helicopter is any rotocraft which depends principally for its support and motion in the air upon lift generated by one (1) or more rotors that rotate on substantially vertical axes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1039, § 1, 9-21-70)  
Sec. 41-69. - Heliport. 
A heliport is an area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or is intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1039, § 1, 9-21-70)  
Sec. 41-70. - Helistop. 
A helistop is the same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-1039, § 1, 9-21-70)  
Sec. 41-71. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-72. - Home improvement warehouse store. 
A home improvement warehouse store is a store which exceeds sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in floor area where home improvement and construction goods are displayed for sale in bulk quantities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1939, § 2, 1-4-88)  
Sec. 41-73. - Home occupation. 
A home occupation is a business conducted within a dwelling, or within buildings or areas accessory to a dwelling, by the occupant of the dwelling as a secondary use. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.29; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1654, § 1, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 41-73.5. - Hookah parlors. 
(a)  A hookah parlor shall mean any facility or location whose business operation, whether as its primary use or as an ancillary use, is denoted by the smoking of tobacco or other substances through one or more pipes (commonly known as a hookah, waterpipe, shisha or narghile) designed with a tube passing through an urn of water that cools the smoke as it is drawn through it, including but not limited to establishments known variously as hookah bars, hookah lounges or hookah cafes. 
(b)  A primary use shall mean a use that is not an ancillary use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2763, § 3, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41-74. - Hospital. 
A hospital is any institution, place, building or agency which maintains and operates organized facilities for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, including convalescence and including care during and after pregnancy or which maintains and operates organized facilities for any such purpose and to which persons may be admitted for overnight stay or longer. "Hospital" includes nursing home and maternity home. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.30; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-75. - Hospital, mental. 
For definition of mental hospital see definition of hospital. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.31; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-76. - Hospital, animal. 
An animal hospital is an establishment in which veterinarian services are rendered to dogs, cats and other small animals and domestic pets. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.32; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-77. - Hotel/motel. 
A hotel/motel is any building, or portion of a building, other than a care home, which is designed, occupied, used or intended to be used, rented or hired out as temporary or overnight accommodations for tourists or transients. Such hotel/motel shall contain more than five (5) guest rooms. A hotel/motel that contains a kitchen (as defined in section 310.7(3) of the California Building Code) in guest rooms shall be deemed to be a long-term stay business hotel. A hotel/motel that meets the criteria of section 41-139 of this Code shall be deemed to be a transient/residential hotel. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.33; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 2, 6-16-80; Ord. No. NS-2471, § 7, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-78. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-79. - Impound yard. 
An impound yard is an area used for the temporary storage of vehicles which have been towed to such area due to having been abandoned or illegally parked or for a similar reason, and where there is no dismantlement of such vehicles nor any sale of the parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1834, § 5, 2-3-86)  
Sec. 41-79.2. - Indoor sport facility. 
Indoor sport facility shall mean the use of any private property for the purpose of providing physical or recreation activity to the public within a fully enclosed structure. Examples of indoor sport facilities include, but are not limited to physical or recreational activities requiring a large floor area such as: soccer fields, go-cart racing, batting cages, bowling alleys, or rock climbing. "Indoor sport facility" shall not include cyber cafes as defined by section 41-45; gymnasium or health club as defined under section 41-67.9; recreational or entertainment uses defined under section 41-142; or slot car or radio controlled vehicles tracks. 
(Ord. No. NS-2776, § 4, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 41-79.5. - Indoor swap meet. 
An indoor swap meet is a store which has been internally subdivided to allow for individual sales booths which are available for lease to individual tenants for display of goods for sale. For purposes of this section, areas bounded by permanent floor-to-ceiling walls or windows, in which all entryways are capable of being closed and locked, shall be considered separate stores and not subdivisions of one (1) store. No store in which one (1) vendor occupies at least eighty (80) per cent of the floor area used for sale of goods shall be considered an indoor swap meet. For purposes of this section, each person offering goods for sale in a store who has a permit from the state board of equalization to engage in or conduct business as a seller at that store shall be deemed a distinct independent vendor, and each such vendor, other than any person in control of the use and occupancy of the store, shall be deemed a tenant in that store. 
(Ord. No. NS-1939, § 3, 1-4-88; Ord. No. NS-2090, § 1, 10-15-90)  
Sec. 41-80. - Inoperable vehicles. 
Any vehicle, either mechanically or legally incapable of being driven on a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. NS-1080, § 1, 5-17-71)  
Secs. 41-81, 41-82. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-83. - Institution. 
An establishment maintained and operated for the purpose of providing charitable, social, educational, medical, or similar services. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.34; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, (6-20-60))  
Sec. 41-83.5. - Integrated development site. 
Integrated development site shall mean any site, regardless of the number of lots or individual tenants, that is developed with common parking, on-site circulation, architecture or design features. 
(Ord. No. NS-2635, § 3, 8-4-03)  
Sec. 41-84. - Interpretive center. 
An interpretive center is an outdoor learning center in which existing natural or cultural resources are displayed or identified. 
(Ord. No. NS-2511, § 2, 9-3-02)  
Secs. 41-85—41-87. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-88. - Junk yards, automobile wrecking yards, and salvage yards. 
A junk yard, automobile wrecking yard, or salvage yard is any space of two hundred (200) square feet or more of area of any lot used for the storage, sale, keeping or abandonment of inoperable vehicles, junk or waste material, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof, other than an impound yard 
(Code 1952, § 9210.35; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1080, § 2, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1834, § 4, 2-3-86)  
Secs. 41-89—41-93. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-94. - Kennel. 
A kennel is any lot, building, structure, enclosure, premise or place, whereon or wherein, three (3) or more dogs are kept or maintained for the purpose of breeding, training, raising, boarding or as pets. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.36; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-95. - Kitchen. 
A kitchen is any room or space used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.37; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-96—41-99. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-100. - Landscape. 
Landscape is any yard or other open space which is purposely designed to create an aesthetic environment composed of plant materials and/or other decorative elements such as fountains, ponds, sculptures, walls, fences, and planters. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.37.5; Ord. No. NS-908, § 1, 1-2-68)  
Sec. 41-101. - Landscaping. 
Landscaping is the act of providing landscape as defined in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.37.6; Ord. No. NS-908, § 1, 1-2-68)  
Sec. 41-101.2. - Live entertainment. 
Includes, but is not limited to, musical performances (non-ambient (as defined in section 11-1), live or recorded), any act, play, revue, pantomime scene, dance act, DJ, Karaoke, strolling musician or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 20, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 4-101.5. - Live-work community. 
A live-work community is a building, or portion thereof, used for units which are each a combination of a studio/workshop and a living quarters, and may be either a building, or portion thereof, originally designed for nonresidential purposes and converted to such use or a new building initially designed for such use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2230, § 1, 8-15-94)  
Sec. 41-102. - Loading space. 
A loading space is an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle in order to load or unload merchandise or material, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.38; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-103. - Lodging house. 
A lodging house is any building, or portion of a building, other than a care home or motel, containing not more than five guest rooms which are used by not more than five (5) guests in total, where lodging which does not include an individual kitchen, but which may or may not include the provision of meals, is provided for compensation; except that the rental of a room in a residential dwelling unit to not more than one person in addition to the family in occupancy of such dwelling shall be permitted as an incidental subordinate residential use of such dwelling, and shall not be deemed to constitute use of such dwelling as a boardinghouse. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.39; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 3, 6-16-80)  
Sec. 41-103.5. - Long-term stay business hotel. 
A long-term stay business hotel is a hotel/motel which is designed and operated to primarily accommodate business travelers whose guest stays vary in general from one (1) week to a month or more. Any hotel/motel that contains a kitchen in guest rooms shall be considered a long-term stay business hotel. No long-term stay business hotel may be established in the city after July 1, 2001 except as permitted by a SP (specific plan) or SD (specific development) district and then only as a conditional use. Long-term stay business hotels shall not include transient/residential hotels. 
(Ord. No. NS-2710, § 4, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-104. - Lot. 
A lot is a parcel of real property shown on an approved final subdivision map or record of survey map or a recorded parcel described by metes and bounds. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.40; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-105. - Lot coverage. 
Lot coverage is the amount of lot area stated in terms of percentage that is covered by all buildings or structures located thereon. This shall be considered to include the building footprint and all building projections, but shall exclude patio covers, awnings and eaves. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.41; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 5, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-106. - Lot line, front. 
The front lot line is the boundary line between a street and abutting property and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.42; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-107. - Lot line, rear. 
The rear lot line is a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For the purpose of establishing the rear lot line of a triangle for trapezoidal lot, or of a lot the rear of which is formed by two (2) or more lines, the following shall apply: 
(a)  For a triangular shaped lot a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot and farthest removed from the front lot line and at right angles to the lot depth line shall be considered the rear lot line; or 
(b)  In the case of a trapezoidal lot the rear line of which is not parallel to the front lot line, the rear lot line shall be considered to be a line at right angles to the lot depth line and drawn through a point bisecting the recorded rear lot line; or 
(c)  In the case of a pentagonal lot the rear boundary of which includes an angle formed by two (2) lines, such angle shall be employed for determining the rear lot line in the same manner as prescribed for a triangular lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.43; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-108. - Lot line, side. 
A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.44; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-109. - Lot width. 
The lot width is the distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth line at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.45; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-110. - Lot depth. 
The lot depth is the horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.46; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-111. - Lot area. 
The lot area is the total land area within the property lines of a lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.47; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-112. - Lot, corner. 
A corner lot is a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.48; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-113. - Lot, reversed corner. 
A reversed corner lot is a corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side lot line of another lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.49; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-114. - Lot, interior. 
An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.50; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-115. - Lot, key. 
A key lot is the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.51; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-116. - Lot, through. 
A through lot is a lot having frontage on two (2) streets (a corner lot, having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, or two (2) streets, the center lines of which, if projected, would not make an angle of more than thirty (30) degrees). 
(Code 1952, § 9210.52; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-117, 41-118. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-119. - Manufacture. 
Manufacture means the making of materials or products by hand or by machinery, often with division of labor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 4, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-120. - Mechanical equipment or appurtenances. 
Mechanical equipment or appurtenances shall include air conditioners, fans, compressors, refrigeration units, exhaust fans, vents, tanks, stacks, duct work, furnaces, adsorption units, air filters or purifiers, chimneys, gravity or rotary vents, or any similar type equipment. This definition does not include attractively designed and constructed residential type chimneys on residential units or buildings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1157, § 1, 3-19-73)  
Sec. 41-120.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2646, § 2, adopted March 15, 2004, repealed § 41-120.1 in its entirety, which pertained to the mission and derived from Ord. No. NS-1397, § 1, adopted January 3, 1978.  
Sec. 41-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2864, § 3, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed § 41-121, in its entirety. Former § 41-121 pertained to medical marijuana dispensary, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2758, § 3, adopted November 5, 2007.  
Sec. 41-122. - Museums and science centers. 
Museums and science centers are facilities which specialize in scientific, cultural or artistic exhibits. Ancillary uses, located within the same premises and architecturally integrated with the main building, may include eating establishments, gift shops, theaters, assembly rooms, and similar activities to support the primary operation and activities of the facility. 
(Ord. No. NS-2296, § 3, 10-7-96)  
Sec. 41-123. - Multiservice center for homeless. 
A site which is operated under the auspices of a government or non-profit agency, for the purposes of bringing together essential services to meet the needs and development of homeless clients. Limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. A multiservice center shall include intake, assessment, and individualized case management services for homeless clients. Services provided shall address basic and immediate necessities, such as overnight shelter, showers, food, medical attention and mental health services, as well as higher level needs, including, but not limited to, computer access, job training and placement, life skills coaching and legal assistance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 4, 9-3-13)  
Secs. 41-124, 41-125. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-126. - Nonconforming use. 
A nonconforming use is a use of land or of a building or structure which was initiated prior to July 20, 1960, or which was conducted in conformity with all applicable provisions of this chapter as they existed at the time such use was initiated, but which thereafter became nonconforming to any provision of this chapter due to the enactment or amendment of such provision or due to the acquisition by a public agency of real property through eminent domain or through a voluntary conveyance in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-45, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 1, 11-19-84)  
Sec. 41-127. - Nonconforming building. 
A nonconforming building is a building to which either of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The building was constructed prior to July 20, 1960, and thereafter the building, or any of its appurtenances, or the site on which it is located became nonconforming to any provision of this chapter due to the enactment or amendment of such provision or due to the acquisition by a public agency of real property through eminent domain or through a voluntary conveyance in lieu thereof. 
(2)  The building and its appurtenances and the site on which it is located existed at one time in conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and thereafter the building, or any of its appurtenances, or the site on which it is located became nonconforming to any provision of this chapter due to the enactment or amendment of such provision or due to the acquisition by a public agency of real property through eminent domain or through a voluntary conveyance in lieu thereof. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.55; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 2, 11-19-84; Ord. No. NS-1961, § 2, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-128. - Off-sale establishment. 
Those establishments licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcohol for consumption away from the premises (e.g., liquor stores, convenience stores, grocery stores). 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 21, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-129. - On-sale establishment. 
Those establishments that qualify as bona fide eating establishments and that are licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 22, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-130. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-131. - Outdoor vending machine. 
Outdoor vending machine shall mean a mechanical device located on the outside of a building that provides a product or service to the public for compensation, including but not limited to water dispensers, drink dispensers, food dispensers or water vending machines. For purposes of this chapter, news boxes, pay phones, automated teller machines and youth amusement rides shall not be deemed to be outdoor vending machines. 
(Ord. No. NS-2635, § 4, 8-4-03; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 6, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-131.5. - Outdoor water vending machine. 
Outdoor water vending machine shall mean a mechanical device located within a building exterior storefront that solely dispenses water for compensation. For purposes of this chapter, machines that vend prepackaged bottled water shall not be considered outdoor water dispensing machines. 
(Ord. No. NS-2710, § 7, 5-1-06)  
Secs. 41-132—41-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2847, § 25, adopted August 5, 2013, repealed § 41-132 in its entirety. Former § 41-132 pertained to overconcentration of alcohol licenses and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2334, § 1, adopted November 3, 1997.  
Sec. 41-136. - Parking area, public. 
A public parking area is an open area other than a street or alley used for the parking of automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.58; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-137. - Parking space. 
A parking space is a space within a public or private parking area or a building, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work area, for the temporary parking or storage of one (1) automobile. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.59; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-137.1. - Parking space, bicycle. 
A bicycle parking space is a space within a public or private property, exclusive of street right-of-way, driveways, ramps, walkways, required landscape areas or work space for the temporary parking or storage of one (1) bicycle. A bicycle parking space is primarily for visitors and guests, and shall include a permanently affixed post or rack for attaching a bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 2787, § 3, 6-8-09)  
Sec. 41-137.5. - Passenger transportation services. 
A passenger transportation service is a use that stores or dispatches vehicles that provide passenger transportation, which include but are not limited to taxicab, limousine, shuttle or transit vehicles with a maximum capacity of fifteen (15) persons, and ambulance services. This may include vehicle maintenance, repair, and fueling to service the fleet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2470, § 4, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-137.10. - Porte-cochere. 
Porte-cochere is a structure over the driveway, and attached to the main residence for the temporary sheltering and unloading of passengers by an entrance of the building. 
(Ord. No. NS-2710, § 8, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-138. - Processing. 
Processing means the preparation of materials or products by a particular method. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 5, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-138.5. - Public premise. 
An establishment licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell and serve alcohol pursuant to Section 23039 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 23, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-139. - Transient/residential hotel. 
A transient/residential hotel differs from a hotel/motel in that, while guests at a hotel/motel have another, primary residence, the guests at a transient/residential hotel utilize it as their primary residence (for purposes of this section the term "primary residence" shall have the same definition as under California Health & Safety Code section 50519(b)(1)). Any hotel/motel that rents, lets or otherwise provides for compensation, twenty-five (25) per cent or more of the total number of rooms therein to any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity for occupancy which exceeds twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or twenty-eight (28) days in any 60-day consecutive period shall be deemed to be a transient/residential hotel. No transient/residential hotel may be established in the city after June 7, 1999 unless: 
(1)  It was existing on June 7, 1999; and 
(2)  It is permitted by a SP (Specific Plan) or SD (Specific Development) district and then only as a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 6, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-140. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-141. - Reasonable accommodation. 
A modification or exception to the standards, regulations, policies, and procedures contained in this title for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities, that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide an individual with a disability equal opportunity for the use and enjoyment of housing of their choice, and that does not impose undue financial or administrative burdens on the city or require a fundamental or substantial alteration of the city's planning and zoning programs. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 3, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 41-142. - Recreational or entertainment uses. 
Recreational or entertainment uses include any use of property for the purpose of providing recreation or entertainment to the public for compensation, including, but not limited to, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, golf course, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, pool halls, sports stadiums, dance halls, and game arcades; provided, however, that the use of less than five (5) per cent of the floor space of that part of a building which is open to the public for mechanical or electronic games shall not be considered a recreational or service use. The square footage for each pool table shall be calculated at one hundred ninety-two (192) square feet to accommodate the area necessary for the players. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 1, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 9, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-142.2. - Recreational vehicle, vehicle and/or boat storage yard. 
A recreational vehicle, vehicle and/or boat storage yard is an outdoor facility in which spaces are individually rented or leased for the storage of recreational vehicles, vehicles or boats (with or without trailers). 
(Ord. No. NS-2494, § 6, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 41-142.5. - Rehabilitation. 
Rehabilitation is the restoration or modification of an existing building which alters the aesthetic quality of the building, excluding normal maintenance. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 3, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-143. - Residence. 
For definition of residence see definition of dwelling. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.61; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-144. - Retail and service uses. 
Retail and service uses include any use of property for the purpose of offering merchandise or services to the public for compensation, and include banks, savings and loan associations, and similar financial institutions, but do not include the following: 
(a)  Sheet metal shops, body-fender works, automobile paint shops, repair garages, and any activity which includes the processing, treatment, manufacturing, assembling or compounding of any product, other than that which is clearly and traditionally incidental and essential to a particular retail activity. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  A hookah parlor as defined in section 41-73.5 of this Code. 
(d)  Any use which is more specifically identified as a permitted use or as a use which may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in one (1) or more use districts pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 2, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2758, § 4, 11-5-07; Ord. No. NS-2763, § 4, 3-3-08; Ord. No. NS-2864, § 4, 12-9-14, )  
Sec. 41-145. - Rooming house. 
For definition of rooming house see definition of boardinghouse. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.63; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-146—41-149. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-150. - Sanitarium. 
For definition of sanitarium see definition of hospital. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.64; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-150.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2940, § 4, adopted April 3, 2018 , repealed § 41-150.5 in its entirety. Former § 41-150.5 pertained to "Second dwelling units," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2629, § 4, adopted June 2, 2003.  
Sec. 41-150.8. - Separation requirement. 
The prescribed distance between a regulated use, conditionally permitted use, or any other use specifying a separation requirement, and the sensitive use(s) near which it is located. For purposes of variances or minor exceptions as addressed in section 41-632, a separation requirement will not be considered a development standard and will not be subject to waiver or modification. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 24, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-151. - Service station. 
A service station is a filling station which supplies motor fuel and oil to motor vehicles and which may also include automobile servicing, the sale of motor vehicle accessories, and other retail sales. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.65; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-152. - Setback line; future right-of-way line. 
A setback line or future right-of-way line is the line between which line and a street line no structure shall project, be erected, or placed. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.66; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-152.1, 41-152.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2373, § 3, adopted December 7, 1998, repealed §§ 41-152.1 and 41.152.2, which pertained to specified anatomical areas and specified sexual activities, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1395, §§ 5, 6, adopted December 12, 1977.  
Sec. 41-153. - Story. 
A story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than six (6) feet above grade such basement or cellar shall be considered a story. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.67; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-154. - Street. 
A street is a public thoroughfare including public roads or highways which affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.68; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-155. - Street line. 
The street line is the boundary line between a street and abutting property. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.69; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-156. - Structure. 
A structure is anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having permanent location on the ground, including signs and billboards, but not including fences or walls used as fences, six (6) feet in height or less. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.70; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-157. - Structural alteration. 
Structure alteration is any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists, roof joists, rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.71; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-158. - Studio. 
A studio is the workplace of one (1) or more individuals who are engaged in the production of works of art or handicrafts for a living, including, but not limited to, painting, sculpture, music, photography, ceramics, glass works and the performing arts. 
(Ord. No. NS-2230, § 2, 8-15-94)  
Sec. 41-158.5. - Supportive housing. 
Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by persons and families who were homeless when approved for tenancy in the supportive housing project in which they currently reside, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community; as defined by Section 50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 5, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 41-159. - Tattoo and/or body art establishment. 
Any facility that includes any of the following activities: 
(a)  "Body art establishments" means any specified building, section of a building, or vehicle in which a practitioner performs body art, including reception areas, the procedure area, and the decontamination and sterilization area. "Body art establishments" does not include a facility that only pierces the ear with a disposable, single-use, presterilized clasp and stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
(b)  "Body art" means the body piercing, tattooing, branding, or application of permanent cosmetics. 
(c)  "Body piercing" means the creation of an opening in a human body for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. "Body piercing" includes the piercing of an ear, including the tragus; lip; tongue; nose; eyebrow; or other body part. "Body piercing" does not include the piercing of an ear, except for the tragus, with a disposable, single-use, presterilized stud and clasp or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
(d)  "Branding" means the process in which a mark or marks are burned into human skin tissue with a hot iron or other instrument, with the intention of leaving a permanent scar. 
(e)  "Permanent cosmetics" means the application of pigments in human skin tissue for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other appearance of the skin. This includes permanent eyeliner, eyebrow, or lip color. Permanent cosmetics, if done as an ancillary use within a beauty salon or spa, is not subject to the standards and restrictions in section 41-199.3 — Tattoo and/or body art establishments. 
(f)  "Tattooing" means the insertion of pigment in human skin tissue by piercing with a needle. 
(Ord. No. NS-1861, § 1, 8-4-86; Ord. No. NS-2346, § 1, 3-16-98; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 3, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 3, 11-21-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2931, § 3, adopted November 21, 2017 , amended § 41-159 to read as set out herein. Previously § 41-159 was titled "Thrift shop, purchase and loan, pawn shop."  
Sec. 41-159.5. - Thrift shop, purchase and loan, pawnshop. 
A thrift shop, purchase and loan, or pawnshop is a retail establishment that sells or purchases secondhand articles, or provides loans secured by secondhand articles. 
( Ord. No. NS-2931, § 4, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 41-160. - Townhouse. 
A townhouse is a dwelling unit located in a group of three (3) or more attached dwelling units with no dwelling unit located above or below another and with each dwelling unit having its own exterior entrance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 3, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-161. - Trailer park or camp. 
A trailer park or camp is any place, area, or tract of land upon which is located any trailer or camp car, but not including a location where a camp car or trailer is not inhabited. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.72; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-161.5. - Transient/residential hotel. 
A transient/residential hotel differs from a hotel/motel in that, while guests at a hotel/motel have another, primary residence, the guests at a transient/residential hotel utilize it as their primary residence (for purposes of this section the term "primary residence" shall have the same definition as under California Health and Safety Code subsection 50519(b)(1)). Any hotel/motel that rents, lets or otherwise provides for compensation, twenty-five (25) per cent or more of the total number of rooms therein to any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity for occupancy which exceeds twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or twenty-eight (28) days in any 60-day consecutive period shall be deemed to be a transient/residential hotel. No transient/residential hotel may be established in the city after June 7, 1999 unless: 
(1)  It was existing on June 7, 1999; and 
(2)  It is permitted by a SP (specific plan) or SD (specific development) district and then only as a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2710, § 10, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-162. - Treatment. 
Treatment means the subjection of material or products to some process or substance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 6, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-163. - Transitional housing. 
A building or buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months; as defined in Section 50675.2 of the Health and Safety Code. Transitional Housing does not include state licensed residential care facilities, also referred to as care homes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 6, 9-3-13)  
Secs. 41-164, 41-165. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-166. - Use. 
Use is the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.73; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-166.5. - Warehouse. 
Warehouse means a storehouse for goods prior to distribution, sale or use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 7, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-167. - Warehouse, mini. 
A mini-warehouse is a structure or building, the interior of which has been partitioned or sectioned off into individual storage units or compartments which do not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in gross floor area per unit (may also include two (2) or more individually constructed units) and are individually rented or leased. A mini-storage or self-storage facility shall be deemed a mini-warehouse. 
(Ord. No. NS-1225, § 1, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 5, 4-15-02)  
Secs. 41-168—41-170. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-171. - Yard. 
A yard is an open space other than a court on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.74; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-172. - Yard, front. 
A front yard is a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the distance between the front lot line and the main wall of the building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.75; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-173. - Yard, rear. 
A rear yard is a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear lot line toward the nearest main wall of the building. 
(Code 1952, § 9210.76; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-174. - Yard, side. 
A side yard is a yard, between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front to the rear property line. The width of the required side yard shall be measured from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest main wall of the building 
(Code 1952, § 9210.77; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60 ; Ord. No. NS-521, § 2, 6-19-61)  
Sec. 41-175. - Youth amusement ride. 
A freestanding electric, mechanical, or hydraulic amusement ride designed for use by one (1) to four (4) children, and typically activated by deposit of coin or token. 
(Ord. No. NS-2487, § 3, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 41-176—41-183. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USE DISTRICTS—GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 41-184. - Districts established. 
In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter, the city is divided into the following districts: 
A1 —  General agricultural 
RE —  Residential-estate 
R1 —  Single-family residence 
R2 —  Limited multiple-family residence 
R3 —  Medium-density multiple-family residence 
R4 —  Suburban apartment 
P —  Professional 
GC —  Government center 
C1 —  Community commercial 
C1-MD —  Community commercial/Museum District 
C2 —  General commercial 
C4 —  Planned shopping center 
C5 —  Arterial commercial 
CR —  Commercial residential 
M1 —  Light industrial 
M2 —  Heavy industrial 
C-SM —  South Main Street commercial district 
O —  Open space 
TV —  Transit Village 
DT —  Downtown 
UC —  Urban Center 
CDR —  Corridor 
UN-2 —  Urban Neighborhood 2 
UN-1 —  Urban Neighborhood 1 
SP —  Specific plan 
SD —  Specific development 
MO —  Military operations 
OZ —  Overlay zone 
(Code 1952, § 9220; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. 2306, § 3, 12-2-96; Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, 6-1-98; Ord. No. NS-2421, 4-3-00; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 3, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-185. - Modification districts. 
(a)  The use districts established in section 41-184 may be altered to conform with the following: 
(1)  The B suffix appending the district classification shall allow properties within the district so modified to be used exclusively for parking as described in section 41-611 of this chapter. 
(2)  Lot width and lot area suffix appending the district classification shall be indicated on the sectional district map and shall designate the lot width and lot area. The number preceding the district classification shall establish the minimum lot width and the number following the district classification shall establish the minimum lot area. 
(3)  Overlay Zone (OZ) suffix appending the district classification shall allow parcels within the district to optionally develop in accordance with alternative uses and standards set forth in an adopted Overlay Zone ordinance, as further described in division 28 of this chapter. 
(4)  The F suffix appending the district classification shall restrict properties within the district so modified to a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0. The F suffix shall not apply to properties that develop in accordance with an overlay zone. 
(b)  The aforesaid land use districts shall be indicated on the sheets which comprise the official sectional district maps of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9221; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2739, § 2, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 41-186. - District boundary changes. 
Changes in the boundaries of any district shall be made by ordinance adopting an amended sectional district map, which said amended map when so adopted shall be published by reference in the manner prescribed by law and shall become a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9222; Ord. No. NS-455, 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-187. - Uncertainty of boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on said sectional district map the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(b)  Where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on such sectional district map. 
(c)  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley. 
The boundaries of such districts as are shown upon the sectional district maps adopted by this chapter are hereby adopted and approved, and the regulations of this chapter governing the use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, the size of yards about buildings and other matters as herein set forth, are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each district shown upon each sectional district map. 
(Code 1952, § 9223; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-188. - Establishment of land use classifications of properties outside the incorporated area. 
The city may prezone certain contiguous areas which in the opinion of the planning commission or city council bears a relationship to its planning. Any district so established shall prevail if and when areas contained within such district are annexed to the city. For this purpose prezoning maps may be developed, adopted and amended as prescribed in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9224; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-189. - Zoning status of annexed property. 
If a prezoning map of properties outside the incorporated area has been adopted in the manner prescribed by ordinance, any territory upon becoming a part of the city shall possess the classification indicated on the detailed prezoning map, and such portions of the prezoning map shall become a part of the city zoning map and thereafter be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. 
If a prezoning map for an area has not been adopted, then such area shall, upon annexation, be considered to be classified A1 until reclassified in the manner prescribed by article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9225; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-190. - General restrictions. 
Except as hereinafter provided: 
(a)  No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformance to the provisions contained herein; nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than that which is permitted in the district or modified district in which such building or land is located. 
(b)  No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height or size limit herein established for the district or modified district in which such building is located. 
(c)  No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that any yard area or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter. 
(d)  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; provided further that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
(e)  Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot created in conformance with the subdivision regulations and in no case shall there be more than one (1) dwelling or other principal structure on one lot except as provided herein. 
(f)  Whenever any land or building is devoted to a use of a more restricted classification than that permitted in the district or modified district where located, such act shall constitute a waiver of any right to claim that any use of buildings or land near, or adjacent thereto, constitute a nuisance in any manner different from that which would be a nuisance if such use were of the least restricted classification permitted in such districts. 
(Code 1952, § 9226; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-191. - Regulated uses. 
(a)  Purpose. It is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are considered as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, by having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood by a concentration of these uses in any one (1) area. 
(b)  Uses subject to regulation: 
(1)  Adult bookstore as defined in section 41-12.1. 
(2)  Adult entertainment businesses as defined in section 41-12.2. 
(3)  Adult theaters as defined in section 41-12.4. 
(4)  Adult entertainment businesses as defined in section 41-1701.6. 
(5)  Bars as defined in section 41-25.5. 
(6)  Figure model studios as defined in section 12-120. 
(7)  Massage establishments as defined in section 22-1. 
(8)  Peep show establishments as defined in section 12-22. 
(9)  Adult motels as defined in section 41-12.3. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any of the uses referred to in subsection (b) within the separation requirement of one thousand (1,000) feet of any other such regulated use. 
(d)  None of the uses referred to in subsection (b) may be established within the separation requirement of one thousand (1,000) feet of any property zoned or used for residential, church, school primarily attended by minors, or park purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1395, § 7, 12-12-77; Ord. No. NS-2209, § 4, 12-20-93; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 3, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 26, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-191.5. - Judicial relief for permits proceedings affecting expressive conduct. 
The provisions of Section 1094.8 of the California Code of Civil Procedure shall govern any application for administrative mandamus based upon final decisions rendered under the following provisions of this Code: 
(a)  Adult businesses, Chapter 41, Article XVII. 
(b)  Newsracks, Chapter 33, Article 5. 
(c)  Cyber cafes, Section 41-198.200. 
(d)  Parades, Chapter 10, Section 10-7 through 10-21 
(e)  Special events, Chapter 10, Section 10-22 through 10-22.14. 
(Ord. No. NS-2513, § 5, 9-3-02; Ord. No. NS-2528, § 5, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 41-192. - Residential overcrowding. 
(a)  Purpose. The city council of the City of Santa Ana finds and determines that the overcrowding of residential dwellings increases noise pollution; traffic congestion in the neighborhood; overburdens the waste and sewage disposal system creating unsanitary conditions; causes a financial burden on the school systems and other public use facilities; and leads to the dilapidation of the housing stock and the general deterioration of the neighborhood. 
It is declared to be the purpose and intent of this section to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community, to maintain the integrity of the city's residential areas, to improve the quality of life for its residents, to prevent the deterioration of neighborhoods, to promote the stability of property values and to impose restrictions upon those activities that would detract from the neighborhood and adversely affect the quality of life and residents. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Dwelling unit shall mean any house, condominium or apartment or any portion of a building, structure or portion thereof that is designated for use as a living facility for one (1) person or by two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Net floor space shall mean the total number of square feet of floor space in a dwelling unit based upon that dwelling unit's interior dimensions excluding stairwells, halls, closets, bathrooms and kitchens. 
(c)  Overcrowding prohibited. No dwelling unit shall be inhabited or allowed to be inhabited in such a manner that it exceeds the maximum occupancy of the dwelling unit. Maximum occupancy shall be determined as follows: For the first two (2) occupants of any dwelling unit, there shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of net floor space. There shall be at least one hundred (100) square feet of net floor space for every additional occupant thereafter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1482, § 2, 4-2-79; Ord. No. NS-2126, § 1, 5-6-91) 
Editor's note— This section of the Santa Ana Municipal Code was held to be invalid by the Court in Briseno v. City of Santa Ana (1992) 6 Cal. App. 4 th 1378.  
Sec. 41-192.1. - Accessory use of dwellings for home occupations. 
A home occupation is permitted as a use accessory to residential use, provided that it is conducted in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 41-192.2, that a permit has been obtained and remains in effect in accordance with sections 41-192.3 through 41-192.5, and that any business license required by Chapter 21 of this Code has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. NS-1654, § 2, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 41-192.2. - Regulation of home occupations. 
No person shall conduct any home occupation in violation of any of the following regulations: 
(a)  There shall be no signs or other devices identifying or advertising the home occupation. 
(b)  There shall be no sales activity, either wholesale or retail, except mail order sales. 
(c)  There shall be no work, storage, or display outside of any fully enclosed structure. 
(d)  Nothing associated with the home occupation shall alter the residential character of the subject property or nearby residential property. 
(e)  There shall be no activity which involves frequent meetings or gatherings of any kind such as may generate traffic and parking congestion, noise, or disturbances beyond that which is normal to residential use. Such uses include but are not limited to photo studios, bail bond uses, or check cashing facilities. 
(f)  There shall be no use of any mechanical equipment, appliance, or motor outside of an enclosed building or which generates noise detectable from outside the building in which it is located. 
(g)  Only one (1) home occupation shall be conducted on the subject property. 
(h)  No more than two (2) persons shall be engaged in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(i)  There shall be no dispatching of persons or equipment from the subject property. 
(j)  No more than a single vehicle used primarily in the conduct of the business may be parked or stored on the public street nor anywhere on the subject property other than an enclosed garage; and that single vehicle shall comply at all times with the provisions of sections 36-145 and 41-607(h). 
(k)  Home occupation activities shall not involve the use of more than one (1) room or four hundred (400) square feet of a dwelling, whichever is more restrictive, and no garage space shall be used for the conduct of any home occupation which interferes with the use of such space for parking of vehicles, if such use for parking of vehicles is necessary to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1654, § 3, 11-1-82; Ord. No. NS-2457, § 5, 1-2-01; Ord. No. NS-2661, § 6, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 41-192.3. - Home occupation permit required. 
No person shall conduct a home occupation without having first obtained a home occupation permit from the zoning administrator. Applications for such a permit shall be filed by the occupant of the dwelling with the zoning administrator on such forms as may be provided by the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by such filing fee as may be set by resolution of the city council. The application shall provide such information and documentation as the director of planning and development services shall, by departmental regulation, determine to be appropriate. The zoning administrator shall issue the home occupation permit if he determines that the home occupation will be conducted in accordance with section 41-192.2 and will not adversely affect the residential character of the subject property or nearby residential properties; otherwise, he shall deny the application. The permit, if granted, shall specifically identify the occupant as permittee and describe the nature of the home occupation thereby allowed. Home occupation permits shall not be transferrable by the designated permittee to any other person. 
(Ord. No. NS-1654, § 4, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 41-192.4. - Revocation of home occupation permit. 
The zoning administrator may revoke a home occupation permit, after notice and an opportunity to be heard by the permittee, upon his determination that the home occupation is being conducted contrary to the regulations set forth in section 41-192.2 or in a manner which adversely affects the residential character of the subject property or nearby residential properties. 
(Ord. No. NS-1654, § 5, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 41-192.5. - Appeals from denial or revocation of home occupation permit. 
Any applicant for a home occupation permit whose application was denied by the zoning administrator, and any permittee whose permit was revoked by the zoning administrator, may, within ten (10) days following such decision, appeal such decision to the planning commission, in which event the decision of the zoning administrator shall be vacated and the planning commission shall determine whether to issue or revoke the permit in accordance with the standards set forth in section 41-192.3 or 41-192.4. The applicant or permittee shall be given at least five (5) days prior written notice by the zoning administrator of the time and place at which the planning commission will consider the application or revocation and shall be provided an opportunity to be heard by the planning commission prior to its decision being made. The zoning administrator or the planning commission may provide such other notice of a hearing on the matter as they deem appropriate. An appeal pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing by the applicant or permittee with the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to one-half (½) of the original application fee. The decision of the planning commission shall be final with no further right of appeal. Written statements of such decision shall be filed with the clerk of the council and the zoning administrator, and mailed to the applicant or permittee. 
(Ord. No. NS-1654, § 6, 11-1-82)  
Sec. 41-193. - Garage sale regulations. 
No person shall conduct, or allow to be conducted, a garage sale on residentially zoned property in violation of the following regulations: 
(1)  Garage sales may only be conducted on the first weekend of the months of March, June, September and December, and on such additional weekends as may be designated for permitted garage sales by the city manager. For purposes of this section, "weekend" means Saturday and Sunday. The city manager may designate an additional weekend for permitted garage sales when, in the city manager's opinion, inclement weather prevented garage sales from being effectively conducted on any weekend on which they were permitted. 
(2)  Garage sale activity shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(3)  Garage sale activity may not be conducted in the public sidewalks, parkways, streets or alleys. 
(4)  All items sold at a garage sale must be used goods, wares or merchandise of a household nature, from that household, and not acquired elsewhere for resale. 
(5)  Garage sale advertising signs may not be posted on telephone poles, streetlights, traffic signs, or any other structure in the public right-of-way. Such signs may not be posted anywhere earlier than one (1) week prior to the first date of the garage sale nor more than one (1) day after the last date of the garage sale. 
(Ord. No. NS-2176, § 1, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2218, § 2, 6-20-94; Ord. No. NS-2252, § 1, 6-19-95)  
Sec. 41-194. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations for the development of accessory dwelling units on residentially zoned properties on lots developed or proposed to be developed with single-family residential dwellings. Such regulations are intended to mitigate potential impacts to neighborhoods and comply with the goals and policies of the City's General Plan and comply with requirements codified in the state Planning and Zoning Law related to accessory dwelling units in residential areas, including California Government Code section 65852.2. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, adopted April 3, 2018 , repealed and replaced § 41-194, in its entirety. Former § 41-194 pertained to "Second dwelling units—Standards," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2629, § 5, adopted June 2, 2003 and Ord. No. NS-2710, § 11, adopted May 1, 2006.  
Sec. 41-194.1. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, the following words, terms or phrases have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Attached accessory dwelling unit" means a residential dwelling unit that is attached to or located within the living area of an existing primary dwelling unit and that provides independent living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities for one (1) or more persons. An attached accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 17958.1. 
(2)  "Detached accessory dwelling unit" means a residential dwelling unit that is detached from the primary dwelling unit and that provides independent living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities for one (1) or more persons. A detached accessory dwelling unit also includes an efficiency unit, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 17958.1, and a manufactured home, as defined in section 18007. 
(3)  "Existing accessory structure" means an accessory structure, as defined in this chapter, which was legally established and existing prior to adoption of this ordinance. 
(4)  "Existing garage" means a building or portion of a building designed or used for parking or storage of motor vehicles that was legally established and existing prior to adoption of this ordinance. 
(5)  "Living area" is defined as the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, but not including a garage or any accessory structure. 
(6)  "Primary dwelling" means an existing single-family residential structure on a single parcel with provisions for living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities occupied and intended for one (1) household. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, adopted April 3, 2018 , repealed and replaced § 41-194.1, in its entirety. Former § 41-194.1 pertained to "Second dwelling units—Occupation," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2629, § 5, adopted June 2, 2003.  
Sec. 41-194.2. - Applicability. 
(1)  The development and design standards in this section shall be applicable to all accessory dwelling units. 
(2)  The Director of the Planning and Building Agency, or his/her designee, shall review and approve, or deny ministerial permits for accessory dwelling units conforming to the time limits specified by Government Code Section 65852.2 or successor provision. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, adopted April 3, 2018 , repealed and replaced § 41-194.2, in its entirety. Former § 41-194.2 pertained to "Second dwelling units—Fees," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2629, § 5, adopted June 2, 2003.  
Sec. 41-194.3. - Permitted zones. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted in all zoning districts, or on a parcel within any Specific Plan in which residential uses are permitted; or, 
(2)  In the Professional (P) zoning district where there is only one (1) legally established single-family residence, the exclusive use of the property is residential, and the continuance of the residential use is not barred by Section 41-683. In such cases, the site shall comply with the development standards in the R1 zoning district. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, adopted April 3, 2018 , repealed and replaced § 41-194.3, in its entirety. Former § 41-194.3 pertained to "Second dwelling units—Appeals of planning manager or zoning administrator decision," and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2629, § 5, adopted June 2, 2003.  
Sec. 41-194.4. - Use restrictions. 
(1)  An accessory dwelling unit may be developed on a parcel that either: 
(a)  Contains only one (1) legally established single-family residence; or 
(b)  Will have only one (1) new detached single-family residence permitted concurrently with the accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit may be located on the lot. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling. 
(4)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented for periods of less than thirty (30) days. 
(5)  The primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be continuously occupied by at least one (1) person having an ownership interest in the lot. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.5. - General development standards. 
Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following development standards, unless the accessory dwelling unit is described in subsection 41-194.8: 
(1)  Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of six thousand (6,000) square feet shall be required in order to establish an accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Maximum Size. The maximum size of an accessory dwelling unit living area shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or fifty (50) percent of the size of the living area of the primary dwelling unit on the parcel, whichever is less, and contain no more than one (1) bedroom. 
(3)  Minimum Size. The accessory dwelling unit shall contain no less than the two hundred twenty (220) square feet in living area the City requires for an efficiency dwelling unit which is defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(4)  Lot Coverage. The lot coverage for the parcel, as that term is defined in this chapter, shall not exceed the percentage specified in the underlying zoning district. 
(5)  Design. The design of the accessory dwelling unit shall preserve the privacy of adjacent uses and be architecturally compatible to the design of the primary dwelling by use of similar materials and textures, window types, roofing materials and roof pitch, and shall comply with the adopted Citywide Design Guidelines. 
(6)  Historic Properties. If an accessory dwelling unit is to be constructed on a parcel identified on the federal, state or local list of historic resources, the accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the United States Secretary of Interior's official Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. If the proposed accessory dwelling unit is placed or constructed so as to result in a modification of the existing historic resource on the parcel, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the Historic Resources Commission upon the finding that the proposed accessory dwelling unit conforms to the United States Secretary of Interior's official Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and does not substantially change the character and integrity of the historic property. 
(7)  Open Space. A minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of usable, continuous, non-front yard open-space, excluding driveways and parking areas, shall be provided. Any open space with a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet by fifteen (15) feet shall be deemed continuous open space. 
(8)  Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. For the purpose of this section, "passageway" shall mean a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one (1) entrance of the accessory dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.6. - Development standards—Detached accessory dwelling units. 
Detached accessory dwelling units shall comply with all provisions in Section 41-194.5, in addition to the following: 
(1)  Setbacks. The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the front and side yard setback standards prescribed in the zoning district, and shall have a rear yard setback of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(2)  Maximum Height. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, as measured from the lowest adjacent grade of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(3)  Separation. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet separation between the primary dwelling unit and a detached accessory dwelling unit and a minimum of five (5) feet between a detached accessory dwelling unit and an accessory building. Separation shall be measured from the exterior wall of the primary dwelling unit or attached structure to the nearest wall of the accessory dwelling unit or attached structure. 
(4)  Site Planning. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located behind the rear building line of the primary dwelling, and be clearly subordinate by location and size. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.7. - Development standards—Attached accessory dwelling units. 
Attached accessory dwelling units shall comply with all provision in Section 41-194.5, in addition to the following: 
(1)  Setbacks. The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the setback standards for primary dwellings prescribed in the zoning district. 
(2)  Maximum Height. The height of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height limit applied to a primary dwelling unit in the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Exterior Stairs. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall have no exterior stairs. 
(4)  Entrances. No attached accessory dwelling unit shall have an outside door on the primary elevation of the primary dwelling unit or an outside door that is visible from the street. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.8. - Development standards—Conversion of an existing structure. 
An existing primary dwelling unit, existing accessory structure, or existing garage, or portion thereof, converted to an accessory dwelling unit is not subject to the development standards of subsections 41-194.5 through 41-194.7 provided that the unit complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Conversion of an existing structure. Is contained within a single-family dwelling, accessory structure or garage that was legally established prior to the adoption of this ordinance; 
(2)  Maximum Size. Is a maximum of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of living area in size or fifty (50) percent of the size of the living area of the primary dwelling unit on the parcel, whichever is less; 
(3)  Minimum Size. Is no less than the minimum two hundred twenty (220) square feet in living area the City requires for an efficiency dwelling unit which is defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health & Safety Code; 
(4)  Setbacks. The side and rear setbacks of the accessory dwelling unit comply with building code provisions related to life and fire safety. 
(5)  Independent Access. Has independent exterior access from the existing residence, which shall not be located on the primary elevation of the primary dwelling; 
(6)  Independent Living Facilities. Has independent living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities for one (1) or more persons; and 
(7)  Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. For the purpose of this section, "passageway" shall mean a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one (1) entrance of the accessory dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.9. - Parking. 
All accessory dwelling units must meet the following parking standards in addition to the required off-street parking for the primary dwelling on the site. 
(1)  One (1) parking space shall be provided for all accessory dwelling units regardless of number of bedrooms, unless the accessory dwelling unit is constructed as a studio without bedrooms, in which case no parking is required. 
(2)  When an existing garage is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, replacement garage spaces for the primary dwelling unit shall not be required. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.10. - Parking exceptions. 
No off-street parking shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half (½) mile of public transit. 
For the purposes of this section "public transit" shall mean a bus stop with fixed route express bus service that provides transit service at fifteen (15) minute intervals or better during peak commute periods. 
(2)  The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary dwelling or an existing accessory structure. 
(4)  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(5)  When there is a car share vehicle located within one (1) block of the accessory dwelling unit. For the purposes of this section, "car-share vehicle" shall mean part of an established program intended to stay in a fixed location for at least ten (10) years and available to the public. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.11. - Non-conforming properties. 
(1)  Legal nonconformities of the existing primary dwelling, except for legal nonconformities related to the parking standards of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain provided nonconformities are not expanded or any new nonconformities are created. 
(2)  A lot shall comply with the current parking standards of this chapter prior to or concurrent with the establishment of an accessory dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.12. - Restrictive covenant. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, a covenant consenting that either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied shall be recorded against the title of the property in the County Recorder's office and a copy filed with the Planning Division. Said covenant shall run with the land, and shall bind all future owners, heirs, successors, or assigns. The form of the deed restriction shall be provided by the City and shall provide that: 
(1)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling. 
(2)  The unit is restricted to the approval size and attributes of this chapter. 
(3)  The covenant restrictions run with the land and may be enforced against future purchasers. 
(4)  The covenant restrictions may be removed if the owner eliminates the accessory dwelling unit. 
(5)  The covenant restriction shall be enforced by the Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee for the benefit of the City of Santa Ana. Failure of the property owner to comply with the covenant restrictions may result in legal action against the property owner and the City shall be authorized to obtain any remedy available to it at law or equity, including, but not limited to, obtaining injunction enjoining use of the accessory dwelling unit in violation of the recorded restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.13. - Appeals of planning manager or zoning administrator decision. 
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the planning manager to disapprove plans and drawings submitted pursuant to section 41-194, et seq., may file an application for a minor exception which shall be heard by the zoning administrator pursuant to Article V of this chapter. Such application may include a request to vary from the standards of section 41-194, et seq. The decision of the zoning administrator on such application may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to said Article V. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-194.14. - Applicability to other regulations. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of accessory dwelling units. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning code, other city ordinances and state and federal law. Should a conflict exist between the provisions of this article and the provisions of other articles of Chapter 41 of this Code, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. NS-2940, § 5, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-195. - Outdoor business activities. 
If, and to the extent that, the following business uses are permitted in a use district, then the corresponding business activities shall be permitted to be located or conducted outside of an enclosed building as part of, or incidental to, the use: 
(1)  Any business use: Vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas, and trash disposal areas. 
(2)  Any business use: Signs and newsracks as permitted by the sign and newsrack regulations contained in this Code. 
(3)  Public utilities: Distribution and transmission lines and accessory structures. 
(4)  Service stations: Pump islands, and the minor vehicle services customarily incidental to the purchase of vehicle fuel at pump stations. 
(5)  Day nurseries: Playground areas. 
(6)  Restaurants, cafes, and other establishments where food and drink is sold for consumption on the premises: The food and drink purchasing areas and dining areas of such establishments. 
(7)  Any business use: Exterior pay phones that are in compliance with section 41-198.100. 
(8)  Any business use: Youth amusement rides that are in compliance with sections 41-365 and 41-366. 
(9)  Any business use: Outdoor vending machines that are in compliance with section 41-198.300. 
(Ord. No. NS-1708, § 2, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-2374, § 3, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2450, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. NS-2487, § 4, 2-4-02; Ord. No. NS-2635, § 4, 8-4-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1708, § 2, amended Ch. 41 by adding provisions designated § 41-194 which provisions were redesignated § 41-195 by the City inasmuch as § 41-194 had previously been added by Ord. No. NS-1701.  
Sec. 41-195.5. - Temporary outdoor activities. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following activities may be conducted in any C1, C1-MD, C2, C4, C5, M1, M2, CSM, GC, P, SD with commercial use, or SP with commercial use district and are not required to be carried on within an enclosed building, provided they are carried on in accordance with the limitations hereinafter set forth, and provided a land use certificate is first obtained in accordance with sections 41-675 through 41-677: 
a.  Bazaars, fiestas and fund-raising events, provided the activities do not occur on the same lot more frequently than six (6) days in any one-year period, do not continue on the same lot for more than three (3) successive days, do not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and do not continue past 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and do not begin earlier than 11:00 a.m. and do not continue past 9:00 p.m. on Sunday. Provided, however, activities in the SD65 district and museum and science center activities in the C1-MD district, may not occur more frequently than one (1) time per month, do not continue on the same lot for more than three (3) successive days and are not held more than twelve (12) times per year. 
b.  Rummage sales, promotional events, sidewalk or parking lot sales, and temporary sales booths, provided the activities do not occur on the same lot more frequently than six (6) days in any one-year period and do not continue on the same lot for more than two (2) successive days. 
c.  Mobile library, medical and veterinary units, provided activities are not conducted on the same lot for more than six (6) days in any one-year period, do not begin earlier than 8:00 a.m., and do not continue past 5:00 p.m. 
d.  Outdoor auctions, provided that activities are not conducted on the same lot more frequently than four (4) days in any one-year period, do not begin earlier than 8:00 a.m., and do not continue past 5:00 p.m. 
e.  Seasonal activities for uses such as, but not limited to: fireworks stands, pumpkin lots and Christmas tree lots, provided that pumpkin lots do not set up more than thirty (30) days prior to Halloween and are removed within one (1) day after Halloween, Christmas tree lots do not set up more than thirty (30) days prior to Christmas and are removed within one (1) day after Christmas and fireworks stands are in compliance with chapter 14, article II. 
f.  Carnivals, circuses, radio or d.j. remotes and outdoor music concerts, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  The activity is not conducted on the same lot for more than five (5) successive days in any one-year period and may not occur more than five (5) days in any one-year period. 
2.  Hours of activities shall not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and do not continue past 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and do not begin earlier than 11:00 a.m. and do not continue past 9:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in article XV. 
4.  On-site circulation shall be maintained in a manner that will assure efficient internal parking lot circulation. Also, lots shall assure that vehicles need not exit on the street then re-enter the lot to find another parking space. 
5.  No equipment and/or rides may be located on the lot of such activity for more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to opening day. 
6.  All equipment and rides used for such activity must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of closing, day of activity. 
7.  Noise sources associated with construction, dismantling of equipment, deliveries and rides, shall be permitted provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, Saturday or Sunday. 
8.  A 30-foot setback clear of, but not limited to, equipment, booths, stages and rides shall be maintained at all times along any property line abutting residential uses. 
9.  The activity is subject to cancellation or additional conditions if conducted in a manner detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the community as determined by authorized city representatives including police, fire, public works, or downtown development. 
g.  Temporary outdoor activities where alcohol sale or and/or consumption is allowed. 
1.  All cooking: equipment (grills, barbecues, etc.) must be turned off one-half (½) hour before the activity closure each evening. 
2.  The sale, service and consumption of alcohol shall occur only within a fenced-in area. This area shall be designated with appropriate signage identifying it as such and shall be approved by the police department. 
3.  The applicant shall ensure that security personnel are on duty at all times and monitoring the fenced-in area designated for the sale, service and consumption of alcohol. Security personnel shall prevent people from carrying alcoholic beverages outside the designated area noted in subsection g.2. 
4.  Advertising which indicates the availability of alcoholic beverages shall be posted at the point of beverage dispensing only. 
5.  Alcoholic beverages shall be served in distinctive cups, which are different from those used for non-alcoholic beverages. 
6.  No more than two (2) cups containing alcoholic beverages may be sold to a customer at a time. All alcoholic beverages shall be sold in paper or plastic cups and not in their original glass or metal containers. 
7.  The server is prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages to an obviously intoxicated person. 
8.  The server is prohibited from consuming alcoholic beverages. 
9.  The sale, service and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall cease one (1) hour prior the end of the activity. 
h.  Farmers markets, provided the activities do not occur on the same lot more frequently that fifty-two (52) days in any one-year period, do not continue on the same lot for more that two (2) successive days, do not begin earlier than 7:00 a.m. and do not continue past 11:00 p.m. 
1.  On-site circulation shall be maintained in a manner that will assure emergency vehicle circulation. 
2.  Adequate trash containers and toilet facilities shall be provided during the hours of operation. 
3.  The lot or portion of the lot used for market activities shall be cleaned at the close of the day. For the purpose of this section only, "cleaned" shall include, but not be limited to: the removal of stalls, retail items, debris, and trash used or generated in conjunction with market activities. 
i.  Mobile and temporary tattoo and/or body art events, provided activities are not conducted on the same lot for more than six (6) days in any one-year period, do not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and do not continue past 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and do not begin earlier than 11:00 a.m. and do not continue past 9:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
j.  All temporary outdoor activities shall be subject to the following: 
1.  The applicant must provide a minimum number of state licensed, uniformed security guards for each day of the activity. This minimum number is to be determined by the chief of police or his authorized representative during the application process. These guards shall be present from the opening of the activity until closing and all persons have vacated the grounds. Under special circumstances city police officers may be required in addition to the security guards. The applicant will bear the cost of the police officers. 
2.  Security guards must carry a cellular phone. 
3.  All personnel serving as security guards must wear attire such as a jacket, shirt, vest, etc., that clearly identifies them as security. 
4.  All security personnel shall have equipment enabling two-way communication with other security personnel. 
5.  The applicant shall be required to pay for any additional police services that may result from the activity. 
6.  Noise levels generated by the activity must remain under specified levels set forth in this Code. 
7.  The sale of tickets must cease thirty (30) minutes prior to the closure of the activity daily. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 4, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2120, § 1, 5-6-91; Ord. No. NS-2461, § 2, 2-20-01; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 4, 6-21-10; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 27, 8-5-13; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 5, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 41-196. - Establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Conditional use permit required. Except as provided in subsection (b), no establishment may sell alcoholic beverages for either on-site or off-site consumption unless a conditional use permit has been approved for such establishment pursuant to Article V of this Chapter. Prior to the public hearing for the approval of said conditional use permit, the establishment must be in compliance with all provisions of Chapter 41. 
(b)  Land use certificates for incidental alcohol sales. A land use certificate may be issued pursuant to the requirements of Section 41-675 for an establishment which serves alcoholic beverages for either on-site or off-site consumption only if the establishment falls within one (1) of the following categories: 
(1)  Club or lodge establishments where admittance is limited to members and guests invited by members and where the sale of alcoholic beverages is clearly incidental to other activities conducted on the premises. 
(2)  Florists shops offering the sale of a bottle of an alcoholic beverage together with a floral arrangement. 
(c)  Alcohol storage and display area for off-sale establishments. No off-sale establishment under ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall have a combined alcohol storage and display area that exceeds five (5) per cent of the gross floor area of the store area. 
(d)  Separation requirement for off-sale establishments under ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No off-sale establishment may be granted a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages if any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The proposed establishment is within one thousand (1,000) linear feet of an existing off-sale alcohol license as measured from the primary entrance of one (1) establishment to the primary entrance of the other establishment. 
(2)  The proposed establishment is within one thousand (1,000) linear feet of any property used as a school primarily attended by minors, for a church or for park purposes as measured from the door of one (1) establishment to the door of the other use(s). 
(3)  The proposed establishment is determined to be over concentrated by the state department of alcohol beverage control as defined in business and professions code section 23958.4. 
(e)  Finding of public convenience or necessity for off-sale establishments under ten thousand (10,000) square feet located within an area of undue concentration. If the proposed off-sale establishment is located within an area deemed to have an undue concentration of off-sale alcohol licenses pursuant to the state department of alcoholic beverage control, the city may, at its discretion, prepare a letter of public convenience or necessity to allow the alcohol license pursuant to the process contained in Section 41-645.5. However, the conditions in subsections (2) and (3) may not be waived. 
(f)  Operational standards for off-sale establishments. The following operational standards shall be included in the conditions of approval for the conditional use permit required pursuant to Section 41-196: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on any property adjacent to the licensed premises under the control of the licensee. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining free of litter the area adjacent to the premises over which he has control. 
(3)  There shall be no exterior advertising of any kind or type, including window signs or other signs visible from outside, promoting or indicating the availability of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(4)  There shall be no coin-operated games maintained on the premises at any time. 
(5)  All public telephones shall be located on the interior of the premises. 
(6)  Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises or on any adjacent area under the control of the applicant shall be removed or painted over within twenty-four (24) hours of being applied. 
(7)  The applicant shall post a placard prohibiting loitering, pursuant to California Penal Code ("CPC") section 602, on the exterior of the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to ensure that CPC section 602 is complied with at all times that the premises are in operation. 
(9)  The applicant shall at all times utilize an age verification device for all purchases of alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  The owner or manager of the licensed premises shall maintain on the premises a written security policy and procedures manual, that has been approved by the police department, addressing at a minimum the following items; handling obviously intoxicated persons; establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior; handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing or loitering about the building and in the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented or used under agreement by the licensee(s); verifying age/checking identification of patrons; calling the police regarding observed or reported criminal activity. 
(11)  If there is a marked or noticeable increase in the number of police-related incidents on or near the premises, as such increase may be determined by the chief of police, the applicant may be required to provide state-licensed, uniformed security guards at a number determined by the chief of police. 
(12)  All managers and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall undergo and successfully complete a certified training program in responsible methods and skills for selling alcoholic beverages. The California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control must approve said training program. Records of each employee's successful completion of the certified training program required by this section shall be maintained on the premises of the alcoholic beverage outlet and shall be presented upon request by a representative of the City of Santa Ana. 
(13)  Alcoholic beverages in containers of less than sixteen (16) ounces cannot be sold by single containers, but must be sold in pre-packaged multi-unit quantities. 
(14)  The sales of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00/midnight each day of the week unless otherwise modified by the granting of an after-hours conditional use permit. 
(15)  Existing building and required parking must conform to the provisions of Chapter 8, Article II, Division 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (building security ordinance). These code conditions will require that the existing project lighting, door/window locking devices and addressing be upgraded to current code standards. Lighting standards cannot be located in required landscape planters. 
(16)  Cash register must be visible from the street at all times and shall not be obstructed at any time by temporary or permanent signage. 
(17)  Window displays must be kept to a minimum for maximum visibility and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of window coverage. 
(18)  Window displays and racks must be kept to a maximum height of three (3) feet including merchandise. 
(19)  A timed-access cash controller or drop safe must be installed. 
(20)  A silent armed robbery alarm must be installed and operable at all times. 
(21)  Clearly distinguishable height markers shall be installed on the inside door jamb of all doors used by the public to access the store. Horizontal marks, one (1) inch wide by three (3) inch long, in different colors, and in a contrasting color to the background, shall be placed every six (6) inches beginning at five (5) feet and ending at six (6) feet six (6) inches. 
(22)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages. 
(23)  Provide a closed circuit television system approved by the police department and capable of viewing and recording events inside and outside the premises including the parking areas with a resolution which will clearly identify individuals for later identification as follows: 
(a)  A minimum of one (1) color camera at each cash register that views the front of a customer, from the waist to the top of the head. 
(b)  A minimum of one (1) color camera that views the full length side of a customer at the cash register area. 
(c)  A color camera recorder capable of recording events on all cameras simultaneously. 
(d)  A tape or disc storage library of recorded cameras kept for a minimum of sixty (60) days. 
(e)  If video tape is used, tapes cannot be taped over more than six (6) times. 
(f)  An audio recording component that will record sounds occurring at the customer counter. 
(g)  An internet protocol (IP)-based system is required. 
(24)  It shall be the operator's responsibility to submit a shopping cart containment plan pursuant to SAMC section 33.210. 
(25)  The operator shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits for building tenant and freestanding signs. This shall include any window signs and temporary banners. 
(g)  Operational standards for on-sale establishments. The following operational standards shall be included in the conditions of approval for the conditional use permit required pursuant to Section 41-196(a). 
(1)  The premises shall at all times be maintained as a bona-fide eating establishment as defined in Section 23038 of the California Business and Professions Code and shall provide a menu containing an assortment of foods normally offered. The premises must have suitable kitchen facilities and supply an assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the day. Full and complete meals must be served whenever the privileges of the on-sale license are being exercised. 
(2)  There shall be no fixed bar or lounge area upon the premises maintained for the sole purpose of sales, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages directly to patrons. A fixed bar or lounge may be permitted if patrons may order food being offered to the general patrons of the eating establishment. 
(3)  The sales, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. unless otherwise amended by the granting of a conditional use permit for after-hours operations pursuant to Santa Ana Municipal Code Chapter 41. 
(4)  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to ensure that no alcoholic beverages are consumed on any property adjacent to the licensed premises under the control of the applicant, with the exception of any enclosed patio areas. 
(5)  The applicant or an employee of the licensee must be present to monitor all areas of the establishment, including outdoor patios, during all times that alcoholic beverages are being served or consumed. 
(6)  All employees serving alcoholic beverages must complete responsible beverage service training, or an equivalent approved by the state department of alcoholic beverage control, prior to being able to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons. Evidence of the completion of such training must be maintained on the premises and available for inspection upon request by the city. 
(7)  During those times when patrons are restricted to twenty-one (21) years of age or older, the applicant shall at all times utilize an age verification means or device for all purchases of alcoholic beverages. Such verification of age is not intended to discriminate against patrons based on race, ethnicity or legal status, but only to comply with state law restricting the sale of alcohol to those twenty-one (21) and older. 
(8)  Queuing lines shall be managed in an orderly manner and all disruptive and/or intoxicated patrons shall be denied entry. The business owner, or his designee, shall be responsible for monitoring the queuing lines at all times. 
(9)  The outdoor queuing line shall not block public walkways or obstruct the entry or exit doors of adjacent businesses. Stanchions or barriers must be used to maintain order at all times the queue exceeds twenty-five (25) patrons. All stanchions or barriers located on public property must be approved by the public works agency. 
(10)  Employees and contract security personnel shall not consume any alcoholic beverages during their work shift, except for product sampling for purposes of employee education about new products. Under no circumstances may contract security personnel consume alcoholic beverages during their work shift. 
(11)  There shall be no exterior advertising of any kind or type, including window signs or other signs visible from outside, that promote or indicate the availability of alcoholic beverages on the premises. Interior displays of alcoholic beverages or signs, which are clearly visible to the exterior, shall constitute a violation of this condition. Permissible window displays must be kept to a minimum for maximum visibility and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of window coverage. Floor displays shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(12)  There shall be no promotions encouraging intoxication or drinking contests or advertisements indicating "buy one (1) drink, get one (1) free", "two (2) for the price of one (1)", or "all you can drink for..." or similar language. 
(13)  Any pool tables, amusement machines or video games maintained on the premises at any time must be reviewed and approved in a security plan submitted to the chief of police. 
(14)  Live entertainment, including but not limited to, amplified music, karaoke, performers and dancing, shall be subject to the issuance of an entertainment permit pursuant to Santa Ana Municipal Code ("SAMC") Chapter 11 — Entertainment, and shall comply with all of the standards contained therein. Notwithstanding this requirement, music/noise shall not be audible beyond twenty (20) feet from the exterior of the premises in any direction. 
(15)  Neither the applicant, nor any person or entity operating the premises with the permission of the applicant, shall violate the city's adult entertainment ordinance contained in SAMC Section 12-1 and 12-2. 
(16)  The premises shall not be operated as an adult entertainment business as such term is defined in SAMC Section 41-1701.6. 
(17)  The applicant(s) shall be responsible for maintaining free of litter the area adjacent to the premises under the control of the licensee. 
(18)  There shall be no public telephones located on the exterior of the premises. All interior pay phones must be designed to allow outgoing calls only. 
(19)  Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises or on any adjacent area under the control of the licensee(s) shall be removed or painted within twenty-four (24) hours of being applied. 
(20)  Existing bona fide eating establishment and required parking must conform to the provisions of Chapter 8, Article II, Division 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (Building Security Ordinance). These code conditions will require that the existing project lighting, door/window locking devices and addressing be upgraded to current code standards. Lighting standards cannot be located in required landscape planters. Prior to issuance of letter of approval to the alcohol beverage control board, this condition must be complied with. 
(21)  A timed-access cash controller or drop safe must be installed. 
(22)  Install a silent armed robbery alarm. 
(23)  The owner or manager of the licensed premises shall maintain on the premises a written security policy and procedures manual, that has been approved by the police department, addressing at a minimum the following items: 
(A)  Procedures for handling obviously intoxicated persons. 
(B)  The method for establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to ensure adequate staffing levels to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior. 
(C)  Procedures for handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing or loitering about the building, and/or in the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented or used under agreement by the licensee(s). 
(D)  Procedures for verifying the age of patrons for purposes of alcohol sales. 
(E)  Procedures for ensuring that servers monitor patrons to ensure that their drinking limit/potential intoxication is not exceeded. This procedure should include a description of the procedure the server would use to warn, or refuse to serve, the patron. 
(F)  Procedures for calling the police regarding observed or reported criminal activity. 
(G)  Procedures for management of queuing lines. 
(H)  The location and description of any video games proposed to be on the premises. 
(24)  The operator shall be responsible for submitting a detailed outdoor fencing and dining plan where outdoor dining is proposed as part of the business operation. If the proposed dining area or fencing is in the public right of way, the applicant must obtain all required permits and approvals from the public works agency. 
(25)  Combined alcohol storage and display areas shall not exceed five (5) per cent of the gross floor area of the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-1729, § 1, 6-4-84; Ord. No. NS-1859, § 1, 10-20-86; Ord. No. NS-1945, § 1, 1-4-88; Ord. No. NS-1994, § 1, 2-21-89; Ord. No. NS-2334, § 2, 11-3-97; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 28, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-196.2. - Concert venues. 
(a)  Conditional use permit required. No concert venue, as defined in Section 41-44.5, may operate as a commercial use unless a conditional use permit has been approved for such establishment pursuant to Article V of this Chapter. Prior to the public hearing for the approval of said conditional use permit, the establishment must be in compliance with all provisions of Chapter 41. 
(b)  Operational standards for concert venues. The following operational standards shall be included in the conditions of approval for the conditional use permit required pursuant to Section 41-196.2: 
(1)  The owner or manager of the licensed premises shall maintain on the premises a written security policy and procedures manual, that has been approved by the police department, addressing at a minimum the following items: 
(A)  Procedures for handling obviously intoxicated persons. 
(B)  The method for establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to ensure adequate staffing levels to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior. 
(C)  Procedures for handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing or loitering about the building, and/or in the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented or used under agreement by the licensee(s). 
(D)  Procedures for verifying the age of patrons for purposes of alcohol sales. 
(E)  Procedures for ensuring that servers monitor patrons to ensure that their drinking limit/potential intoxication is not exceeded. This procedure should include a description of the procedure the server would use to warn, or refuse to serve, the patron. 
(F)  Procedures for calling the police regarding observed or reported criminal activity. 
(G)  Procedures for management of queuing lines. 
(H)  The location and description of any video games proposed to be on the premises. 
(I)  A fully-dimensioned site plan showing: 
(i)  The posting locations of any required security guards; 
(ii)  The location of all emergency exits; 
(iii)  The location of primary entrances and exits for patrons; 
(iv)  The location and square footage of the alcohol storage area; 
(v)  The dimensions and locations of the dance floor(s), stage(s) and fixed bar(s); 
(vi)  The location of the designated queuing area including the location of any stanchions; 
(vii)  The location of all cameras for the required closed circuit television system (CCTV); 
(viii)  Occupancy standards and approvals from the building department and Orange County Fire Authority; 
(ix)  Additional items as required to be indicated as determined necessary by the city manager, or designee. 
(J)  Procedures for counting the number of occupants entering and exiting the venue for purposes of enforcing established occupancy limits. 
(K)  Procedures for the provision of alternate transportation services to patrons. This may include procedures for access to a telephone, the provision of a list of taxi services, or other service that will ensure the safe travel of any patron, particularly those who are intoxicated, in leaving the establishment. 
(L)  Procedures for requiring the use of wristbands to indicate patrons' ages to identify those who are twenty-one (21) years of age and older. 
(2)  Any pool tables, amusement machines or video games maintained on the premises at any time must be reviewed and approved in the security plan. Any pool or billiard tables will be subject to the provisions of Santa Ana Municipal Code Chapter 29 — Pool and Billiards. 
(3)  Neither the responsible party for the permitted establishment, nor any person or entity operating the premises with the permission of the responsible party, shall violate the city's adult entertainment ordinance contained in Santa Ana Municipal Code Section 12-1 and 12-2. 
(4)  The premises shall not be operated as an adult entertainment business as such term is defined in Santa Ana Municipal Code Section 41-1701.6. 
(5)  Persons who appear obviously intoxicated shall not be admitted into the venue. 
(6)  Employees shall not consume any alcoholic beverages during their work shift, except for product sampling for purposes of employee education about new products. Under no circumstances may contract security personnel consume alcoholic beverages during their work shift. 
(7)  Music/noise shall not be audible beyond twenty (20) feet from the exterior of the premises in any direction. 
(8)  There shall be no public telephones located on the exterior of the premises. All interior pay phones must be designed to allow outgoing calls only. 
(9)  Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises or on any adjacent area under the control of the responsible party for the permitted establishment shall be removed or painted within twenty-four (24) hours of being applied. 
(10)  It shall be the permitted establishment's obligation to ensure that California Penal Code section 602 — Trespassing is complied with at all times that the premises are in operation. 
(11)  The responsible party for the permitted establishment shall be responsible for maintaining free of litter the area adjacent to the premises under the control of the licensee. 
(12)  In no event shall the applicant allow the number of occupants to exceed the posted maximum occupancy. 
(13)  Existing venue and required parking must conform to the provisions of Chapter 8, Article II, Division 3 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code (building security ordinance). These code conditions will require existing project lighting may require upgrading and new lighting must meet current code standards. Lighting standards cannot be located in required landscape planters where they may become obscured by the mature canopy growth of trees. 
(14)  Cash register(s) must be visible from the street at all times and shall not be obstructed at any time by temporary or permanent signage or other mitigation agreed upon with the police department. 
(15)  Window displays must be kept to a minimum for maximum visibility and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of window coverage. 
(16)  Window displays and racks must be kept to a maximum height of three (3) feet including merchandise. 
(17)  A timed-access cash controller or drop safe must be installed or other mitigation measures agreed upon with the police department. 
(18)  Installation of a silent armed robbery alarm or other mitigation measures agreed upon with the police department. 
(19)  The permittee is ultimately responsible for all activity on the premises. 
(20)  The permit is non-transferable. The permit cannot be transferred to a new owner/operator, under a sublease or by a subcontractor. 
(21)  Except in case of emergency, the responsible party for the permitted establishment shall not permit its patrons to enter or exit the licensed premises through any entrance/exit other than the primary entrance/exit, excluding entrances/exits from enclosed patio areas. Steps shall be taken by the responsible party for the permitted establishment to discourage unauthorized exiting. 
(22)  The police department will require uniformed, state-licensed security guards and/or Santa Ana police officers, at the owner's expense, to perform crowd control inside and outside of the establishment, based upon the type of activities anticipated at the location or based upon prior history of activity at this establishment or other similar businesses. These security guards will be deployed as per the agreed upon, security policies and procedures manual that has been approved by the police department. At a minimum and at all times, entertainment is being offered, the applicant shall employ a minimum of one (1) uniformed, state licensed security guard for every one hundred (100) persons in attendance per event, for keeping the peace. Mandated security officers will be required to use a radio frequency and communication equipment that is specified by the police department. Radios and communication equipment will be provided by the establishment at the establishment's cost. Guards will be required to provide escort service to patrons of the establishment if requested, insofar as the guard is not off the premises for more than ten (10) minutes. Mandated security guards will be required to participate in mutual aid activities with the police department and other guard companies at the direction of the police department. This may include the adoption of mutual aid communications as well as attendance at information sharing meetings. It is the responsibility of the permittee to keep copies and associated records of all individuals acting as private security for the establishment, which illustrate their state-licensed certification. These copies/records shall be readily accessible and provided to Santa Ana police personnel twenty-four (24) hours a day upon request. 
(23)  An electronic incident log shall be maintained at the licensed premises on a continual basis with at least one (1) year of entries and be readily available for inspection by a police officer. The log is for recording any physical altercations, injuries, and objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance occurring in, on, or at the licensed premises, including the immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, or rented by the licensee. The log will indicate date, time, description of incident, and action taken. "Objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance" means disturbance of the peace, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, loitering, public urination, lewd conduct, drug trafficking, excessive loud noise, etc. 
(24)  Contract security services, proprietary security personnel, or personnel assuming the functions typically associated with security shall be familiar with the establishment's written police department approved security policies and procedures by reviewing them and signing that they have read and understood the policy. The signed acknowledgement shall be kept in a file relating to the security manual and shall be made available to the police department upon request. 
(25)  Security personnel required by the entertainment permit issued for the entertainment venue shall be in a uniform or clothing, which is readily identifiable as a security person. Security uniform standards will be included in the security policy and procedures manual and will not be the same colors as the police department's. They shall maintain order and enforce the establishment's no loitering policy, and shall take "reasonable steps" (as that term is defined in subparagraph (3) of Section 24200 of the California Business and Professions Code) to correct objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance. 
(26)  If there is an increase of twenty-five (25) per cent in the number of police-related incidents on or near the premises, the permittee shall increase the number of uniformed, state-licensed security guards to a total number of guards as determined by the chief of the police department. 
(27)  In addition to the above number of state-licensed uniformed security guards, the applicant shall provide a minimum of one (1) state-licensed uniformed security guard to ensure patron safety when going to and from the required parking for the venue whether on-site or off-site. Said guard is specifically assigned to this function until all activity on the premises has ceased and patrons have cleared the parking area. 
(28)  For any concert/live entertainment event where attendance exceeds 400 persons, it shall be the permittee's responsibility to pay for a minimum of two (2) uniformed Santa Ana police officers to work the event and ensure public safety. If the proposed event is deemed to have special circumstances by the police department, the chief of police or his authorized representative may increase the number of required police officers to ensure public safety. The officer costs shall be the Permittee's responsibility to include, at a minimum one-half (½) hour prior to, during, and one-half (½) hour after the time the event is scheduled to end or until all patrons have left the premises and parking areas. Law enforcement presence is required at a minimum of four (4) hours for each officer assigned to the venue. 
(29)  The permittee will be responsible for verifying the age of those wishing to purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages in order to ensure that the business is in compliance with state law restricting the age of the sales and consumption of alcohol to those twenty-one (21) years of age and older. This verification process may include such techniques as, the manual checking of identification by a trained employee, the use of an identification scanner or similar device, or other method as approved in the security plan. This condition is not intended to be used as a means to discriminate against patrons based on race, ethnicity or legal status. 
(30)  The owner/operator shall provide a closed circuit television system approved by the police department and capable of viewing and recording events on the property and inside the premises with a resolution that will clearly identify individuals for later identification. This system will be clearly identified within the agreed upon security policy and procedures manual. Camera system components shall include: 
(A)  A minimum of one (1) color camera at each police department specified location. 
(B)  A color camera recorder or digital system capable of recording events on all cameras simultaneously. 
(C)  Provide an IP-based system. 
(31)  The permittee shall submit a monthly activity schedule to the police department. The schedule must include a brief synopsis of the type of venue, hours of the venue, artist(s) names and expected attendance. The submission must be via e-mail and must be received thirty (30) days prior. Updates to the proposed schedule must be sent immediately. 
(32)  A ticket manifest for an event shall be provided, on demand, to an authorized police department representative, if requested. The ticket manifest must clearly outline the total number of tickets sold for said event. It is generally understood that the industry standard is to utilize an electronic ticketing system. Authorization by the police department to access this online electronic system is the preferred method. 
(33)  Queuing lines shall be managed in an orderly manner and all disruptive and intoxicated patrons shall be denied entry. The business owner or his designate shall be responsible for monitoring and managing the queuing lines at all times. Food or alcohol may not be served to patrons waiting to enter the establishment. 
(34)  The outdoor queuing line shall not block public walkways or obstruct the entry or exit doors of adjacent businesses and residences. Stanchions or barriers must be used to maintain order at all times the queue exceeds twenty-five (25) patrons. Placement of stanchions and barriers must receive public works agency approval. 
(35)  Controls shall be established to maintain occupancy levels allowed by the Orange County Fire Authority and these fire department approved levels will not be exceeded. Methods of controlling occupancy can include, but not limited to the following: Counters used to count the number of occupants entering and exiting the location, which are available for inspection by OCFA or the police department. 
(36)  The permitted establishment shall at all times comply with Santa Ana Municipal Code Sections 10-181 through 10-187 regarding curfews for minors. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 29, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-196.5. - Entertainment permit required. 
Any legal non-residential use wishing to offer entertainment as an ancillary use to its primary operation must apply for an entertainment permit pursuant to Chapter 11 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. At no time may entertainment be offered without such a permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2847, § 30, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-197. - Regulation at property not included in any use district. 
Property which is not included within any use district on the sectional district maps of the city shall be subject to the same use and development regulations as apply to property in the O (open space land) district. 
(Ord. No. NS-1898, § 1, 5-18-87)  
Sec. 41-198. - Wireless communication facilities—Purpose. 
The purpose of these regulations and guidelines is to regulate the establishment of all wireless communication facilities to protect the public safety, general welfare, and quality of life of Santa Ana citizens. The city council has found and determined that these regulations and guidelines for wireless communication facilities are necessary to attain these goals. These regulations are intended to amend applicable provisions of this section, pertaining to communications facilities, Chapter 41 of this Code, and any other applicable provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 5, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.1. - Same—Definitions. 
Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions pertain to sections 41-198 through 41-198.14: 
Antenna means a device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals. 
Antenna, panel means an antenna or array of antennae that are flat and rectangular and designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as directional antennae. 
Antenna, whip means an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty (360) degrees. They are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six (6) inches in diameter and measure up to eighteen (18) feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, stick, or pipe antennas. 
Building mounted means mounted to the side of a building or to another structure such as a water tank, billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, etc. 
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the State of California. 
Cell site means a geographical area that contains both transmitting and receiving antennae. 
Cellular means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains antennae. 
Certificate of public convenience and necessity means a certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
Co-location means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one (1) provider on a single building mounted, roof mounted, or ground mounted or wireless communication facility. 
Electromagnetic field means the local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor. 
Enhanced specialized mobile radio means a digital wireless communication technology that specializes in providing dispatching services. 
Ground mounted means mounted to a pole, monopole, lattice tower, or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting such antenna. 
Lattice tower means a structure with two (2) or more support legs that supports a variety of antennae. These towers generally range in height from sixty (60) to two hundred (200) feet and are constructed in areas where great height is needed, microwave antennas are required, or where the weather demands a more structurally sound design. 
Major wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that: 
(1)  Is ground mounted; or 
(2)  Is building or roof mounted and exceeds ten (10) feet in height. 
Microcell means a wireless communication facility that: 
(1)  Contains a maximum of four (4) whip and twelve (12) panel antennae. Each whip antenna does not exceed four (4) inches in diameter and four (4) feet in length. Each panel antenna does not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. 
(2)  Contains a maximum of one (1) microwave antennae no larger than ten (10) square feet in surface area. 
(3)  Has an array of antennae less than ten (10) feet in height as measured from the base. 
(4)  Is building or roof mounted. 
(5)  Has a total height, if building or roof mounted, that does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the applicable zoning district in which the facility is located. 
Minor wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that: 
(1)  Consists of a microcell; or 
(2)  Is building or roof mounted and is less than ten (10) feet in height and does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
(3)  Is fully screened from view if roof mounted. 
Monopole means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennae and related equipment. 
Mounted means attached or supported. 
Multi-purpose tower means a structure that integrates a monopole into a light pole or other utility pole. 
Personal communication services means a digital wireless communication technology that has the capacity for multiple communications services and will provide a system in which calls will be routed to individuals rather than places, regardless of location. 
Private wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that has not been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the CPUC. 
Public wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the CPUC. 
Radiofrequency radiation means electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three (3) kilohertz to three hundred (300) gigahertz. 
Roof mounted means mounted above the eave line of a building or on any portion of the roof area. 
Stealth facility means any communications facility which is disguised to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure. Also referred to as a concealed antenna. 
Wireless communication facility means any public or private structure that supports antennae, microwave dishes, and other related equipment that sends and/or receives radiofrequency signals. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 6, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.2. - Same—Applicability. 
(a)  All wireless communication facilities for which applications were approved and/or building permits issued by the planning and building agency on or prior to the adoption date of this section are subject to the provisions of the nonconforming buildings and uses section of Chapter 41 (sections 41-679 through 41-689). 
(b)  All wireless communication facilities for which building permits have expired, and have not been renewed on or prior to the adoption date of this section, shall be required to comply with the regulations and guidelines contained within this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 7, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.3. - Same—Permits required. 
(a)  Minor wireless facilities. A land use certificate is required for each installation. 
(b)  Major wireless facilities. A conditional use permit is required for each installation. 
(c)  Multiple wireless communication facilities. A multiple wireless communication facility program shall be adopted for multiple installations of minor wireless communication facilities on a single structure or building. The minor wireless communication facility program shall be reviewed or specified for minor wireless facilities. Each individual installation of a minor wireless facility pursuant to a minor wireless communication facility program requires approval of an installation permit pursuant to the procedures for a land use certificate. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for multiple installations of any wireless communication facility, except pursuant to an approved multiple wireless communication facility program in accordance with this article. 
(2)  A wireless communication facility program for existing multiple installations of minor wireless communication facilities that do not have an approved program shall be adopted prior to the issuance of any additional wireless communication permits for multiple installations. Said program shall follow the implied program or predominant pattern in use of the existing installations. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 8, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.4. - Same—Improvement requirements. 
Site improvements required for major wireless facilities include: 
(1)  Landscaping around the base of the facility, including vines, groundcover, and a twenty-four (24) inch box tree; 
(2)  Decorative fencing such as wrought iron or block around the wireless facility; 
(3)  A solid wall, with a minimum height of six (6) feet, between a wireless facility and all property lines which abut property zoned or used for residential purposes; 
The following improvements may be required, as determined by the planning manager, or his or her designee: 
(4)  One (1) parking space for the wireless facility use, if on-site parking is not available; 
(5)  Repairing, repaving and restriping of a parking lot which is in poor condition as identified by the planning division; 
(6)  The repainting of building(s) on a site; and 
(7)  The construction of a new trash enclosure. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 9, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.5. - Same—Development criteria. 
(a)  Screening criteria and guidelines. 
(1)  Major wireless communication facilities shall be a stealth facility as defined in section 41-198.1. 
(2)  All wireless communication facilities shall be located in areas that will minimize their aesthetic intrusion on the surrounding community. For building mounted facilities, all screening shall be compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture, and/or materials of the building. 
(b)  Site selection order of preference. 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities shall be located in the following order of preference: 
a.  On existing structures such as buildings, communication towers, church steeples, and freestanding signs. 
b.  In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
(2)  As part of the application process for major wireless communication facilities, the applicant shall be required to provide written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort in locating facilities in accordance with the site selection order of preference. 
(c)  Other criteria and guidelines. 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities shall not bear any signs of advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other required seals or signage. 
(2)  All accessory equipment associated with the operation of the wireless communication facility shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 10, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.6. - Same—Locational criteria for all wireless communication facilities. 
No wireless communication facility shall be established: 
(1)  Within any property zoned or used for residential purposes; or 
(2)  On property that contains any legally-established residential use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 11, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.7. - Same—Locational guidelines for all minor wireless communication facilities. 
Minor wireless communication facilities may be established on property within the city that is not zoned or used for residential uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 12, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.8. - Same—Locational guidelines for all major wireless communication facilities. 
Providers requesting permission to establish major wireless communication facilities in the city are strongly encouraged to find sites that are separated from residential areas to the greatest extent feasible. No major wireless communication facility should be established within one hundred forty (140) feet of: 
(1)  Any residential zone or land use district; and 
(2)  Any legally-established residential use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 13, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.9. - Same—Height criteria for all major wireless communication facilities. 
No major wireless communication facility shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height from ground level as measured from the nearest street curb. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 14, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.10. - Same—Requirement for conditional use permit. 
Each major wireless communication facility established in the city must first receive approval of a conditional use permit as established by section 41-198.3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 15, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.11. - Same—Requirement for design review. 
Development review approval shall be required prior to the establishment of any major wireless communication facility in accordance with section 41-668 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 16, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.12. - Same—Private wireless communication facilities. 
Private wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the provisions of sections 41-198 through 41-198.14. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 17, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.13. - Same—Conditional use permit expiration. 
Each wireless communication facility approved pursuant to this article shall be approved for a period not to exceed ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 18, 7-6-98; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 3, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-198.14. - Same—Abandonment. 
Lawfully erected wireless communication facilities that are abandoned shall be removed promptly from the premises, and no later than ninety (90) days after the discontinuation of use. A wireless communication facility is considered abandoned if it no longer provides wireless communication service. Such removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements. 
A written notice of the determination of abandonment shall be sent or delivered to the operator of the wireless communication facility. The operator shall have ninety (90) days to remove the facility or provide the planning division with evidence that the use has not been discontinued. The planning commission shall review all evidence and shall determine whether or not the facility is abandoned. All facilities not removed within the required ninety-day period shall be in violation of this Code and operators of the facility and the owners of the property shall be subject to penalties for violations under the enforcement and penalties provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 19, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.15. - Same—Violations; penalties. 
Violations of sections 41-198 through 41-198.14 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. Each day the violation continues is punishable as a separate offense pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 20, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.16. - Same—Severability. 
All of the provisions of sections 41-198 through 41-198.14 shall be construed together in order to accomplish the purpose of these regulations. If any provision of this part is held by a court to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall apply only to the particular facts, or if a provision is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional as applied to all facts, all of the remaining provisions of sections 41-198 through 41-198.14 shall continue to be fully effective. 
(Ord. No. NS-2356, § 21, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-198.100. - Exterior pay phone facilities. 
(a)  Exterior pay phone facilities are not permitted in the RE, R1, R1-4000, R2, R3, PD, PCD or SD use district which is planned or developed for residential use. 
(b)  In use districts other than those specified in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  A land use certificate is required, in accordance with sections 41-675 through 41-677, for each exterior pay phone installed. All pay phone facilities holding a valid business license as of January 1, 1998 will have three (3) years from the effective date of the ordinance [Ordinance NS-2374] to comply with the provisions herein. 
(2)  A land use certificate shall be issued in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section only if the following standards and conditions are met: 
a.  The pay phone may not be located such that the pay phone, or a user of the pay phone, is in: 
1.  A public right-of-way, 
2.  A required landscape setback area, 
3.  A driveway, or 
4.  An area used by vehicles for circulation. 
b.  The pay phone may not be located on any unimproved property. 
c.  A minimum walkway width of six (6) feet is required in front of the phone, when the phone is situated within the primary ingress to and egress from the property. The building official shall determine whether the ingress to and egress from the property is primary to the property. In all other situations, a minimum walkway width of four (4) feet is required in front of the phone. 
d.  The pay phone may not block doors or be located in front of windows. 
e.  Signage for the pay phones, if any, must comply with section 41-872. 
f.  Exterior conduit, piping or wiring must not be visible when standing directly in front of the phone and is limited to no more than six (6) inches for new installations or phones that are required to be moved, and to no more than three (3) feet for existing installations that comply with all other provisions of the Code. 
g.  No overhead utility drop is permitted for installation. 
h.  No more than two (2) payphones may be located within a one hundred (100) foot radius of each other. This restriction shall not apply to existing installations, installed prior to January 1, 2002, which comply with all other provisions of the Code. 
(3)  Any land use certificate for a pay phone facility issued after January 1, 2002, shall be valid for five (5) years from the date of issuance. All land use certificates for pay phone facilities issued prior to January 1, 2002, shall be valid for five (5) years commencing January 1, 2002. 
(4)  Upon determination by the hearing officer that an exterior pay phone constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to Article VI of Chapter 17 (sections 17-71 through 17-99, inclusive), the land use certificate for such exterior pay phone shall be revoked. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no land use certificate for a pay phone facility shall be issued that would violate section 17-74, or any condition imposed on an existing conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception pursuant to section 41-638. 
(Ord. No. NS-2374, § 4, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2489, § 4, 2-4-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2374, § 4, adopted Dec. 7, 1998, set out provisions intended for use as § 41-198.1. Inasmuch as § 41-198.1 had previously been added by Ord. No. NS-2356, the provisions of Ord. No. NS-2374 have been redesignated as § 41-198.100 at the direction of the city.  
Sec. 41-198.200. - Cyber cafes. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, cyber cafes may be conducted in any C1, C2, C4, and C5 zones, provided they are carried on in accordance with the limitations hereinafter set forth, and provided a ministerial land use certificate is first obtained in accordance with sections 41-675 through 41-677 of this Code. Cyber cafes shall not be permitted in a special districts or a specific plan unless explicitly set forth as a permissible use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2513, § 6, 9-3-02; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 5, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-198.300. - Outdoor vending machines. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, outdoor vending machines may be operated only in the C1, C2, C4, C5, CR, North Harbor Specific Plan (SP-1), and Bristol Street Specific Plan (SP-2) zones provided they are carried on in accordance with the limitations hereinafter set forth and provided a ministerial land use certificate is first obtained in accordance with sections 41-675 through 41-677 of this Code. Outdoor vending machines located in public parks or any other public property shall not be subject to this section. 
(b)  No outdoor vending machine may be installed, maintained, repaired, or operated in the city without first being issued a valid land use certificate. A land use certificate shall be issued by the planning manager only if the following standards and conditions are met: 
(1)  The outdoor vending machine may not be located such that the outdoor vending machine, or a user of the outdoor vending machine, is within: 
a.  A public right-of-way; 
b.  A required landscape area; 
c.  A driveway; 
d.  An area used by vehicles for circulation; or 
e.  Five (5) feet of any business entrance or exit. 
(2)  All outdoor vending machines must be ancillary to an approved primary use and may not be located on an unimproved lot. 
(3)  When an outdoor vending machine is situated within the primary ingress to and egress from the lot, a minimum walkway width of six (6) feet shall be required in front of the outdoor vending machine, when the outdoor vending machine. The building official shall determine whether the ingress to and egress from the lot is primary to the lot. In all other situations, a minimum walkway width of four (4) feet is required in front of the outdoor vending machine. 
(4)  All outdoor vending machines shall only be located on a building elevation that contains a primary entrance. 
(5)  All outdoor vending machines must be positioned against a building wall and not located in front of windows. This subsection shall not apply to outdoor water vending machines. 
(6)  Outdoor water vending machines may be located within the glass or wall storefront provided visibility to the cashier is not obstructed, with no greater than twenty-five (25) per cent of window area to be covered by signage and/or an outdoor water vending machine. 
(7)  An outdoor vending machine shall not block exit doors. 
(8)  Outdoor vending machine sign panels shall be limited to the products sold within the outdoor vending machine. No additional signs or advertising can be attached to or placed on top or side of any outdoor vending machine. 
(9)  Exterior conduit, piping or wiring must not be visible when standing directly in front of the outdoor vending machine. 
(10)  No visible security cages are permitted on the outside of an outdoor vending machine. 
(11)  Outdoor vending machines shall not exceed eighty (80) inches in height and thirty-six (36) inches in depth and forty-two inches (42) in width. 
(12)  Outdoor water vending machines shall not exceed thirty five (35) inches in height, one (1) inch in depth, as measured from the exterior glass or wall storefront, and twenty nine (29) inches in width. 
(13)  All outdoor vending machines shall be maintained in a clean and attractive condition. 
(14)  Any graffiti on an outdoor vending machine shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(15)  Number of outdoor vending machines. 
a.  No more than five (5) outdoor vending machines shall be permitted per development site or integrated development site; of which only one (1) may be an outdoor water vending machine. 
b.  The number of outdoor vending machines permittable on a development site shall be as follows: 
Square footage of 
development site 	Number of outdoor 
vending machines 
15,000 or less 	1 
15,001—30,000 	2 
30,001—45,000 	3 
45,001—60,000 	4 
60,001 or greater 	5 
 
c.  For integrated development sites with multiple underlying lots, at least one (1) outdoor vending machine, but not to exceed three (3) outdoor vending machines, may be allowed per lot. Multiple outdoor vending machines shall be subject to the following ratio: 
Square footage of a lot within an integrated development 	Number of outdoor 
vending machines 
15,000 or less 	1 
15,001—30,000 	2 
30,001 or greater 	3 
 
(16)  Upon removal or relocation of an outdoor vending machine, the building and site area where the outdoor vending machine was located shall be repaired to its original condition within thirty (30) days from the date of removal. 
(Ord. No. NS-2635, § 5, 8-4-03; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 12, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-199. - Laundromats. 
Laundromats may be permitted in the C1, C2, C4 and C5 districts subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. Laundromats are not permitted in any other use district. Laundromats shall comply with the following development and performance standards: 
(a)  Minors (under eighteen (18) years of age) shall not be permitted to enter or remain in a cyber cafe during the following periods unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian: 
(1)  Between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., or after 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday of each week; 
(2)  Saturday and Sunday after 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  The above weekday daytime hours of restriction shall not apply to vacation days or school holidays as established by any public school district or private school, kindergarten through twelfth grade, operating within the city. 
(4)  Notice of these hours of restriction for minors shall be posted at the entrance in lettering of at least two (2) inches in size. 
(b)  The cyber cafe shall not be open to customers, patrons or any member of the public between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  "No loitering" signs shall be posted at the front and rear of the business. In addition, a waiting area with not less than eight (8) seats shall be provided for customers waiting to use a computer. No outside waiting or seating area is permitted. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to consume alcohol on the premises. 
(e)  Employees shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. There shall be a minimum of one (1) employee managing the cyber cafe during all working hours. If the business has more than thirty (30) computers, the business is required to add one (1) additional employee for every additional thirty (30) computers, or portion thereof, and for every thirty (30) computers thereafter, or any portion thereof. During each employee's working hours, the employee shall wear a badge identifying the business and the employee's full name. 
(f)  Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the uniform building code and uniform fire code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
(g)  The establishment shall maintain and operate a camera/video surveillance system with recording capability during all business hours. The system shall cover the entire interior of the premises and all entrances to and exits from the establishment. The camera/video surveillance system shall be capable of delineating on playback of the system the activity and physical features of persons or areas within the premises. 
(1)  Tapes/disks shall be kept a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours. 
(2)  The business owner shall permit the city to inspect the tapes/disks during business hours. The system shall be maintained in good working order, including the running of the tape/disks. 
(3)  A sign shall be posted inside and at the entrance to the establishment indicating that the premises are under camera/video surveillance. 
(h)  The business owner shall submit and receive approval of a fire exit plan from the city's fire department. The plan shall address all existing requirements of the uniform building code and uniform fire code. This includes, but is not limited to, providing an exiting plan showing equipment location, aisle locations and dimensioned widths, and having approved exit doors and panic hardware. 
(i)  Any adult entertainment business is prohibited unless specifically approved pursuant to the requirements of chapter 41, article XVII of this Code. 
(j)  Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. All windows and entrances must be unobstructed at all times so as to allow an unimpaired line of sight by a police officer. 
(k)  The business operator, at his/her expense shall provide a California licensed uniform security guard on the premises Monday through Friday between 4:00 p.m. and closing, and Saturday through Sunday between 12:00 p.m. and closing. 
(1)  The chief of police is authorized to require a specific owner/operator to provide a security guard(s) on the premises at other hours of the day in the event that there are significant calls for service relating to assaults, gang related activity, weapons offenses, disturbances, and juvenile related crime, including truancy, or other good cause. 
(2)  Any decision of the chief of police may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be made within ten (10) calendar days following the date of the decision by the chief of police. Further, such appeal period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following such date of the written decision by the chief of police. If such tenth calendar day ends on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the ten-day period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the next regular business day. 
(3)  All appeals shall be in writing and on forms provided by the planning department and shall specify wherein there was any error of decision or requirement by the chief of police. Furthermore, a copy of such appeal shall be filed with the planning department and the clerk of the council. 
(4)  Upon receipt of such appeal, the planning department shall set the matter for hearing by the city council. 
(5)  The city council may, after public hearing, affirm, reverse, change, or modify the original decision and may make any additional determination it shall consider appropriate within the limitations imposed by this chapter. Such decision shall be filed with the clerk of the council, and the planning department; one (1) copy thereof shall be sent to the applicant. 
(l)  Lighting levels on the premises within sixty (60) feet of the use and in all required parking areas shall be maintained at a minimum one (1) footcandle of light. Interior lighting shall be at maintained at a minimum of thirty (30) footcandles of light. 
(m)  No exterior pay phones shall be permitted. 
(n)  No pool tables or other amusement devices not directly related to Internet computer devices shall be permitted. 
(o)  No gaming tournaments for cash prizes shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2135, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2245, § 1, 3-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 13, 5-1-06; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 6, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-199.1. - Banquet facilities. 
Banquet facilities may be permitted in the P, C1, C1-MD, C-SM, C2, C4, C5, CR zoning districts and in any specific plan or specific development zoning district wherever restaurants and eating establishments are permitted, as a primary and ancillary use, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. Banquet facilities may be permitted in the M1 and M2 zoning districts as an ancillary use to restaurants and eating establishments, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. Banquet facilities shall comply with the following development and operational standards: 
(a)  All banquet facilities require a kitchen facility, including but not limited to, an oven, stove, refrigeration, freezer, exhaust hood, grease receptor, cutting and preparation areas, dishwashing area or machine, employee sink and mop, and appropriate counter/service facilities. 
(b)  All banquet facilities require sanitation facilities in compliance with the California Building Code building standards. 
(c)  Whenever there is entertainment with or without alcohol, the banquet facility shall provide a uniformed state licensed security guard, as approved by the chief of police, at the rate of one (1) guard/one hundred (100) attendees, with a minimum of one (1) security guard, or other security measures as approved by the chief of police. The guards shall be present until all attendees have left the premises. 
(d)  All banquet facilities shall provide exterior lighting in compliance with police department requirements. 
As used herein, a banquet facility is a facility available for rental and used for the purpose of meetings, parties, ceremonious gatherings, dining or entertainment. For the purposes of this definition, the term rental shall mean to obtain the possession and use of a facility, or a portion of a facility, on a short term, hourly or daily basis where occupancy is closed to the general public in exchange for monetary or other form of compensation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2445, § 13, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 7, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-199.2. - Adult day care facilities. 
Adult day care facilities providing care to more than six (6) adults may be permitted in the R1, R2 and R3 zoning districts as an ancillary use to churches and schools, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Adult day care facilities may be permitted in the P, C1, C2, C4, and C5 zoning districts, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
Adult day care facilities may be permitted in any specific plan or specific development zoning district as an ancillary use to churches and schools, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
As used herein, an adult day care facility is a facility that provides nonmedical care to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis, as currently defined by California Health and Safety code section 1502(a)(2), as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. NS-2446, § 7, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-199.3. - Tattoo and/or body art establishments. 
All tattoo/body modification establishments shall be subject to the following, in addition to all other requirements of the law: 
a.  No tattoo and/or body art establishment in the C-1, C-2, and C-4 zoning districts shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a public or private school (K-12) or public park as measures from the outermost boundary of the property to the entrance of the facility. This restriction is based at the time of issuance of a business license and such future school or public park that may be located within this 500-foot zone will not cause the relocation of that tattoo and/or body art establishment. 
b.  No tattoo and/or body art establishment in the C-1, C-2, and C-4 zoning districts shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of another tattoo and/or body art establishment. 
c.  No tattoo and/or body art establishment shall operate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
d.  Live animals, except service animals, shall not be allowed on the premises. 
e.  Temporary establishments or events are not authorized by this section, unless a land use certificate is approved by the planning manager. 
f.  The facility shall be designed to screen tattooing and/or body modifications or similar services performed on a patron from persons outside the facility. 
g.  Signage, advertising, or images depicting specific anatomical parts shall not be placed in the windows or be visible to persons outside the facility. 
h.  A sign shall be posted on or by each entrance stating that no person under eighteen (18) years old shall be allowed without parent or legal guardian. 
i.  The applicant/operator of the tattoo and/or body art facility shall also comply with all applicable state, county and local laws as they may be amended from time to time, including Health and Safety Code Sections 119300 et seq. (California Safe Body Art Act), Penal Code Section 653 and 655 and chapter 18 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. NS-2931, § 6, 11-21-17 )  
ARTICLE III. - USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS SPECIFICALLY  
DIVISION 1. - A1 (GENERAL AGRICULTURAL) 
 
Sec. 41-200. - Applicability of division. 
A1 (general agricultural) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-201. - Uses permitted in the A1 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the A1 district: 
(a)  Farming, including all types of crop agriculture and horticulture, grazing, small animal farms, and similar types of farming, except: 
(1)  Hog and commercial livestock feeding ranches; and 
(2)  Farms operated publicly or privately for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish or offal. 
(b)  Parks, playgrounds and recreation buildings of a public or quasi-public character, golf courses, country clubs and other similar uses. 
(c)  Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
(d)  Temporary stands for the sale of agricultural or farming products grown or produced on the premises shall be permitted as accessory uses upon the following conditions: 
(1)  When placed for a period of more than ninety (90) days, plans shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission; 
(2)  The floor area of such stand shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet; 
(3)  The owner shall remove such stand at his own expense when not in use; 
(4)  The stand shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from any public right-of-way. 
(e)  One (1) one-family dwelling, detached guest home and employees' quarters, all of a permanent character; a density of one dwelling unit for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area shall be permitted provided the lot has an area of one-half (½) acre or less. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-635, § 2, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-988, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 9, 10-7 -74; Ord. No. NS-1297, § 1, 2-17-76; Ord. No. NS-1352, § 1, 4-4-77; Ord. No. NS-1654, § 7,11-1-82; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 5, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-201.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the Al district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the A1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Public utility buildings and structures, including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
(b)  Cemeteries, mausoleums and crematories. 
(c)  Mining, quarrying and other earth extraction industries. 
(d)  Commercial or public airports and landing fields. 
(e)  Private airplane landing fields. 
(f)  Commercial dairies having herds of more than five (5) head. 
(g)  Commercial stables and riding academies. 
(h)  Feed mills. 
(i)  Packing plants for whole agricultural products. 
(j)  Commercial egg production, candling and sales; commercial production of poultry, pigeons and other fowl. Commercial production of these products if produced, raised or fattened on the premises, provided that any poultry, pigeon or rabbit enclosure, slaughtering building or place, shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any existing dwelling or milk handling facility of a dairy; 
(k)  Apiaries, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  No occupied hives to be closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to any street or highway right-of-way; 
(2)  No occupied hives to be closer than four hundred (400) feet to any existing dwelling on the premises or the premises of another apiary; 
(3)  No occupied hives to be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property lines common to other property lines other than property lines of another apiary. 
(l)  Churches, public institutions, public and parochial schools and colleges and hospitals. 
(m)  Trailer park or camp. 
(n)  Kennels. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 6, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-202. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 1, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-203. - Front yard. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-204. - Side yard. 
There shall be a side yard of not less than six (6) feet. On a corner lot the side yard on the street shall be not less than ten (10) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-205. - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-206. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.6; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-207—41-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RE (RESIDENTIAL-ESTATE) 
 
Sec. 41-216. - Applicability of division. 
RE (residential-estate) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.20; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-217. - Uses permitted in the RE district. 
The following uses are permitted in the RE district: 
(a)  One (1) one-family dwelling. 
(b)  Private greenhouses and horticulture collections for domestic, noncommercial use, flower and vegetable gardens, fruit trees or any agricultural crops. 
(c)  Accessory buildings. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.21; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-635, § 3, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-1297, § 2, 2-17-76; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 7, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-217.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the RE district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the RE district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Churches and accessory church buildings. 
(b)  Public grade schools, colleges and universities which may include: Dormitories, libraries, museums, university union buildings and art galleries when owned and operated by governmental agencies or the university. 
(c)  Private schools and colleges except said private schools and colleges shall not include trade schools operated by governmental agencies or the university. 
(d)  Parks and playgrounds not operated for commercial purposes. 
(e)  Public utility buildings and structures including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
(f)  Golf courses specifically excluding miniature and pitch and putt golf courses and driving ranges. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 8, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-218. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.22; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 2, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-219. - Front yard. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.23; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-220. - Side yard. 
Each side yard shall be ten (10) per cent of the average lot width, provided, however, that the maximum side yard required under this provision need not exceed twenty (20) feet. On corner lots the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.24; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-221. - Rear yard. 
There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.25; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-222. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.26; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-223—41-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - R1 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE) 
 
Sec. 41-231. - Applicability of division. 
R1 (single-family residence) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division, except that nonresidential uses allowed pursuant to section 41-232.5 are subject to the design and development standards set forth in Division 12 of this article for the C1 (Community Commercial) district. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.40; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 4, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-232. - Uses permitted in the R1 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the R1 district: 
(a)  One (1) one-family dwelling with six (6) or fewer bedrooms. 
(b)  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections for domestic noncommercial use, flower and vegetable gardens, fruit trees and any agricultural crop. 
(c)  One (1) temporary real estate office devoted to the sale of real estate in the tract in which it is located, which use shall be for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and structures, except as otherwise provided in section 41-232.5. 
(e)  Child care facilities providing care to not more than fourteen (14) children, provided that if the number of children exceeds eight (8), a land use certificate must be first obtained pursuant to division 4 of article V of this chapter. 
(f)  Adult day care facilities providing care to not more than six (6) adults. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.41; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-635, § 4, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-988, § 2, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1110, § 1, 3-20-72; Ord. No. NS-1230, § 1, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1297, § 3, 2-17-76; Ord. No. NS-1719, § 1, 3-19-84; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 9, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 5, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 8, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 14, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-232.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the R1 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Churches and accessory church buildings. 
(b)  Public schools, colleges and universities which may include on the campus: Dormitories, libraries, museums, university union buildings and art galleries, which are owned and operated by the university. 
(c)  Private schools and colleges except said private schools and colleges shall not include trade schools or business colleges. 
(d)  Public buildings and public utility buildings and structures, including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
(e)  Golf courses, excluding miniature golf courses, pitch and putt courses and driving ranges. 
(f)  Child care facilities caring for more than fourteen (14) children. 
(g)  Neighborhood and community service centers. 
(h)  Garages for more than four (4) vehicles. 
(i)  Accessory buildings more than fifteen (15) feet in height or more than one (1) story. 
(j)  Adult day care facilities ancillary to a church or school providing care to more than six (6) adults. 
(k)  One (1) one-family dwelling with seven (7) or more bedrooms. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 10, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 6, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 9, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 15, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-233. - Building height in the R1 district. 
No primary structure shall exceed twenty-seven (27) feet nor two (2) stories in height, as measured from the lowest adjacent grade of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(Code 1952, § 9280.42; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-533, § 3, 12-4-61; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 7, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-234. - Front yard. 
The front yard shall be equal to the prevailing front yard setback of the block as described in subsection 41-603(b), but not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.43; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 16, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-235. - Side yards in the R1 district. 
(a)  Each side yard shall be not less than five (5) feet for each building. 
(b)  On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet for each building. 
(c)  The restrictions on nonconforming buildings set forth in article VI of this chapter shall not apply to buildings which are nonconforming solely for the reason that they do not have side yards satisfying the setback requirement set forth in subsection (a) and provided the side yards of such building are at least three (3) feet wide. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.44; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 8, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 17, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-236. - Rear yards in the R1 district. 
There shall be a rear yard setback of not less than twenty (20) feet. This section shall not apply to permitted accessory dwelling units. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.45; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 9, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 18, 5-1-06; Ord. No. NS-2940, § 6, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-237. - Minimum lot size and street frontage in the R1 district. 
(a)  The minimum size of lots in the R1 district is six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum street frontage of lots in the R1 district, measured from the back of the front yard setback, is fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Lots which have resulted from a legal subdivision but which do not meet the standards set in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be developed with single-family dwellings, provided they have at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of area and at least forty (40) feet of street frontage. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.46; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 10, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-238. - Lot coverage in the R1 district. 
No more than thirty-five (35) per cent of a lot in the R1 district shall be covered by structures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 11, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 19, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-239. - Development standards in the R1 district. 
Lots in the R1 district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Front and street oriented side yards shall be landscaped with the exception of approved driveways and sidewalks. 
(b)  Side yards shall be completely landscaped, except a walkway or driveway may encroach into required side yard. 
(c)  Driveways shall lead to a garage and not exceed the width of such garage or fifty (50) per cent of the lot width at the street, whichever is less. There shall be no parking of vehicles in the front yard except in such driveways. 
(d)  Garages facing the street shall occupy no more than fifty (50) per cent of the lot width. 
(e)  Porte-cocheres shall be architecturally integrated with the structure and may encroach up to the side property line located on a driveway that leads to the garage. A two-car garage must be provided prior to approval of a porte-cochere. 
(1)  A porte-cochere shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length. 
(2)  Porte-cocheres shall comply with the setbacks established for the building it is attached to, except that the side yard setback may be reduced to three (3) feet. On corner lots the side yard setback on the street side shall be no less than ten (10) feet. 
(f)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) per cent of the required rear yard area. 
(g)  An accessory building shall be not less than five (5) feet from a main building. 
(h)  Maximum square footage of accessory building shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the main structure square footage. Required detached garages may exceed fifty (50) per cent of the main structure square footage, but shall not exceed four hundred forty (440) square feet for a two-car garage, six hundred forty (640) square feet for a required three-car garage and eight hundred forty (840) square feet for a required four-car garage. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 12, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 20, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-240. - Landscaping standards in the R1 district. 
In the R1 district, all yards shall be landscaped. Each residential unit shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Front yard: 
(1)  One 24-inch box canopy tree. 
(2)  All trees shall be double-staked. 
(3)  Six (6) five-gallon size shrubs and ten (10) one-gallon size herbaceous perennials/shrubs as a foundation planting. 
(4)  Turf or acceptable dry climate ground cover: 
a.  Turf shall be drought tolerant variety and planted as sod or hydroseed. 
b.  Ground cover shall be well-rooted cuttings from flats and planted at appropriate spacing for that particular plant material. 
(b)  Side yard: Corner lots shall require one (1) 15-gallon size tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of property abutting a street, plus six (6) five-gallon size shrubs as a foundation planting. Root barriers shall be required on all trees planted along the street oriented yards. 
(c)  Project perimeter walls: 
(1)  Flowering vines shall be secured to a decorative masonry wall or wood fence material. 
(2)  The vines shall be five-gallon size and be planted at 20-foot intervals. They shall be secured to the walls with eye hooks and wire. 
(3)  Espaliered shrubs, fruit trees, or other ornamental trees may be substituted for the flowering vines. 
(d)  Irrigation system: 
(1)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. A pop-up sprinkler type irrigation system shall be provided for all yards for each residential unit. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. 
(2)  The use of "xeriphytic" or dry climate type plant materials is encouraged. Irrigation systems may require special fittings to properly water dry climate plantings. 
(3)  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with a controller capable of dual or multiple station programming. 
(e)  Screening: 
(1)  All meters shall be appropriately screened from public view with trellis work and vines or a hedge type shrub or they shall be incorporated into the residential structure. 
(2)  Any enclosed structure for utilities must not encroach into any required setback. 
(f)  Maintenance: All plant material shall be maintained per section 41-609 of this chapter. 
(g)  [Compliance with article XVI:] Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 13, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 3, 12-23-09)  
DIVISION 3.5. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2458, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 2000 repealed in their entirety the provisions of Division 3.5 of Article III of this chapter which encompassed §§ 41-241—41-245.14, pertained to the R1-400 (Small Lot Single-Family Residence) zoning district and derived from Ord. No. NS-2111, § 14, adopted April 1, 1991. 
 
Secs. 41-241—41-245.14. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - R2 (TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE) 
 
Sec. 41-246. - Applicability of regulations. 
R-2 (two-family residence) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division, except that one-family dwellings are subject to the design and development standards set forth in division 3 of this article, townhouses are subject to the design and development standards set forth in division 6 of this article, and uses allowed under section 41-247.5 are subject to the design and development standards set forth in this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.60; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 15, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 4, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-247. - Uses permitted to the R-2 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district: 
(a)  One-family dwellings. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Townhouses. 
(d)  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections for domestic noncommercial use, flower and vegetable gardens, fruit trees and any agricultural crop. 
(e)  One (1) temporary real estate office devoted to the sale of real estate in the tract in which it is located, which shall be used for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year. 
(f)  Accessory structures. 
(g)  Child care facilities providing care to not more than fourteen (14) children, provided that if the number of children exceeds eight (8), a land use certificate must be first obtained pursuant to Division 4 of Article V of this chapter. 
(h)  Adult day care facilities providing care to not more than six (6) adults. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.61; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-988, § 3, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1230, § 2, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1658, § 1, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 11, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1866, § 2, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-1935, § 2, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 16, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 10, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-247.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the R2 district. 
(a)  Any use which may be permitted in the R1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 41-232.5 may likewise be permitted in the R2 district subject to a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Care homes, as defined by section 41-41.5 of this Code, which previously were permitted pursuant to a validly issued conditional use permit and subsequently lost the permitted use pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 12, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1866, § 3, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-1935, § 3, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2409, § 2, 11-15-99)  
Sec. 41-247.6. - Minimum lot area in the R2 district. 
(a)  Lots containing only one (1) dwelling unit shall have an area of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(b)  Lots containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have an area of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet plus an additional three thousand (3,000) square feet for each dwelling unit on the lot in excess of one (1). 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 17, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-247.7. - Minimum street frontage in the R2 district. 
(a)  Lots containing only one (1) dwelling unit shall have street frontage of at least fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Lots containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have street frontage of at least seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 18, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-248. - Building height in the R2 district. 
No primary structure shall exceed twenty-seven (27) feet nor two (2) stories in height, as measured from the lowest adjacent grade of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.62; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 4, 12-4-61; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 19, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-248.5. - Lot coverage in the R2 district. 
No more than fifty (50) per cent of the lot shall be covered by structures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 20, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-249. - Front yards in the R2 district. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet from the street. If there are two (2) single-family detached units on a site, the front yard of the rear unit adjacent to the rear yard of the front unit shall be not less than ten (10). 
(Code 1952, § 9230.63; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 21, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-250. - Side yards in the R2 district. 
Each side yard shall be not less than five (5) feet for each building. On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet for each building. The restrictions on nonconforming buildings set forth in Article VI of this chapter shall not apply to buildings which are nonconforming solely for the reason that they do not have side yards meeting the standard set by this section, provided the side yards of such building are at least three (3) feet wide. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.64; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1935, § 4, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 22, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-251. - Rear yards in the R2 district. 
There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet for each dwelling unit. Such rear yard may be reduced to not less than ten (10) feet in width, provided that it has at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of open space area, exclusive of side yard areas. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.65; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-66; Ord. No. NS-1935, § 5, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 23, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-252. - Attachment of dwelling units in the R2 district. 
No more than two (2) dwelling units (other than townhouses) shall be attached together. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.66; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1658, § 2, 11-15-82; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 1, 1-17-85; Ord. No. NS-1866, § 4, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-1935, § 6, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 24, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-253. - Development standards in the R2 district. 
Lots in the R2 district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Front and street oriented side yards shall be landscaped with the exception of approved driveways and sidewalks. 
(b)  Side yards shall be completely landscaped. Any walkway, driveway, or hardscape shall be in addition to the required side yard. 
(c)  Driveways shall lead to a garage and not exceed the width of such garage or fifty (50) per cent of the lot width at the street, whichever is less. There shall be no parking of vehicles in the front yard except in such driveways. 
(d)  Garages facing the street shall occupy no more than fifty (50) per cent of the lot width. 
(e)  Porte cocheres shall be architecturally compatible with the structure and may encroach up to the side property line. A two-car garage must be provided prior to approval of a porte cochere. 
(f)  Accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) per cent of the required rear yard area. 
(g)  The primary entrance of at least one (1) dwelling unit must face the street to which the unit is oriented. When a unit is oriented to face a driveway, the primary entrance shall face that driveway. 
(h)  Maximum square footage of accessory structures shall not exceed sixty-six (66) per cent of the main structure square footage. 
(i)  Existing detached accessory structures, on exterior corner lots only, may be connected to the main structure, provided a minimum five-foot setback is maintained from any property line and a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of open area is maintained in the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. NS-1866, § 5, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 25, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-254. - Building separation in the R2 district. 
(a)  The building separation between primary structures shall be at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  The building separation between primary and accessory structures shall be at least five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-1866, § 6, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 26, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-255. - Open space standard for the R2 district. 
Private open space shall be provided for each unit at a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet in the form of a private patio or deck. The minimum dimensions of such space shall be eight (8) feet in each direction. 
(Ord. No. NS-1935, § 7, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 27, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-256. - Landscape standards for the R-2 district. 
In the R2 district, all yards shall be landscaped. Each residential unit shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Front yard: 
(1)  One (1) 24-inch box canopy tree. 
(2)  All trees shall be double-staked. 
(3)  One (1) tree species for up to five (5) dwelling units and an additional tree species for each increment of five (5) units. 
(4)  Six (6) five-gallon size shrubs and ten (10) one-gallon size herbaceous perennials/shrubs as a foundation planting. 
(5)  Turf or acceptable dry climate ground cover: 
a.  Turf shall be drought tolerant variety and planted as sod or hydroseed. 
b.  Ground cover shall be well-rooted cuttings from flats and planted at appropriate spacing for that particular plant material. 
(b)  Side yard: Corner lots shall require one (1) 15-gallon size tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of property abutting a street plus six (6) five-gallon size shrubs as a foundation planting. Root barriers shall be required on all trees planted along the street oriented yards. 
(c)  Rear yard: A buffer shall be provided for privacy from adjoining property. A hedge or vines on a fence are satisfactory screens. 
(d)  Project perimeter walls: 
(1)  Flowering vines shall be secured to a decorative masonry wall or wood fence material. 
(2)  The vines shall be five-gallon size and be planted at 20-foot intervals. They shall be secured to the walls with eye hooks and wire. 
(3)  Espaliered shrubs, fruit trees, or other ornamental trees may be substituted for the flowering vines. 
(e)  Irrigation system: 
(1)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. A pop-up sprinkler type irrigation system shall be provided for all yards for each residential unit. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. 
(2)  The use of "xeriphytic" or dry climate type plant materials is encouraged. Irrigation systems may require special fittings to properly water dry climate plantings. 
(3)  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with a controller capable of dual or multiple station programming. 
(f)  Screening: 
(1)  All meters shall be appropriately screened from public view with trellis work and vines or a hedge type shrub or they shall be incorporated into the residential structure. 
(2)  Any enclosed structure for utilities must not encroach into any required setback. 
(g)  Maintenance: All plant material shall be maintained per section 41-609 of this chapter. 
(h)  [Compliance with article XVI:] Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1935, § 8, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 28, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 4, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-257. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - R3 (MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. NS-1845, adopted June 2, 1986, provided in part for the repeal of §§ 41-258, 41-260—41-265, 41-265.5, 41-266 and 41-267 of this division which pertained to various district regulations for the R3 (Medium-Density Multiple-Family Residence) district. Section 6 of said Ord. No. NS-1845 amended the title of this Div. 5 to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions of this division enumerated above derived from Code 1952, §§ 9230.81, 9230.83—9230.90; Ord. No. NS-959, § 2, adopted March 17, 1969; Ord. No. NS-1726, §§ 1—8, enacted June 25, 1984; and Ord. No. NS-1739, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 15, 1984. 
 
Sec. 41-258. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to regulate the development of land for multiple-family residential purposes in the city. It is the intent of this division to set forth standards for the development of superior quality multiple-family housing development in a setting which is sensitive to the impacts on adjacent properties. It is further the intent of this division to create housing development which will be of such utility and function that it will remain liveable and usable for an extended period of years. It is also the intent of this division to provide functional and nonmonotonous orientation of buildings with a maximum of usable open space around each. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 29, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-258.5. - Scope. 
This division applies to developments which are used solely for residential purposes and uses incidental thereto and which include one (1) or more multifamily dwellings. It does not apply to buildings which are used partly for dwelling units and partly for commercial or office uses (other than sales or management activities pertaining to dwelling units on the same site). It does apply to single-family and two-family dwellings which are part of a development which includes multiple-family dwellings. One-family dwellings that are not part of a development which includes multiple-family dwellings shall be subject to the design and development standards set forth in Division 3 of this article. Two-family dwellings that are not part of a development which includes multiple-family dwellings shall be subject to the design and development standards set forth in Division 4 of this article. Townhouses are subject to the standards set forth in Division 6 of this article instead of those set forth in this division. Nonresidential uses shall be subject to the design and development standards set forth in Division 12 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 30, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-259. - Uses permitted in the R3 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the R3 district: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the R2 district pursuant to section 41-247. 
(b)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.82; Ord. No. NS-959, § 2, 3-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1110, § 1, 3-20-72; Ord. No. NS-1230, § 3, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 5, 6-16-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 13, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 11, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-259.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the R3 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R3 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Any use which may be permitted in the R2 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 41-247.5. 
(b)  Lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses, and sorority houses. 
(c)  Sanitariums and hospitals. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 14, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-260. - Classification of multiple-family dwelling developments. 
For purposes of this division, multiple-family dwelling developments are classified as follows: 
Class I —Developments having a density of twenty-two (22) or less dwelling units per acre. 
Class II —Developments having a density of more than twenty-two (22) dwelling units per acre but not more than thirty-five (35) dwelling units per acre. 
Class III —Developments having a density of more than thirty-five (35) dwellings units per acre but not more than sixty (60) dwelling units per acre. 
Class IV —Developments having a density of more than sixty (60) dwelling units per acre. 
The density of a multiple-family dwelling development is determined by multiplying the number of dwelling units in the development by a fraction, the numerator of which is forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet and the denominator of which is the number of square feet in the development site. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 31, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-261. - Density. 
The density of a multiple-family dwelling development, as determined pursuant to section 41-260, shall not exceed the density limit, if any, prescribed by the general plan of the city for the area of the city in which the development is located. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 32, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-262. - Site size limitation. 
(a)  The number of dwelling units in a multiple-family dwelling development having less than standard site size, as hereinafter defined, shall not exceed its site size limitation, as hereinafter defined. The definitions hereinafter set forth are for purposes of this section only. 
(b)  Standard site size means: 
(1)  For class I developments: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(2)  For class II developments: Twenty-one thousand seven hundred (21,700) square feet. 
(3)  For class III developments: Forty-three thousand five hundred (43,500) square feet. 
(4)  For class IV developments: Sixty-five thousand three hundred (65,300) square feet. 
(c)  Conformance quotient means the number obtained by dividing the actual size of the development site, expressed in square feet, by its standard site size. 
(d)  Base density means: 
(1)  For class I developments: Fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  For class II developments: Twenty-two (22) dwelling units per acre. 
(3)  For class III developments: Thirty-five (35) dwelling units per acre. 
(4)  For class IV developments: Sixty (60) dwelling units per acre. 
(e)  Potential additional density means: 
(1)  For class I developments: Seven (7) dwelling units per acre. 
(2)  For class II developments: Thirteen (13) dwelling units per acre. 
(3)  For class III developments: Twenty-five (25) dwelling units per acre. 
(4)  For class IV developments: Thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. 
(f)  Actual additional density means the number of dwelling units per acre obtained by multiplying a development's potential additional density by its conformance quotient. 
(g)  Allowable site size density means the number obtained by adding a development's actual additional density to its base density. 
(h)  Site size limitation means the number of dwelling units obtained by multiplying a development's allowable site size density by a fraction, the numerator of which is the actual size of the development site, expressed in square feet, and the numerator of which is forty-five thousand five hundred sixty (45,560) square feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 33, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-263. - Density bonuses. 
The limitations of sections 41-261 and 41-262 may be exceeded as appropriate to allow a density bonus authorized or required by state law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 34, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-264. - Minimum street frontage. 
The primary street frontage of any multiple-family dwelling development shall have an extension equal to or greater than the following: 
(1)  Class I developments: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(2)  Class II developments: One hundred thirty-five (135) feet. 
(3)  Class III developments: One hundred thirty-five (135) feet. 
(4)  Class IV developments: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 35, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-265. - Building setbacks generally. 
(a)  As used in sections 41-266 and 41-267, the term "absolute minimum setback" means the minimum required distance between any part of a building and any part of the nearest property line thereto. No part of any multiple-family dwelling shall encroach into any absolute minimum setback. 
(b)  As used in sections 41-266 and 41-267, the term "minimum average setback" means the minimum required average distance between a face of a building and the property line nearest thereto. Private decks and balconies may encroach into a minimum average setback. 
(c)  The front yard building setback requirements in sections 41-266 and 41-267 apply to all buildings within a multiple-family dwelling development, including accessory buildings such as garages, carports and recreational buildings. The rear and side yard building setback requirements in such sections apply only to buildings in which dwelling units are located; provided, however, that if an accessory building is located within a rear or side yard building setback area, the distance between such accessory building and the nearest dwelling unit building shall equal or exceed that building setback requirement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 36, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-266. - Building setback requirements for class I developments. 
(a)  The front yard building setback requirements for class I developments are as follows: 
(1)  The absolute minimum setback is twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  If a building is more than ten (10) feet high but not more than twenty (20) feet high, its minimum average setback is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  If a building is more than twenty (20) feet high but not more than thirty (30) feet high, its minimum average setback is twenty-five (25) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the building's height exceeds twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  If a building is thirty (30) feet high or higher, its minimum average setback is thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  The side yard building setback requirements for class I developments are as follows: 
(1)  The absolute minimum setback is six (6) feet, except that, for any side yard facing on a street, the absolute minimum setback for the ground level story shall be ten (10) feet or the average depth of the front yards of residential buildings on such street in the vicinity of the development, whichever is greater. 
(2)  If a building is more than ten (10) feet high but not more than twenty (20) feet high, its minimum average setback is eight (8) feet. 
(3)  If a building is more than twenty (20) feet high but not more than twenty-eight (28) feet high, its minimum average setback is eight (8) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the buildings height exceeds twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  If a building is twenty-eight (28) feet high or higher, its minimum average setback is twelve (12) feet. 
(c)  The rear yard absolute minimum setback is fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 37, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-267. - Building setback requirements for class II developments. 
(a)  The front yard building setback requirements for class II developments are as follows: 
(1)  The absolute minimum setback is fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  If a building is more than ten (10) feet high but not more than twenty (20) feet high, its minimum average setback is twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  If a building is more than twenty (20) feet high but not more than forty (40) feet high, its minimum average setback is twenty (20) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the building's height exceeds twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  If a building is forty (40) feet high or higher, its minimum average setback is thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  The rear and side yard setback requirements for class II developments are the same as those specified in section 41-266 for class I developments. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 38, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-268. - Building setback requirements for class III and class IV developments. 
(a)  The absolute minimum setbacks for buildings in class III or class IV developments and the minimum average setbacks for all such buildings which are not more than forty-five (45) feet high are the same as those specified in section 41-267 for class II developments. 
(b)  The front yard minimum average setback for a building more than forty-five (45) feet high in a class III or class IV development is as follows: 
(1)  If the building is less than sixty (60) feet high, the minimum average setback is thirty (30) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the building's height exceeds fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  If the building is sixty (60) feet high or higher, the minimum average setback is thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  The side yard minimum average setback for a building more than forty-five (45) feet high in a class III or class IV development is as follows: 
(1)  If the building is less than fifty (50) feet high, the minimum average setback is twenty-two and one-half (22½) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the building's height exceeds forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  If the building is fifty (50) feet high or higher, the minimum average setback is twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  The rear yard minimum average setback for a building more than forty-five (45) feet high in a class III or class IV development is as follows: 
(1)  If the building is less than fifty (50) feet high, the minimum average setback is twenty-seven and one-half (27½) feet plus six (6) inches for each foot by which the building's height exceeds forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  If the building is fifty (50) feet high or higher, the minimum average setback is thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 39, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-269. - Building height. 
(a)  Buildings in class I, class II or class III developments shall not exceed the following height limitations. 
(1)  In class I developments: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  In class II developments: Forty-five (45) feet. 
(3)  In class III developments: Sixty (60) feet. 
(b)  There is no height limitation on buildings in a class IV development. 
(c)  Mechanical and other appurtenances to buildings may extend above the height limitations imposed by this section, subject to screening standards and height and size limitations adopted pursuant to section 41-272.06. 
(d)  The filing with the city of development plans for any development including one (1) or more buildings more than three (3) stories high shall be accompanied by the filing of a shade and shadow analysis and diagram showing such building's impact on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 40, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-270. - Open spaces. 
(a)  Usable open space shall be provided at the rate of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of area for each residential unit. Such usable space shall be divided between (1) passive common open space and (2) active open space and (3) private open space, as follows: 
(1)  Passive common open space: 
a.  Passive common open space shall be provided at the rate of at least one hundred (100) square feet per residential unit, and there shall be at least one (1) area of passive common open space in each project that is at least seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in size and has minimum dimensions of twenty (20) feet in each direction. 
b.  Passive common open space shall be undisturbed soil at natural grade and shall be a minimum of forty (40) per cent of the total open space required within the project. 
c.  Passive common open space shall consist of ground level open space which s primarily sod-covered or landscaped and which may provide such amenities as barbecue grills and picnic furniture. 
(2)  Active open space: 
a.  There shall be at least one (1) area of active open space that is at least five hundred (500) square feet in size and has a minimum dimension of at least twenty (20) feet in each direction. 
b.  Active open space shall be a minimum of forty (40) per cent of the total open space required within the project. 
c.  Active open space shall consist of such amenities as swimming pools, jacuzzis and tennis courts. These facilities may only be used to satisfy the active open space requirement. 
d.  An enclosed room for recreational purposes may be provided to satisfy the active open space requirements, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A maximum of twenty (20) per cent of the total open space required within the project may be counted for recreational building space. 
2.  Recreational building space shall consist of such amenities as recreation rooms, exercise facilities and saunas. Recreational building space may be constructed within a structure or at some point other than ground level. 
3.  Recreational building space must be maintained in perpetuity within the project and shall not be converted to alternative uses other than a different recreational use. 
(3)  Private open space: 
a.  Private open space provided within an individual unit shall be no less than ninety (90) square feet and shall have a minimum dimension of six (6) feet in each direction. 
b.  Only interior courtyards and interior balconies may be counted in satisfying this open space requirement. 
c.  Exterior balconies that face a public street, alley or arterial street shall not be considered in satisfying this open space requirement. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section are in addition to the building setback requirements of sections 41-265 through 41-268. That portion of the site which lies between a property line and the minimum building setback distance measured from such property line shall not be included in the determination of open space for purposes of such subsection. 
(c)  For calculation purposes, the yard setback area which is contiguous to the passive common open space may be included in the total requirement of passive common open space for the project. Either the total side yard or the rear yard or the front yard (up to the footage equal to the rear yard) may be involved in those calculations. This area must be easily accessible to all units through public areas. 
(d)  Class III and class IV developments are subject to the following additional requirements: Not more than sixty (60) per cent of the development site area shall be devoted to main or accessory buildings, covered or open parking areas, driveways and other nonopen space uses. The remaining parcel area shall be devoted to passive or active open space, including landscaped activity areas, game courts, swimming pools, putting greens, walkways and passive recreational uses, amenities or other features for the exclusive use of project residents and their guests. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 41, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-271. - Balconies and decks. 
(a)  Any balcony or deck which is constructed as an appurtenance to a dwelling unit shall be not less than ninety (90) square feet in size and have dimensions of at least six (6) feet in each direction, and shall be screened from view from outside the building to up to the minimum height for a guardrail for such balcony or deck as established by the Uniform Building Code. 
(b)  Courtyards and interior balconies may be counted in satisfying the private open space requirement. Exterior balconies that face a public street or arterial street shall not be considered in satisfying the private open space requirement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 42, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272. - Storage space. 
For each dwelling unit, there shall be a separate, enclosed, lockable storage space area reserved for the occupants of such dwelling unit. Such storage space may be located in the garage space allocated to such unit or elsewhere within the development, but may not be directly accessible from the dwelling unit. Such storage space shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet in size and shall have minimum dimensions of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 43, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272.01. - Size of dwelling units. 
(a)  The gross floor area of each dwelling unit shall equal or exceed the following standards: 
(1)  Bachelor units: Four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(2)  One-bedroom units: Five hundred fifty (550) square feet. 
(3)  Two-bedroom units: Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(4)  Three-bedroom units: Nine hundred fifty (950) square feet. 
(b)  The gross floor area of a dwelling unit shall be calculated exclusive of garages, carports, private balconies and/or private open space. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 44, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272.02. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XV of this chapter. All such parking spaces, except spaces for visitor parking, must be covered and screened from neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 45, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272.03. - Landscaping. 
(a)  All required setback areas, required open spaces around the perimeter of buildings, and the required parking areas, unless specified in the provisions of this district, shall be completely landscaped, except for vehicular and pedestrian accessways. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of a multiple-family dwelling development, the developer shall submit to the city, and the planning division shall approve, a landscape plan that conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(c)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(d)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(e)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(f)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(g)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 46, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 5, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-272.04. - Determination of number of bedrooms in dwelling unit. 
For purposes of determining the minimum dwelling unit size pursuant to section 41-272.01 and the number of required off-street parking spaces required for a development pursuant to Article XV of this chapter, the planning division may determine that any area shown on the floor plan of a dwelling unit shall be deemed a bedroom even though not designated as such on such plan, provided such area exceeds eighty (80) square feet and is reasonably usable as a bedroom or is readily convertible to use as a bedroom by the construction of a single partition wall and/or an additional doorway. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 47, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272.05. - Restriction on division of developments. 
No site which has been developed as a multiple-family dwelling development shall thereafter be divided into two (2) or more parcels under separate ownership unless each parcel which would result from such division complies on its own with all the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 48, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-272.06. - Supplementary regulations and specific development objectives. 
(a)  The planning commission is authorized to adopt regulations supplementary to and consistent with the provisions of this division in order to clarify the general application of such provisions. 
(b)  The planning commission is further authorized to set development objectives for individual proposed multiple-family dwelling developments. Such objectives shall be consistent with the provisions of this division and shall be for the purpose of clarifying the application of such provisions specifically to the proposed development and promoting the purposes of this division. 
(c)  Development project plans approved pursuant to sections 41-668 through 41-674 for multiple-family dwelling developments shall be consistent with any and all regulations or development objectives established pursuant to this section which are applicable to such development, subject to the appeal process set forth in such sections. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 49, 4-1-91)  
DIVISION 6. - TOWNHOUSE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 41-273. - Applicability of division. 
Townhouse developments are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-274. - Minimum development site size. 
The minimum development site size shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of contiguous land, with a minimum street frontage of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-275. - Minimum lot area per unit. 
The minimum lot area shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-276. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2710, § 21, adopted May 1, 2006, repealed § 41-276 in its entirety, which pertained to minimum street frontage, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, adopted April 1, 1991.  
Sec. 41-277. - Building height. 
(a)  No primary structure shall exceed twenty-seven (27) feet or two (2) stories in height, as measured from the lowest adjacent grade of the structure to the top of the structure. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet or one (1) story in height. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-278. - Lot coverage. 
No more than fifty (50) per cent of the lot shall be covered by structures. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-279. - Front yard. 
Each townhouse shall have a front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-280. - Side yard. 
Each side yard of a townhouse shall be not less than ten (10) feet. Side yards which front on a local street shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. Side yards that front on an arterial street shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-281. - Rear yard. 
Each townhouse shall have a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-282. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Each unit shall have two (2) spaces in a garage. 
(2)  Garages shall not face the street. 
(3)  A garage shall have access directly into the townhouse or into the private yard area of the townhouse. 
(4)  Two (2) guest spaces shall be provided for each townhouse. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-283. - Open space. 
For a townhouse development, both private and common open space shall be provided within the project. Minimum open space requirements for townhouse developments are as follows: 
(1)  Private open space: 
(a)  Shall be a single private open space no less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet per unit, with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet in each direction. 
(b)  Shall be at the ground level. 
(c)  Shall be accessible from the unit's kitchen, dining area, den, family and/or living room. 
(2)  Common open space: 
(a)  Shall be a single common open space equivalent to no less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet per unit, with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in each direction. 
(b)  Is in addition to yard areas. Front, side and rear yards may not be counted to satisfy this requirement. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-284. - Fences. 
(a)  A fence plan for any townhouse development project shall be submitted for approval to the planning manager. The fence plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The plan shall delineate and dimension the location, size and materials of all fences. 
(2)  The plan shall provide elevations demonstrating the architectural compatibility of the proposed fences with the proposed project. 
(3)  The plan shall include installation specifications ensuring long term quality of the proposed fencing. 
(b)  Fences shall not be located within the required front yard setbacks or located within ten (10) feet of the side property line on any street oriented side yard. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-285. - Building separation. 
The building separation between primary structures shall be not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-286. - Access. 
(a)  Each townhouse shall have a minimum of forty (40) per cent of the living area and be accessible from ground level. 
(b)  A front door must face the street or a common area. 
(c)  No exterior stairwells shall be permitted on units abutting street oriented yards. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-287. - Storage space. 
For each townhouse, there shall be a separate, enclosed, lockable storage space area reserved for the occupants of such townhouse. Such storage space may be located in the garage of the townhouse or elsewhere within the development, but may not be directly accessible from the townhouse. Such storage space shall be at least two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet in size and shall have minimum dimensions of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91)  
Sec. 41-288. - Landscaping. 
All yards shall be landscaped. Each townhouse shall meet the following minimum landscaping standards: 
(a)  Front yard: 
(1)  One (1) 24-inch box canopy tree. 
(2)  All trees shall be double-staked. 
(3)  Six (6) five-gallon size shrubs and ten (10) one-gallon size herbaceous perennials/shrubs as a foundation planting. 
(4)  Turf or acceptable dry climate ground cover: 
a.  Turf shall be drought tolerant variety and planted as sod or hydroseed. 
b.  Ground cover shall be well-rooted cuttings from flats and planted as appropriate spacing for that particular plant material. 
(5)  Root barriers shall be required on all trees. 
(b)  Side yard: Corner lots shall have one (1) 15-gallon size tree for every thirty (30) linear feet of property abutting a street plus six (6) five-gallon size shrubs as a foundation planting. Root barriers shall be required on all trees planted along the street oriented yards. 
(c)  Project perimeter walls: 
(1)  Flowering vines shall be secured to a decorative masonry wall or wood fence material. 
(2)  The vines shall be five-gallon size and be planted at 20-foot intervals. They shall be secured to the walls with eye hooks and wire. 
(3)  Espaliered shrubs, fruit trees, or other ornamental trees may be substituted for the flowering vines. 
(d)  Irrigation system: 
(1)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. A pop-up sprinkler type irrigation system shall be provided for all yards. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. 
(2)  The use of "xeriphytic" or dry climate type plant materials is encouraged. Irrigation systems may require special fittings to properly water dry climate plantings. 
(3)  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with a controller capable of dual or multiple station programming. 
(e)  Screening: 
(1)  All meters shall be appropriately screened from public view with trellis work and vines, a hedge type shrub or be incorporated into the residential structure. 
(2)  Any enclosed structure for utilities must not encroach into the required setback. 
(f)  Maintenance: All plant material shall be maintained per section 41-609 of this Code. 
(g)  [Compliance with article XVI:] Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2111, § 50, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 6, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-289. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - R4 (SUBURBAN APARTMENT) 
 
Sec. 41-290. - Applicability of division. 
R4 (suburban apartment) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.120; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-291. - Purpose. 
The R4 suburban apartment district is authorized to provide for garden apartment development, regulated so as to cover a minimum of ground area and provide a maximum of open space. This zone will provide most of the desirable residential characteristics found in single-family residence areas. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.121; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-292. - Uses permitted in the R4 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the R4 district: 
(a)  Bungalow courts. 
(b)  Apartment houses. 
(c)  One permanent resident manager's office devoted solely to the rental of the dwelling units on the same parcel provided said office and surrounding grounds retain a residential character. 
(d)  Accessory buildings. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.122; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61; Ord. No. NS-1230, § 5, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 17, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-292.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the R4 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R4 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Any use that may be permitted in the R1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to section 41-232.5. 
(b)  Care homes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 18, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-293. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 41-293, relative to the submittal of development plans and the detail to be shown thereon, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 1983. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 9230.123; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1961.  
Sec. 41-294. - Development standards. 
(a)  Any development in this district shall be surrounded by a solid redwood or cedar fence or solid masonry wall or combination thereof, the height of which shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 41-610 of this chapter. However, nothing herein shall require the construction of the aforementioned fence along any property line abutting a street, alley, or at driveway entrances and exits. 
(b)  All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
(c)  Compliance with section 34-48 of the subdivision regulations, requiring alleys to the rear of all lots used or intended to be used for the construction of multiple-family residential structures of four (4) or more units, shall not be required in the event of the subdivision of properties zoned R4 provided said subdivision is developed within the terms and intent of the R4 district. 
(d)  Prior to the submission of development plans with the planning department, the owner or owner's engineer shall confer with the department of public works concerning the necessity for a runoff study based on a storm of a ten (10) year frequency, if said study is considered necessary by the director of the department of public works; it shall be filed with said department and shall show existing and proposed facilities and methods of draining the site and tributary areas without exceeding the capacity of any street, onsite or off-site. The plans shall be approved or conditionally approved and the minimum required improvements installed by the owner to assure adequate and reasonable drainage of the area to the satisfaction of the department of public works, prior to the issuance of a utility release by the building department for the development. 
(e)  If any parcel zoned R4 is to be developed in accordance with the provisions set forth for this district and, said parcel abuts a street not improved to city standard, the owner shall dedicate the necessary street easement to the city and improve said street so as to be in accordance with the design standards and specifications of this Code of Ordinances prior to the issuance of a utility release by the building department. 
(f)  All trash collection and garbage collection areas shall be surrounded on at least three (3) sides by a five (5) foot block wall with adequate access to and from these areas for trash and garbage collection vehicles. 
(g)  Due to the complexity of garden apartment development it is illogical and impractical to define herein an exact pattern for the arrangement of group dwellings for a parcel involving two (2) or more main dwellings; however it is the intent of this district to provide a functional and non-monotonous orientation of buildings with a maximum of open space around each main building consisting of courts, parkways and patio areas all oriented so as to provide separation of vehicular traffic from play areas and recreational areas for children and adults. Further, in order to more clearly define the intent of this district there shall be on file in the office of the planning department illustrations entitled "Guides to Suburban Apartment Development." Said illustrations shall be approved by resolution by the planning commission and city council and shall show the desirable arrangement of buildings and open space, but are not designs which must be copied in order to secure approval of development plans as required by the provisions of the R4 district. 
(h)  All off-street parking areas not under cover shall be screened from the view of surrounding residents or tenants of the project by shrubs and bushes the normal growth of which is not less than four (4) feet in height. 
(i)  All points of vehicular access to and from off-street parking areas and driveways onto public rights-of-way shall be approved by the director of public works of the city. Wherever a private driveway enters onto said public right-of-way, a stop sign shall be erected and maintained at such exit point to insure reasonable traffic safety all in compliance with the standard sign sheet on file in the office of the department of public works of the city. 
(j)  All driveways and off-street parking areas shall consist of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete on four (4) inches of rock base or of materials and of a thickness approved by the director of public works which shall be of equivalent strength and life of said asphaltic concrete and rock base. 
(k)  All interior streets and private drives shall be constructed to the standard set forth in this Code of Ordinances prior to the dedication of any such streets to the city. Streets not so constructed need not be accepted by the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.124; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-295. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, enacted Nov. 21, 1983, repealed § 41-295, pertaining to approval of development plans by the planning director. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 9230.125; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1961.  
Sec. 41-296. - Height limit. 
The height limit is: 
(a)  None except as limited in subsection (b) hereinbelow. 
(b)  When a lot in the R4 district is within one hundred and fifty (150) feet from property zoned A1, RE, or R1, on said R4 lot no main buildings shall exceed one (1) story and said one (1) story shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. Furthermore, when a lot in the R4 district is within three hundred (300) feet of property zoned A1, RE, or R1 on said R4 lot no main buildings shall exceed three (3) stories and said three (3) stories shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.126; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61; Ord. No. NS-644, § 1, 4-1-63)  
Sec. 41-297. - Side yard. 
(a)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the R4 district abuts property in the A1, RE or R1 district, each dwelling shall have a required side yard along said side property line of not less than one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of building height of that particular dwelling. 
(b)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the R4 district abuts property in the R4 district or any other district not set forth in subsection (a) of this section, there shall be a required side yard along that side property line of not less than four (4) feet regardless of the height of the dwelling on the lot. 
(c)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the R4 district abuts a lot or lots having zone classifications of A1, RE, or R1 and any other district, subsection (a) of this section shall apply in the determination of the required side yard along that entire interior side property line. 
(d)  On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.127; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-298. - Rear yard. 
(a)  When any lot zoned R4 has a rear property line abutting property in the A1, RE or R1 district, each dwelling shall have a required rear yard of not less than one (1) foot for each foot of building height of that particular dwelling. 
(b)  When any lot zoned R4 has a rear property line abutting a lot in any other district not set forth in subsection (a) of this section, there shall be a required rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(c)  When any lot in the R4 district has a rear property line common to a property line of a lot or lots having zone classifications of A1, RE or R1 and any other district, subsection (a) of this section shall apply in the determination of the required rear yard along that entire rear property line. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.128; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-299. - Minimum gross floor area. 
The following uses shall be subject to the following minimum square feet of gross floor area per unit exclusive of garages, carports and unenclosed porches and patios: 
(a)  Bachelor apartment: Four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(b)  One-bedroom apartment: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet. 
(c)  Two-bedroom apartment: Eight hundred (800) square feet. 
Further, for each additional bedroom in excess of two (2) bedrooms in an apartment unit, there shall be an additional one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.129; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-300. - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
(a)  For any one (1) story, two (2) story, or three (3) story single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, or multiple-family dwelling: Not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit constructed therein. 
(b)  For any four (4) or more story single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwelling: Not less than five hundred (500) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit constructed therein. 
(c)  Where an apartment development consists of more than one main building and said buildings vary in height, then subsections (a) and (b) set forth hereinabove shall be applied respectively for each main building depending on the height of each main building. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section only, if the topmost story of any dwelling unit proposed to be constructed in the R4 district is used for the housing of any mechanical equipment, such as air-conditioning facilities and elevator mechanisms, but is void of any dwelling unit, then said topmost story shall not be declared a story as defined in section 41-153. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.130; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-301. - Maximum lot coverage. 
Not more than fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to main and accessory building area, driveways, open or enclosed parking areas and covered patios. The remaining fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to landscaping; lawn area: Noncommercial outdoor recreational facilities incidental to the residential development such as private swimming pools, putting greens and tennis courts; walkways; uncovered patio areas; fences and necessary fire-fighting equipment and installations as required in section 41-294, subsection (d) of this chapter; further, the open space required by this section shall be arranged and provided in such a manner that it is accessible and usable for the purpose intended herein. Said open space shall not be devoted to commercial agricultural pursuits or any other activity in conflict with the stated purpose of this section and district. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.132; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-302. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. However, of the off-street parking required by Article IV, at least one parking space per unit shall be within a garage or carport. All additional parking stalls may be uncovered. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.133; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Sec. 41-303. - Subdivision of property developed under the R4 district. 
(a)  Upon completion of a development of property in the R-4 district no portion of the property involved in said development shall be severed or sold unless said severed parcel and the development thereon comply with all provisions set forth for the R4 district. Further, the remaining parcel and development thereon shall also comply with said R4 district provisions. Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of any one-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling or any dwelling unit within a two-family or multiple-family dwelling provided all common open areas, required yard areas, recreational areas and similar areas constituting the required fifty (50) per cent open areas as set forth in section 41-301 are retained in trust or otherwise for the benefit of all tenants and owners of any interest of any of the structures on the original area developed as a unit. Further, prior to the issuance of a building permit or approval of the development plans as set forth in section 41-295, deed restriction prohibiting the alienation of all land areas not devoted to buildings shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the County of Orange, California. Said restriction shall include a statement that said deed restrictions shall be irrevocable for a period of not less than thirty (30) years. A copy of said deed restrictions shall be filed with the planning department prior to the issuance of a building permit to the owner of the original project. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.134; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-537, § 1, 9-18-61)  
Secs. 41-304—41-311. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - P (PROFESSIONAL) 
 
Sec. 41-312. - Applicability of division. 
P (professional) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.140; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-313. - Uses permitted in P district. 
The following uses are permitted in the P district: 
(a)  Professional, business and administrative offices where no merchandise is sold. 
(b)  Banks, savings and loan offices, credit unions, and mortgage and finance companies. 
(c)  Travel agencies. 
(d)  Medical and dental offices. 
(e)  Art galleries, art and photography studios. 
(f)  Museums and science centers. 
(g)  Print and copy services. 
(h)  Pharmacies, limited to the dispensing of goods and merchandise related to health care only, and excluding drive-through facilities. 
(i)  Child care facilities. 
(j)  Non-freestanding commercial and service uses which do not exceed ten (10) per cent of the floor space of the building in which they are located and which are supportive of, compatible with, and integrated into the professional and business uses on the same property, excluding drive-through facilities, and commercial uses which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(k)  Freestanding restaurants, cafes, and eating establishments, excluding drive-through facilities and excluding any eating establishment specified in section 41-313.5. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.141; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-635, § 5, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 1, 9-2-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 19, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1873, § 1, 12-1-86; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. NS-2176, § 2, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2296, § 1, 10-7-96; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 12, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-313.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the P district. 
The following may be permitted in the P district, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
a.  Convalescent hospitals, nursing homes, rest homes and extended care facilities. 
b.  Hospitals. 
c.  Trade and professional schools. 
d.  Health clubs and gymnasiums. 
e.  Recreational or entertainment uses if carried on in conjunction with any of the uses specified in clauses (e), (f) and (k) of section 41-313. 
f.  Ambulance and emergency medical response services. 
g.  Non-freestanding commercial and service uses which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., provided that such uses also meet the standards for commercial and service uses permitted under section 41-313, and further provided that such uses have less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area. 
h.  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
i.  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
j.  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
k.  Adult day care facilities. 
l.  Clubs, fraternities and lodges. 
m.  Bail bond uses, subject to development and operation standards set forth in section 41-323. 
n.  Churches and accessory church buildings. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 20, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 2, 11-20-89; Ord. No. NS-2296, § 2, 10-7-96; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 4, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 13, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2473, § 4, 6-18-01; Ord. No. NS-2661, § 4, 9-20-04; Ord. No. NS-2938, § 3, 2-20-18 )  
Sec. 41-314. - Building height. 
(a)  No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height except as provided by section 41-602 for Height District II. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 41-602(d), all structures shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet within one hundred forty (140) feet of property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other height provision of this chapter, all structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet in height within the rear fifty (50) per cent of a lot abutting on the rear property line of property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.142; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-55 3, § 7, 12-4-61; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 3, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-315. - Building setbacks. 
(a)  Front. All structures shall maintain a fifteen-foot setback from the front property line. 
(b)  Side. 
(1)  All structures shall maintain a fifteen-foot setback from side property lines abutting a street. 
(2)  All structures shall also maintain a five-foot setback from interior side property lines. 
(3)  All stories above and exclusive of the second story or twenty-five (25) feet in height shall maintain an additional setback of not less than two (2) feet for each foot above the second story if the lot is abutting property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(c)  Rear. All structures shall maintain a fifty-foot rear setback if the lot abutting on the rear property line is a parcel used or zoned for residential purposes. In all other cases, all structures shall maintain a ten-foot rear setback. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.143; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-903, § 1, 12-4-67; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 4, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-316. - Landscaped area. 
(a)  Front. There shall be a landscaped front yard area of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  Side. There shall be a landscaped side yard area of not less than five (5) feet. On corner lots, the landscaped side yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Rear. There shall be a landscaped rear yard area of not less than ten (10) feet if the lot abutting on the rear property line is a parcel used or zoned for residential purposes. There shall be a landscaped rear yard of not less than five (5) feet in all other cases. 
(d)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the developer shall submit to the city and the planning division shall approve a landscape plan that conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(f)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(g)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(h)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(i)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.144; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 7, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 5, 11-20-89; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 7, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-317. - Landscaping, building perimeter. 
A landscaped area shall be provided around and abutting each building. The area of landscaping shall be equal to or greater than three (3) times the perimeter dimensions of the building but in no case shall be less than five (5) feet in width. The side yard landscaping abutting the building may be considered as part of this landscape requirement. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.145; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2035, § 6, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-318. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.146; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-319. - Parking lot landscaping. 
Interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided at a rate of one (1) planter for each ten (10) parking spaces. Landscape planter areas shall be provided with plant material per the commercial area landscape standards. The minimum dimension of each landscape planter shall be eight and one half (8.5) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. NS-2035, § 7, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-320. - Parking structure landscaping. 
One (1) square foot of landscaping and decorative pedestrian landscape in a plaza or around the perimeter of the parking structure shall be provided for every fifty (50) square feet of parking structure footprint area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2035, § 8, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-321. - Residential conversions. 
Required setbacks and yards shall be reduced as necessary to allow existing one-and two-story residential buildings to be converted to a use permitted by this division. All other provisions of this division must be met by such conversions. 
(Ord. No. NS-2035, § 9, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-322. - Wall requirements. 
A six-foot high minimum solid decorative masonry wall designed in the same manner as the proposed building shall be provided along the side and rear property lines. Notwithstanding, said wall shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height within twenty (20) feet of the property line abutting a street. If the site is abutting a nonresidential use, the wall height requirement may be reduced by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 2035, § 10, 11-20-89)  
Sec. 41-323. - Standards for bail bond uses in the P district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the following minimum development and operational standards apply to bail bond uses: 
(a)  Bail bond uses shall only be conducted within a P zone that is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a jail facility. 
(b)  Bail bond uses shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet from a R1, R2 or R3 zoned property. 
(c)  Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in article IV of this chapter for service uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2661, § 5, 9-20-04)  
Secs. 41-324—41-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2035, § 11, adopted Nov. 20, 1989, repealed §§ 41-326—41-332 of this division, which pertained to the limited professional district. Section 12 of Ord. No. NS-2035 provided that "Any property located in the LP (Limited Professional) District shall be subject to the regulations of the P (Professional) District, as amended by this ordinance, and as they may from time to time hereafter be amended, until the district designation of such property is changed." Former Div. 9 derived from §§ 9230.150—9230.156 of the city's 1952 Code, as amended by the following: Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-771, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 1965; Ord. No. NS-995, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1969; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 8, adopted Oct. 7, 1974; Ord. No. 1540, § 2, adopted Sept. 2, 1980; and Ord. No. 1732, §§ 21, 22, adopted June 25, 1984. 
 
Secs. 41-326—41-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - GC (GOVERNMENT CENTER)[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2058, § 1, adopted May 7, 1990, amended the title of this division, formerly entitled CD (Civic Development), to read as set out. Section 8 of said ordinance provided as follows: 
Section 8. Any parcel which is included in the CD (Civic Development) use district after the effective date of this ordinance shall remain subject to the CD (Civic Development) use district regulations as they existed immediately prior to the adoption of this ordinance until the effective date of an ordinance which reclassifies such parcel into another use district. 
 
Sec. 41-341. - Applicability of division. 
GC (government center) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.160; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2058, § 2, 5-7-90)  
Sec. 41-342. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the government center district is to provide for orderly governmental development, free of inconsistent uses. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.161; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-2058, § 3, 5-7-90)  
Sec. 41-343. - Uses permitted in the GC district. 
The following uses are permitted in the GC district: government buildings, public utility facilities, flood-control structures, and uses accessory thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.162; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-667, § 1, 7-1-63; Ord. No. NS-707, § 1, 12-16-63; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 3, 9-2-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 23, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2058, § 4, 5-7-90)  
Sec. 41-344. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, enacted Nov. 21, 1983, repealed § 41-344, relative to the submission of development plans and the architectural review thereof, derived from Code 1952, § 9230.163, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-345. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2058, § 5, adopted May 7, 1990, repealed former § 41-345, which pertained to yards, building height, off-street parking in the C3 district and derived from § 9230.164 of the city's 1952 Code as amended by Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-346. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1721, § 5, enacted April 2, 1984, repealed § 41-346, relative to sign regulations in CD districts. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 9230.165, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Secs. 41-347—41-351. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - PD (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT) 
 
Sec. 41-352. - Applicability of division. 
PD (planned development) suffixes are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.170; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-353. - Description and purposes. 
The R1 (single-family residence) district way be modified at the time the zoning is first established or by amendment by adding to the district designation PD, which shall make no alteration to the uses permitted under the regular district classification except as listed in section 41-354. Said designation is intended to provide for residential developments on large sites characterized by a physical environment commensurate with such contemporary site planning principles as: 
(1)  Building integrated around open and recreational areas which are reserved for pedestrian use and serve as unifying elements. 
(2)  The separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  The placement of buildings in such a way as to create a variety of open areas or subareas, thereby eliminating corridor or barrackslike arrangements of buildings. 
(4)  Recreational-leisure space sufficient to accommodate the needs of all the occupants. 
(5)  The location and design of all buildings, structures, and open spaces in such a manner as to create a balanced and harmonious composition as a whole and in the relations of its several parts and features to each other. 
(6)  The development of land in an efficient and orderly manner consistent with the established quality of the community. 
Further, said PD suffix is intended to allow innovations in subdivision design intended to foster greater land utilization while increasing the desirability of each project developed under the PD suffix. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.171; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-354. - Accessory uses. 
The following accessory uses are permitted only where they are integrated with and clearly incidental to a primary permitted use and where the sole purpose is to provide convenience to residents of the development rather than the general public: 
(1)  Swimming pools. 
(2)  Recreational buildings, structures, and areas. 
(3)  Private parks. 
(4)  Other normal accessory uses constituting an integral part of said planned development. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.172; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-355. - Conditional use permit required. 
Any development of property within a PD modified district classification shall necessitate the filing of a conditional use permit. Said conditional use permit shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied. No building permit shall be issued unless said conditional use permit is approved or conditionally approved. All development shall be in compliance with all conditions of approval prior to the issuance of a utility release by the building department. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.173; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-356. - Minimum land area per dwelling unit. 
There shall be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of land area per dwelling unit within a planned development, exclusive of primary streets shown on the streets and highways clement of the general plan of community development or amendment thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.174; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-357. - Site development standards. 
Unless otherwise indicated in the conditions of approval of the approved conditional use permit for a planned development as set forth in section 41-355, the following standards shall be complied with. Said standards are necessary in order to assure adequate levels of light, air, and density of development, to maintain and enhance the locally recognized values of community appearance, to promote functional compatibility of uses, and to promote the safe and efficient circulation and separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. These standards are found to be inherent characteristics of planned developments and further found to be necessary for the preservation of the community health, safety, and general welfare: 
(a)  Site area and dimension. The development site area shall be not less than three (3) acres and of such shape as to provide for interior vehicular circulation, central recreational-leisure area, efficient and orderly non-monotonous arrangement of buildings to achieve the living environment intended by this section. 
(b)  Buildings and structural height limitations. None, except as set forth in the R1 district regulations. 
(c)  Recreational-leisure areas. The following provisions are made for recreational and leisure facilities. These standards are found to be the minimum necessary to afford residences of such developments a desirable living environment consistent with the established quality of residential areas throughout the community: 
(1)  Each planned development shall reserve and maintain a unified, usable open area or areas, exclusive of private patios, balconies and areas used primarily for pedestrian accessways, driveways, parking areas, garages and carports, equal to at least twelve hundred (1,200) square feet per each proposed dwelling unit. The purpose of such area is to provide for the recreational and leisure time activities of the residences. Said area or areas may include swimming pools, putting greens, court games and any other recreational-leisure facilities necessary to meet the requirements of the residences and their guests. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit shall have an enclosed patio at least six hundred (600) square feet in area, of which the least dimension shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Recreational-leisure space shall be conveniently located and readily accessible to the users of such areas. 
(d)  Minimum floor area of dwelling units. There shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area per dwelling unit, excluding garages and patios. 
(e)  Building setback requirements. The following building setbacks shall be provided in planned developments: 
(1)  Wherever a site abuts a primary street there shall be provided a landscaped building setback area of twenty (20) feet. Staggered building setbacks may be provided. However, in no case shall the building setback be less than fifteen (15) feet and provided that for every foot of building frontage less than twenty (20) feet from the property line there shall be provided an equal amount of building frontage correspondingly greater than twenty (20) feet from the property line. 
(2)  Along all site boundary lines not abutting a major, primary or secondary highway or local street or private vehicular accessway, there shall be a landscaped setback area of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(3)  No buildings, structures, or vehicular parking shall be permitted within a required landscaped building setback area. 
(4)  All required setback areas, with the exception of access drives and walks, shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials and shall be permanently maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition to use. Fountains, ponds, sculpture, planters, and decorative screen-type walls, thirty (30) inches or less in height, where an integral part of a landscaping scheme comprised primarily of plant materials, are permitted. 
(f)  Vehicular access. The design and location of vehicular accessways shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  All planned developments shall be served by public dedicated rights-of-way sufficient to provide adequate access, egress and circulation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in conformance with city standards. 
(2)  Private vehicular accessways may be permitted for planned developments on sites less than four (4) acres in size as of record on September 3, 1964, and where it is found that said accessways provide safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic consistent with city standards. Where private vehicular accessways are permitted they shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
(i)  The minimum private vehicular accessway that shall be provided for any planned development shall be thirty (30) feet wide. 
(ii)  Private vehicular accessways with planned parallel parking on both sides shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet wide. 
(iii)  Curbs, gutters and parkways shall be provided along both sides of the above private vehicular accessways. 
(3)  All vehicular accessways shall be so located as to provide for the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Appropriate street trees shall be provided along all parkways subject to the approval of the superintendent of parks. 
(g)  Off-street parking requirements. The following parking requirements shall be met for all planned developments: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) covered spaces per single-family dwelling unit. The location of parking facilities shall be properly integrated with the dwelling units to be served and shall provide the occupants easy and convenient access to such spaces. Said facilities shall be properly screened from adjacent properties and from adjacent living and recreational-leisure areas. 
(2)  A minimum of one-half (½) guest parking space per single-family dwelling unit, conveniently located. 
(h)  Walls. In recognition of the unique and self-containing characteristics of planned development all such developments shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall, redwood or cedar fence or combinations thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height, erected along and immediately adjacent to the property line abutting adjacent properties, except where a holding strip is permitted for the purpose of providing for the logical development of adjacent properties. 
(i)  Standard refuse storage areas. Each trash and refuse storage area shall be screened from view of the residents of the property and neighboring properties by a solid masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height and shall be maintained for health and sanitation purposes. 
(j)  Street dedications and improvements required. Anticipating that changes will occur in the local neighborhoods and the city generally due to the increase in vehicular traffic, increase in pedestrian traffic, increased noise, and other activities associated with the city's development and growth, the following dedications and improvements are deemed to be necessary to prevent congestion and other hazards related to the intensified use of the land and necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These requirements shall be met or complied with before any building shall be finally approved and accepted for use and occupancy: 
(1)  All required public streets and alleys, both local and primary, which abut the subject property shall be dedicated to the city. 
(2)  All street, highway, and alley improvements shall be installed and in good repair, or street improvement plans shall be required to be prepared to city standards and said improvements constructed. A faithful performance bond in a form approved by the city attorney and in an amount to be determined by the city engineer may be posted to guarantee the construction of the streets, which may include but not necessarily be limited to excavation, curbs, pavement, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, or any other engineering requirements. 
(3)  Necessary fire protection facilities shall be provided for in accordance with the requirements of the fire chief of the city. 
(4)  The director of building safety and housing shall not grant final release of occupancy to any structure constructed upon any property covered by this ordinance until the city engineer has certified to the compliance of the conditions set forth in (1) and (2) above; and the fire chief has certified to the compliance of the conditions set forth in (3) above. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.175; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60 ; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Sec. 41-358. - Procedure. 
(a)  The applicant for approval of a planned development shall be the owner, all of the owners of the site acting jointly, or an authorized agent. 
(b)  Each prospective applicant is encouraged to confer with the planning department in connection with the preparation of a plan for a planned development prior to the submission of the conditional use permit application to the planning commission. The chief purpose of such a preapplication conference is to benefit the prospective applicant by providing information and clarification of requirements before such prospective applicant incurs any substantial expense in the preparation of plans. 
(c)  (1) 
Planned development proposed for division for sale into two (2) or more separately owned parcels shall require the filing of a subdivision map in accordance with the subdivision regulations (chapter 34 of this Code). 
(2)  When a planned development is divided for sale or lease through the subdivision of said development, the minimum lot area, lot frontage and/or lot depth for subdivision purpose may be less than that required in the subdivision regulations. Such exceptions to the district regulations may be permitted where: 
(i)  The individual units or groups of units and their patios are described as an individual lot in such a subdivision. 
(ii)  All remaining areas are in common ownership, held in trust, or otherwise for the benefit of those persons residing in the planned development. 
(3)  Prior to filing of a final subdivision map the following provisions shall be complied with: 
(i)  Adequate and permanent ingress and access easement from a street to each dwelling unit shall be provided. The conveyance of such easements shall be approved as to form and content by the city attorney. 
(ii)  Each recorded lot on which a residential unit can be placed shall have not less than thirty (30) feet of frontage on a common open space lot or parcel. 
(iii)  Those lots or parcels which are to be utilized for common purposes shall be designated as "not a buildable lot or parcel" and shall be continuously and permanently maintained for the exclusive use and benefit of the occupants in the subdivisions. The manner in which this is to be accomplished shall be a part of the map and submitted in writing and be subject to approval by the city attorney. 
(iv)  Those lots apparently designed for garage or parking space requirements for each buildable lot shall be designated with the same numeral as the building lot, with the addition of a letter. Such parking facilities shall be continuously maintained and reserved for parking. The manner in which this is to be accomplished shall be a part of the map, and submitted in writing and be subject to approval by the city attorney. 
(Code 1952, §§ 9230, 9230.176; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-745, § 1, 8-3-64)  
Secs. 41-359—41-363. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - C1 (COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL) 
 
Sec. 41-364. - Applicability of division. 
C1 (community commercial) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.180; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-365. - Uses permitted in the C1 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the C1 district: 
a.  Retail and service uses. 
b.  Professional, administrative and business offices. 
c.  Automobile parking lots and parking structures. 
d.  Automobile sales, but excluding truck, trailer, tractor and boat sales. 
e.  Churches and accessory church buildings. 
f.  Mortuaries. 
g.  Theaters. 
h.  Hospitals, clinics, and sanitariums. 
i.  Animal hospitals and veterinaries. 
j.  Plant nurseries. 
k.  Gymnasiums. 
l.  Golf courses, both regulation and miniature, and driving ranges. 
m.  Public utility structures, including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
n.  Restaurants, cafes, and eating establishments, other than those specified in section 41-365.5. 
o.  Schools and studios operated for commercial or public purposes. 
p.  Childcare facilities. 
q.  Service stations. 
r.  Automobile servicing. 
s.  Cyber cafes, subject to compliance with the requirements of section 41-198.200. 
t.  Tattoo and/or body art establishments, subject to the development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.3. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.181; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, §§ 3, 4, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-635, § 6, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-1035, § 1, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 2, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 1, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 1, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 6, 6-16-80; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 4, 9-2-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 24, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1937, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 3, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 14, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2487, § 5, 2-4-02; Ord. No. NS-2513, § 7, 9-3-02; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 7, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 41-365.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the C1 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
a.  Clubs. 
b.  Outdoor and indoor recreational or entertainment uses other than those set forth in section 41-365. 
c.  Hotels, motels, lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses and sorority houses. 
d.  Thrift shops, purchase and loan, pawn shops. 
e.  Eating establishments with drive-through window service. 
f.  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
g.  Laundromats, subject to the development and performance standards set forth in section 41-199. 
h.  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
i.  Check cashing facilities, as defined by section 41-42.7. 
j.  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
k.  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
l.  Adult day care facilities. 
m.  Superstores. 
n.  Tattoo and/or body art establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., subject to the development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.3. 
(Ord. No. 1732, § 25, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1861, § 2, 8-4-86; Ord. No. NS-1937, § 2, 11-6-87; Ord. No. NS-2213, § 1, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2245, § 2, 3-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2276, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2346, § 2, 3-16-98; Ord. No. NS-2412, § 3, 12-6-99; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 5, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 2446, § 15, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2734, § 3, 2-5-07; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 8, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 41-366. - Operational standards in the C1 district. 
(a)  All business activities in the C1 district shall be conducted and located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195, and except that the following business activities, to the extent permitted under section 41-365 and section 41-365.5, may be conducted outside of an enclosed building: 
(1)  Plant nurseries. 
(2)  Automobile sales and parking lots. 
(3)  Recreational or entertainment uses. 
(4)  Youth amusement rides. 
(b)  Storage of goods and supplies shall be limited to those sold at retail on the premises or utilized in the course of business. 
(c)  Public utility electric distribution and transmission substations shall be screened by a fence at least six (6) feet high, except as restricted by sections 36-45, 36-46, and 36-47 of this Code. 
(d)  No sales shall be made directly from a building to persons on a public sidewalk, either through a window or similar opening or by means of any coin-operated device. 
(e)  Service stations and automobile servicing: No automobile servicing within three hundred (300) feet of property used or zoned for residential purposes shall be conducted before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week. 
(f)  Youth amusement rides shall comply with the following standards, deviation from which requires written approval by the planning manager: 
(1)  No youth amusement ride shall be located on a required walkway or landscape area. 
(2)  No youth amusement ride shall be located in a foyer leading to a store entry unless a minimum of six (6) feet of clearance remains. 
(3)  No advertising is allowed on any youth amusement ride. 
(4)  All youth amusement rides shall be maintained in a clean, attractive and sanitary condition. 
(5)  No youth amusement ride shall be designed or located such as to create a safety hazard or interfere with reasonable pedestrian passage to adjacent businesses. 
(6)  No more than two (2) youth amusement rides are allowed per street frontage or primary store entrance. 
(7)  No more than three (3) youth amusement rides are allowed per building. 
(8)  Any graffiti on a youth amusement ride shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(9)  Youth amusement rides shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. Inoperable youth amusement rides shall be repaired or removed from the premises within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Code 1952, § 9320.182; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 3, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 26, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 4, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2487, § 6, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 41-367. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.183; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 8, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-368. - Front yard requirements in C1 district. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.184; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 2, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 1, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-369. - Side yard and building setback requirements in the C1 district. 
There are no side yard requirements, except that on corner lots the side yard adjacent to a street shall have a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. However, no part of a building above the first fifteen (15) feet in height may be located within twenty (20) feet of the vertical plane of a side lot line if the lot is contiguous to residentially zoned or used property on such side. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.185; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 3, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 2, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-370. - Rear yard and building setback requirements in the C1 district. 
There is no rear yard requirement. However, no part of a building above the first fifteen (15) feet in height may be located within twenty (20) feet of the vertical plane of a rear lot line if the lot is contiguous to residentially zoned or used property on the rear. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.186; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 4, 1-7-85)  
Sec. 41-371. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.187; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-372. - Landscaping requirements in the C1 district. 
(a)  A landscaped area not less than fifteen (15) feet wide shall be maintained along any property line to the extent it abuts a street, except at approved driveways. 
(b)  A landscaped area not less than five (5) feet wide shall be maintained along any property line to the extent it serves to separate property zoned or used for residential purposes from any off-street parking area. 
(c)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the developer shall submit to the city and the planning division shall approve a landscape plan that conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(e)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(f)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(g)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(h)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1860, § 3, 9-15-86; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 8, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-373. - Lot size and lot frontage requirements in the C1 district. 
Each lot which is used for retail or service purposes in the C1 district shall have at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of area and one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage. 
(Ord. No. NS-1860, § 4, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-374. - Standards for service stations and automobile servicing in the C1 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the following minimum standards apply to service stations and automobile servicing: 
(1)  Driveways: 
(a)  Sites with only one (1) street frontage shall have no more than two (2) driveways. 
(b)  Sites with frontage on more than one (1) street are subject to the following requirements: For lots under forty thousand (40,000) square feet: 
1.  There shall be no more than two (2) driveways on one (1) of the abutting streets. 
2.  There shall be no more than one (1) driveway on all other abutting streets, except as otherwise approved by the zoning administrator based on a traffic analysis study. 
(c)  Driveways shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width when more than one (1) exists on a street frontage. 
(d)  Traffic analysis studies supporting additional driveways shall consider on-site and off-site traffic circulation as well as intersection capacity, traffic counts and other pertinent data. 
(2)  Landscaping: Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the standards applicable to commercial development generally, subject to the following: 
(a)  A five-foot landscaped yard shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where such area is not occupied by a building or appurtenant structure. 
(b)  On sites less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in lot size, a reduction in landscaping may be granted by the zoning administrator as necessary for public safety or traffic circulation reasons. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-374.5. - Additional standards for check cashing facilities in the C1 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the following minimum standard applies to check cashing facilities: 
(1)  Spacing. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any check cashing facility, as defined by section 41-42.7 of this Code, within one thousand (1,000) feet of another check cashing facility, measured from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. NS-2412, § 4, 12-6-99)  
DIVISION 12.5. - C1-MD (COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL-MUSEUM DISTRICT) 
 
Sec. 41-375. - Applicability of division. 
The C1-MD (Community Commercial-Museum) district is specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. Such district is also subject to all regulations in this chapter which apply to property located in the C1 (Community Commercial) district, except that sections 41-365 and 41-365.5 shall not apply to the C1-MD district. 
(Ord. No. NS-2299, § 1, 9-3-96)  
Sec. 41-375.1. - Uses permitted in the C1-MD district. 
The following uses are permitted in the C1-MD district: 
(a)  Retail and service uses, other than those specified in section 41-375.2. 
(b)  Professional, administrative and business offices where no merchandise is sold. 
(c)  Medical and dental offices. 
(d)  Theaters and cinemas. 
(e)  Gymnasiums and health clubs. 
(f)  Travel agencies, with no embarking or disembarking of passengers. 
(g)  Art galleries and art and photography studios. 
(h)  Museums and science centers. 
(i)  Restaurants, cafes, and eating establishments other than those specified in section 41-375.2, excluding eating establishments with drive-thru window service. 
(j)  Child care facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2299, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 16, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-375.2. - Uses subject to a conditional permit in the C1-MD district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C1-MD district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Clubs. 
(b)  Outdoor and indoor recreational or entertainment uses other than those set forth in section 41-375.1. 
(c)  Hotels. 
(d)  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
(e)  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(f)  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(g)  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(Ord. No. NS-2299, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 6, 9-18-00)  
DIVISION 13. - C2 (GENERAL COMMERCIAL) 
 
Sec. 41-376. - Applicability of division. 
C2 (general commercial) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.200; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-377. - Uses permitted in the C2 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the C2 district. 
(a)  All uses which are permitted in the C1 district pursuant to section 41-365. 
(b)  Automotive garages including body and fender repair, painting, and engine replacement. 
(c)  Blueprinting, photo-engraving, including all types of reproduction processes. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Equipment rental yards. 
(f)  Metal shops. 
(g)  Tire recapping. 
(h)  Wholesale establishments as follows: 
(1)  Automotive equipment, including parts and supplies for machinery. 
(2)  Drugs, chemicals and allied products excluding explosives and industrial chemicals. 
(3)  Dry goods and apparel. 
(4)  Food products. 
(5)  Farm products. 
(6)  Electrical and plumbing supplies. 
(7)  Office equipment and supplies. 
(i)  Truck, trailer, tractor and boat sales. 
(j)  Research institutions and laboratories. 
(k)  Adult entertainment businesses subject to compliance with the requirements of article XVII of this chapter. 
(l)  Cyber cafes, subject to compliance with the requirements of section 41-198.200. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.201; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, §§ 5, 6, 7, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-1035, § 2, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 2, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1225, § 2, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-1397, § 2, 1-3-78; Ord. No. NS-1438, § 1, 8-21-78; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 2, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 27, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 4, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2513, § 8, 9-3-02; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 7, 4-15-02; Ord. No. NS-2812, § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 41-377.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the C2 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C2 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Any use which may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in the C1 district pursuant to section 41-365.5. 
(b)  Open-air car washes. 
(c)  Trailer parks and camps. 
(d)  Thrift shops, food distribution centers, and counselling service establishments operated by nonprofit or government-subsidized organizations or by public agencies. 
(e)  Indoor swap meets, bulk merchandise stores, and home improvement warehouse stores. 
(f)  Superstores. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 28, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1939, § 4, 1-4-88; Ord. No. NS-2114, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2734, § 4, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 41-378. - Operational standards in the C2 district. 
(a)  All business activities in the C2 district shall be conducted and located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195, and except that the following business activities, to the extent permitted under section 41-377 and section 41-377.5, may be conducted outside of an enclosed building: 
(1)  Plant nurseries. 
(2)  Automobile sales and parking lots. 
(3)  Recreational or entertainment uses. 
(4)  Equipment rental yards. 
(5)  Truck, trailer, tractor and boat sales. 
(6)  Open-air car washes. 
(7)  Trailer parks and camps. 
(b)  No sales shall be made directly from a building to persons on a public sidewalk, either through a window or similar opening or by means of a coin-operated device. 
(c)  Service stations, automobile servicing, and automobile repair are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No outdoor overnight vehicle storage is permitted except as permitted by section 41-613.2. 
(2)  No auto repair or auto body activity within three hundred (300) feet of property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.202; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 4, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 29, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2114, § 2, 3-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 6, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2812, § 4, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 41-379. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.203; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 9, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-380. - Front yard requirements in the C2 district. 
Front yard requirements are the same as prescribed for the C1 district by section 41-368. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.204; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 5, 1-7-85)  
Sec. 41-381. - Side yard and building setback requirements in the C2 district. 
Side yard and building setback requirements are the same as prescribed for the C1 district by section 41-369. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.205; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 6, 1-7-85)  
Sec. 41-382. - Rear yard and building setback requirements in the C2 district. 
Rear yard and building setback requirements are the same as prescribed for the C1 district by section 41-370. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.206; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 7, 1-7-85)  
Sec. 41-383. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed by Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.207; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-384. - Landscaping, lot size, and lot frontage requirements in the C2 district. 
Landscaping, lot size, and lot frontage requirements in the C2 district are the same as prescribed for the C1 district by sections 41-372 and 41-373. 
(Ord. No. NS-1860, § 5, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-385. - Standards for automobile repair in the C2 district. 
In addition to the commercial development standards, automobile repair uses are subject to the following: 
(1)  A ten-foot minimum width planter shall be provided along the side or rear property line which abuts property zoned or used for residential purposes, except when such area is occupied by a building. 
(2)  Driveways on corner lots shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from the corner radius. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 7, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-386. - Service stations and automobile servicing in the C2 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter for commercial uses, service stations and automobile servicing are subject to the requirements of section 41-374. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 8, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-387. - Equipment rental yard—Operational standards. 
Equipment rental yards shall comply with the following operational standards: 
(a)  Any permitted equipment rental yard shall be operated in a fashion so as to have no detrimental effect on lawful adjacent uses by reason of refuse matter, noise, light, vibration, or lack of property maintenance of grounds or buildings. 
(b)  A solid decorative masonry wall not less than eight (8) feet in height shall be built and maintained along any rear or side lot line abutting property that is used, zoned, or designated on the general plan for residential purposes. 
(c)  Equipment, including stacked storage or displays, shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height when being stored or displayed on the site. 
(d)  All parking, vehicle circulation, queuing, backing, and equipment loading must occur completely on-site. 
(e)  Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(f)  Equipment, including stacked storage or displays, shall be stored or displayed entirely on-site, pursuant to any applicable approved site plan, but shall not be stored or displayed: 
(1)  In any setback, improved or not, required pursuant to sections 41-368, 41-369, and 41-370; 
(2)  In any required parking spaces, driveways, or pedestrian walkways; 
(3)  So as to obstruct sight distance or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic; 
(4)  So as to disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation; 
(5)  On any public right-of-way. 
(h)[(g)]  All trash and debris generated by the storage of building materials, such as sand or gravel, must be contained on site. 
(Ord. No. NS-2812, § 5, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 41-388. - Amortization of non-conforming equipment rental yards. 
Any use of real property existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, which meets the definition of equipment rental yard as set forth in section 41-58 of this Code, but which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all regulations and design, development, and operational standards adopted by the city, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use which may be continued until six (6) months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. On or before such date, all such nonconforming aspects of such use shall be terminated or brought into full compliance with the operational requirements set forth in section 41-387, with the exception of subsection (b). 
(a)  Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an equipment rental yard for a continuous period of one (1) year shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use. 
(b)  Amortization—Annexed property. Any equipment rental yard that was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property, but that does not conform to the regulations and design, shall be brought into compliance within one (1) year of the date of annexation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2812, § 6, 12-20-10)  
Secs. 41-389—41-393. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2803, § 8, adopted June 21, 2010, repealed the former division 14, §§ 41-394—41-399 in its entirety, which pertained to the C3 central business district, and derived from the Code of 1952, §§ 9230.220—9230.225; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-553, § 10, adopted December 4, 1961; Ord. No. NS-1035, § 3, adopted September 8, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 3, adopted September 8, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1071, § 1, adopted March 15, 1971; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 3, adopted July 17, 1972; Ord. No. NS-1225, § 2, adopted October 7, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1397, § 2, adopted January 3, 1978; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 3, adopted November 19, 1979; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 7, adopted June 16, 1980; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 5, adopted September 2, 1980; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 5, adopted December 19, 1983; Ord. No. NS-1732, §§ 30—32, adopted June 25, 1984; Ord. No. NS-2010, § 1, adopted July 3, 1989; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 9, adopted March 18, 1991; Ord. No. NS-2427, §§ 2, 3, adopted May 15, 2000, and Ord. No. NS-2446, § 17, adopted September 18, 2000. 
 
Secs. 41-394—41-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14.5. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2803, § 9, adopted June 21, 2010, repealed the former division 14.5, §§ 41-401—41-404 in its entirety, which pertained to the C3-A central business—artist's village district, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2230, § 2, adopted August 15, 1994; Ord. No. NS-2276, § 2, adopted December 18, 1995; Ord. No. NS-2335, § 3, adopted November 3, 1997; Ord. No. NS-2427, §§ 4, 5, adopted May 15, 2000; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 8, adopted September 18, 2000, and Ord. No. NS-2513, § 9, adopted September 3, 2002. 
 
Secs. 41-401—41-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - C4 (PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER) 
 
Sec. 41-411. - Applicability of division. 
C4 (planned shopping center) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.240; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-412. - Uses permitted in the C4 district. 
All uses permitted in the C1 district pursuant to section 41-365 are likewise permitted in the C4 district. In addition, adult entertainment businesses shall be permitted in the C4 district, subject to compliance with the requirements of article XVII of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.241; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 4, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1071, § 2, 3-15-71; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 4, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 4, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 8, 6-16-80; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 6, 9-2-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 33, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 5, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-412.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the C4 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C4 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Hotels, motels, lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses and sorority houses. 
(b)  Indoor swap meets, bulk merchandise stores, and home improvement warehouse stores. 
(c)  Eating establishments with drive-through window service. 
(d)  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
(e)  Laundromats, subject to the development and performance standards set forth in section 41-199. 
(f)  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(g)  Check cashing facilities, as defined by section 41-42.7 of this Code. 
(h)  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(i)  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(j)  Adult day care facilities. 
(k)  Superstores. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 34, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1937, § 3, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-1939, § 5, 1-4-88; Ord. No. NS-1993, § 1, 1-3-89; Ord. No. NS-2213, § 2, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2245, § 3, 3-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2276, § 3, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2412, § 5, 12-6-99; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 9, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 18, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2734, § 5, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 41-413. - Operational standards in the C4 district. 
(a)  All business activities in the C4 district shall be conducted or located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195, and except that the following business activities, to the extent permitted under sections 41-412 and 41-412.5 may be conducted outside of an enclosed building: 
(1)  Newsstands. 
(2)  Flower stands. 
(3)  Plant nurseries. 
(4)  Automobile sales and parking lots. 
(5)  Recreational or entertainment uses. 
(b)  There shall be no manufacturing, processing, compounding, assembling or treatment of any material or product other than that which is clearly incidental to a particular retail enterprise, and where such goods are sold on the premises. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.242; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1700, § 4, 11-21-83; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 6, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 35, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-414. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.243; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 11, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-415. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 41-415, relative to minimum area for property classified C4, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1732, § 36, enacted June 25, 1984. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 9230.244, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-416. - Yard, building setback, landscaping, lot size, and lot frontage requirements in the C4 district. 
Yard, building setback, landscaping, lot size, and lot frontage requirements in the C4 district are the same as those prescribed for the C1 district by sections 41-368, 41-369, 41-370, 41-372, and 41-373. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.245; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 8, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 6, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-417. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed by Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.246; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-418. - Service stations, automobile servicing, and automobile repair in the C4 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter for commercial uses, service stations and automobile servicing are subject to the requirements of 41-374, and automobile repair is subject to the requirements of 41-385. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 10, 3-18-91)  
Secs. 41-419—41-422. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - C5 (ARTERIAL COMMERCIAL)[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1640, § 1, enacted July 19, 1982, amended Div. 16, §§ 41-423—41-430, to read as herein set out. Prior to such amendment Div. 16 was derived from Code 1952, §§ 9230.260—9230.267, and the following ordinances: 
Ordinance No. 	Section 	Date 
NS- 455 	 1 	 6-20-60 
NS- 533 	12 	12- 4-61 
NS- 635 	 7 	 3- 4-63 
NS- 692 	 1 	11- 4-63 
NS-1035 	 4 	 9- 8-70 
NS-1036 	5 	 9- 8-70 
NS-1123 	5 	 7-17-72 
NS-1507 	5 	11-19-79 
NS-1532 	9 	 6-16-80 
NS-1540 	7 	 9- 2-80 
 
 
Sec. 41-423. - Applicability of division. 
(a)  C5 (arterial commercial) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction or enlargement of any building or structure in the C5 district until a site plan has been submitted to the zoning administrator pursuant to section 41-430 and approved by him as conforming to the requirements of this division. 
(c)  After approval of a site plan for a lot in the C5 district pursuant to section 41-430, no person shall cause such lot to be developed or maintained in nonconformity with such approved site plan or any approved revision thereof. 
(d)  Separately owned units of real property may be deemed a single lot for purposes of this division ff they are subject to conditions, covenants and restrictions and reciprocal easements of access which provide for unified responsibility for vehicle access and parking, landscaping, and signage. 
(e)  Two-family dwellings permitted in the C5 district shall not be subject to the operational and design regulations set forth in sections 41-425 through 41-429. Such dwellings shall be subject to the standards set forth for such uses in the R2 (multiple-family residence) district. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 1, 7-19-82; Ord. No. NS-2629, § 2, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 41-424. - Uses permitted in the C5 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the C5 district: 
(a)  Administrative and professional offices. 
(b)  Retail and service uses. 
(c)  Automobile parking lots, but excluding the sale or storage of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, or tractors, whether new or used. 
(d)  Churches, chapels, mortuaries, and theaters. 
(e)  Government buildings. 
(f)  Restaurants and cafes, other than those specified in section 41-424.5. 
(g)  Schools and studios operated for commercial or public purposes. 
(h)  Child care facilities. 
(i)  The printing, publishing, and circulation of a newspaper, including plant and office. 
(j)  Two-family dwellings not exceeding one (1) unit per three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area, provided such units front on a secondary or local street. 
(k)  Cyber cafes subject to compliance with the requirements of section 41-198.200. 
(l)  Gymnasiums and health clubs. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 2, 7-19-82; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 37, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 19, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2513, § 10, 9-3-02; Ord. No. NS-2629, § 2, 6-2-03; Ord. No. NS-2819, § 2, 5-16-11)  
Sec. 41-424.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the C5 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C5 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Hotels, motels, lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses, and sorority houses. 
(b)  Dwelling units when erected above the ground floor of a commercial structure when the ground floor is devoted exclusively to nonresidential uses. 
(c)  Hospitals. 
(d)  Public utility structures, including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
(e)  Eating establishments with drive-through or walk-up window service. 
(f)  Service stations and automobile servicing. 
(g)  Car wash establishments, provided they are wholly enclosed. 
(h)  Laundries. 
(i)  Indoor swap meets, bulk merchandise stores, and home improvement warehouse stores. 
(j)  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
(k)  Laundromats, subject to the development and performance standards set forth in section 41-199. 
(l)  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(m)  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(n)  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(o)  Adult day care facilities. 
(p)  Superstores. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 38, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1939, § 6, 1-4-88; Ord. No. NS-2103, § 2, 12-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2176, § 3, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2213, § 3, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2245, § 4, 3-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2276, § 4, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 10, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 20, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2734, § 6, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 41-425. - Operational standards. 
(a)  All business activities shall be conducted or located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195. 
(b)  Storage of goods and supplies shall be limited to those sold at retail on the premises or utilized in the course of business. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 3, 7-19-82; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 7, 12-19-83)  
Sec. 41-426. - Walls. 
Where property within this district is to be used for professional or commercial purposes and has a lot line in common with any lot in a residential district there shall be erected a solid masonry wall not less than six (6) feet high along all such common lines. Where a wall of such height is prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance the wall shall be the maximum allowable height. Further, where an alley separates the property in this district from property in a residential district said block wall shall be erected along the property line abutting the alley except at points of ingress/egress to the parking area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 4, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 41-427. - Yard, building setback, landscaping, lot size, and lot frontage requirements in the C5 district. 
Yard, building setback, landscaping, lot size and lot frontage requirements in the C5 district are the same as those prescribed for the C1 district by sections 41-368, 41-369, 41-370, 41-372, and 41-373. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 5, 7-19-82; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 7, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-428. - Vehicle access. 
(a)  There shall be no more than one (1) vehicle entryway and one (1) vehicle exit way for each one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage of the lot. No such entryway or exit way shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any street intersection corner radius. 
(b)  The design of vehicle accessways, driveways, and parking areas shall be safe and practical. 
(Ord. No. NS-1640, § 6, 7-19-82)  
Sec. 41-429. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1721, § 5, enacted April 2, 1984, repealed § 41-429, pertaining to sign regulations in the C5 district. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1640, § 7, adopted July 19, 1982.  
Sec. 41-430. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 41-430, relative to site plan review, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, enacted Nov. 21, 1983. Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1640, § 8, adopted July 19, 1982.  
Sec. 41-431. - Service stations and automobile servicing in the C5 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter for commercial uses, service stations and automobile servicing are subject to the requirements of section 41-374. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 11, 3-18-91)  
Secs. 41-432—41-438. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - CR (COMMERCIAL RESIDENTIAL) 
 
Sec. 41-439. - Applicability of division. 
CR (commercial residential) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.270; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-850, § 1, 6-20-66)  
Sec. 41-440. - Description and purpose; principles. 
This district is intended to provide areas located adjacent to certain high capacity arterial streets and highways for planned developments integrating commercial and residential land uses. Site development standards and principles are designed to encourage greater convenience, efficiency, excellence of design, and visual appeal than is possible through usual strip development. 
The following site planning principles, in accordance with community development policy, shall be incorporated in all developments approved for this district: 
(a)  Uses shall be buffered from one another, in order to avoid nuisances. 
(b)  Internal circulation shall separate different kinds of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and shall involve the least possible dissection of the site. 
(c)  Access to and from the adjacent high capacity arterial streets and highways shall be limited, in order to insure efficient and safe vehicular circulation. 
(d)  Adequate open spaces and landscaping shall be provided for all uses and shall be integrated with buildings and parking areas. 
(e)  Buildings shall be located to create a variety of open spaces and to eliminate corridor or barrackslike effects. 
(f)  A well-planned system of walks shall be developed for convenient access between dwelling units and to commercial or other uses developed on the site. 
(g)  Walks, parking, and open spaces shall be provided with adequate lighting for safe and convenient night-time use. 
(h)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes shall have varied alignments and vistas. 
(i)  Uncovered parking areas shall be distributed throughout the site in order to avoid monotonous stretches of parked cars or surface paving. 
The above principles apply to the placement, shape, and interrelationship of buildings, spaces, and other site elements, and shall not be misconstrued to interfere with the architectural style or motifs of individual buildings. 
(Code 1952, § 9320.271; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-850, § 1, 6-20-66)  
Sec. 41-441. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 1983, repealed § 41-441, relative to submission of development plans, derived from Code 1952, § 9230.272; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-850, § 1. adopted June 20, 1966.  
Sec. 41-442. - Uses permitted in the CR district. 
The following uses are permitted in the CR district: 
(a)  Retail and service uses. 
(b)  Professional offices. 
(c)  One-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings. 
(d)  Resident managers' offices devoted solely to the rental of dwelling units on the site, provided that said office and surrounding grounds shall retain a residential character if located within residential areas. 
(e)  Adult entertainment businesses, subject to compliance with the requirements of article XVII of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.273; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-850, § 1, 6-20-66; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 6, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 6, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1230, § 6, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 6, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1532, § 10, 6-16-80; Ord. No. NS-1540, § 8, 9-2-80; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 39, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 6, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-442.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the CR district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the CR district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Hotels, motels, lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses and sorority houses. 
(b)  Service stations, provided they are integrated into a larger development site and accessible only by limited access ways serving the larger site as a whole. 
(c)  Indoor swap meets, bulk merchandise stores, and home improvement warehouse stores. 
(d)  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
(e)  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(f)  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(g)  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 40, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1992, § 1, 1-17-89; Ord. No. NS-2213, § 4, 1-18-94; Ord. No. NS-2276, § 5, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 11, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-443. - Site standards. 
(a)  Sites developed for exclusively commercial or professional use or exclusively residential use shall meet the following minimum site standards: 
(1)  Minimum area: The minimum site area shall be three (3) acres. 
(2)  Minimum dimensions: 
(i)  The minimum site depth shall be three hundred (300) feet, providing that for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of ground floor building area above twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, there shall be provided an additional one (1) foot in depth. 
(ii)  The minimum site width shall be no less than one-half (½) of the site depth. 
(b)  Sites developed for mixed residential and commercial or professional uses shall meet the following minimum site standards: 
(1)  Minimum area: The minimum site area shall be five (5) acres. 
(2)  Minimum depth: The minimum site depth, measured at right angles from any arterial street or highway from which there will be primary vehicular access to the property, shall be six hundred (600) feet. 
(3)  Minimum width: The minimum site width shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.274; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-850, § 1, 6-20-66)  
Sec. 41-444. - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum gross floor area. Dwelling units shall have the following minimum gross floor areas per unit, exclusive of garages, carports, balconies, patios, or open porches: 
(1)  Bachelor apartment: Three hundred (300) square feet. 
(2)  One-bedroom apartment: Five hundred (500) square feet. 
(3)  Two (2) or more bedroom apartment: Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(b)  Maximum building height. The maximum height of any building or structure used for any purpose permitted in this district shall be equivalent to one-third ( 1/3 ) the distance from any point on the building or structure perimeter at ground level to the nearest point of any land zoned for exclusively residential purposes. 
(c)  Buffers. 
(1)  At any point where a site area used for residential uses abuts land on or off the site used or zoned for commercial uses or vehicular ways or parking areas related to commercial uses, there shall be provided either a solid barrier six (6) feet in height of decorative noncombustible material or permanently maintained hedge, or an open space twenty-five (25) feet in width which shall not be used in the calculation of other required open spaces, yards or setbacks. 
(2)  Buildings combining residential and commercial uses may be permitted if the design assures the privacy, amenities, and protection against nuisances provided for residential use buildings under the provisions of this district. 
(d)  Setback and yard requirements. 
(1)  Where a building site abuts any public right-of-way there shall be provided an open, landscaped setback at least ten (10) feet in depth, measured at right angles to the right-of-way line and extending the full length of such abutment. Where such a required yard abuts building, vehicular accessway, or parking areas used solely for commercial purposes, fifty (50) per cent of the required yard may be substituted in required parking area landscaping, provided that no such required yard shall be less than five (5) feet in depth. 
(2)  Buildings shall be provided with the following open yards, of which the depths are to be measured perpendicular to the building walls: 
(i)  Any building wall containing a main entrance shall have a yard having a minimum depth of ten (10) feet plus two (2) feet for each additional feet for each additional story in height above the first, plus one (1) foot for each fifteen (15) feet in length. 
(ii)  Any building wall which contains windows opening into any habitable room or place of work, but does not contain a main entrance, shall have a yard having a minimum depth of six (6) feet plus one (1) foot for each additional story in height above the first, plus one (1) foot for each fifteen (15) feet in length. 
(iii)  Any building wall which does not contain main entrances or windows opening into any habitable room or place of work or which is part of an accessory building shall have a yard having a minimum depth of five (5) feet. 
(3)  The depth of required yards may be reduced fifty (50) per cent for any single-story building used solely for commercial purposes, if an equivalent area contiguous with the building is substituted in pedestrian mall or arcade landscaped entirely with decorative materials and plants, provided that no such building shall be closer than ten (10) feet to another building and no pedestrian accessway shall be less than six (6) feet. 
(e)  Minimum distances between buildings. The minimum distances between buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  The minimum distance between parallel walls of two (2) main buildings or between (2) parallel facing walls of the same building shall be the sum of the yard depth requirements of both walls. 
(2)  For obliquely aligned buildings, the required distance between two (2) main buildings may be decreased a maximum of five (5) feet at one end if increased an equal distance at the other end provided that the minimum distance in no case shall be less than ten (10) feet. 
(3)  The distance between two (2) parallel main buildings facing each other for only a portion of their lengths may be reduced if the extent of their overlap does not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the length of either facing wall. The minimum distance between said buildings shall be equal to the full yard depth requirement of the longer facing wall plus three-fourths (¾) of the yard depth requirement of only the overlapping portion of the shorter facing wall. 
(4)  Any pedestrian accessory shall have a minimum width of six (6) feet. 
(5)  The requirements of (1) through (4) above shall apply whether the required spaces are open to the sky or covered. 
(6)  Balconies and exterior stairways shall not project more than fifty (50) per cent of the depth of any required yard or setback. 
(f)  Open space and recreational-leisure areas. There shall be provided a minimum of: 
(1)  Three hundred fifty (350) square feet of usable recreational-leisure space for each dwelling unit. Portions of spaces required under the yard and minimum distance provisions of this section may be included in the calculation of recreational-leisure space to the extent that they are integrated with and usable as part of a larger recreational-leisure area. 
(2)  Where private outdoor living areas are provided, the minimum recreational-leisure space requirement shall be reduced to three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit. 
(i)  Minimum dimensions of such private outdoor living areas shall be as follows: 
(.1)  When provided for ground floor or studio-type units, such areas shall have a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet, the least dimension of which shall be ten (10) feet. 
(.2)  When provided for dwelling units wholly above the ground floor, such areas shall be provided as accessible balconies or decks, and shall have a minimum area of fifty (50) square feet, the least dimension of which shall be five (5) feet. 
(ii)  Remaining required space not provided in private outdoor living areas shall be provided in common recreational-leisure areas. 
(3)  Common recreational-leisure areas, which shall be conveniently located and readily accessible from all dwelling units located on the building site, may extend into the required yards, but shall be screened from adjacent arterial streets and highways, and may include swimming pools, putting greens, court game facilities, and any other recreational-leisure facilities necessary to meet the requirements of residents and their guests. Common recreational-leisure areas, with the exception of pedestrian accessways and paved recreational facilities, shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials and shall be permanently maintained in a neat and orderly manner as a condition to use. Fountains, sculpture, planters and decorative screen-type walls, where an integral part of a landscaping scheme comprised primarily of plant materials, are permitted. Required recreational-leisure space shall in no case be used for parking automobiles or for commercial agriculture. 
(4)  Fifty (50) per cent of required common recreational-leisure space for residential units may be included in the calculation of required yards and setbacks for commercial uses developed on the same site, providing the resulting spaces shall be part of an integrated whole contiguous with and convenient to the residential buildings served, shall be developed solely with plant and decorative materials, and shall not serve as primary commercial pedestrian routes or otherwise made unavailable for leisure purposes. 
(g)  Coverage. The maximum coverage by main residential buildings and accessory residential buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the residential site area. If the site is in residential use only, the residential site area is the total site minus the area of all vehicular rights-of-way and of all accessways which exceed one hundred (100) feet in length. If the site is also in use for commercial purposes, demarcation of residential site areas shall be shown on submitted plans for the purpose of calculating coverage, and any open spaces, setbacks, parking areas, and vehicular ways used to satisfy development requirements for commercial uses shall not be included in calculating the coverage of residential buildings. Recreation-leisure facilities shall not be counted as covered areas. 
(h)  Off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  Refer to section 41-617 for parking requirements for this district. 
(2)  Parking facilities for residential units shall be completely separated from parking facilities and main internal circulatory routes used for commercial or professional uses. The site design shall discourage users of one use area from parking their cars in spaces serving other use areas. Each space for residential use shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the principal entrance to the building in which the dwelling unit served is located. 
(3)  Spaces provided for residential guest parking shall be conveniently distributed in separate groupings having a maximum of five (5) spaces each. 
(4)  All points of vehicular access to and from off-street parking areas and driveways onto public rights-of-way shall be approved by the director of public works. Wherever a private driveway enters onto said public right-of-way, a stop sign shall be erected and maintained at such exit point to insure reasonable traffic safety in compliance with the standard sign sheet on file in the office of the department of public works. 
(i)  Landscaping. 
(1)  All required setback areas, required open spaces around the perimeter of buildings, and the required parking landscaped areas, unless otherwise specified in the provisions of this district, shall be landscaped and maintained according to approved plans. Required setback areas abutting properties zoned for exclusively residential purposes shall be planted with one (1) tree to be provided for each fifteen (15) linear feet of abutment. 
(2)  Landscaping shall consist of lawn, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials, and may include the following decorative elements where an integral part of a landscape scheme is comprised primarily of plant materials: 
(i)  Fountains, ponds, sculptures and planters. 
(ii)  Screen-type masonry walls forty-two (42) inches in height. 
(iii)  Wrought iron or other types of open work metal fences, exclusive of chain link, provided that the component solid portions of a fence do not constitute more than twenty (20) per cent of the total surface area of its face. Such fences shall have a maximum of six (6) feet. 
(3)  Two (2) per cent of the gross uncovered parking area for all uses shall be landscaped. 
(4)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the developer shall submit to the city and the planning division shall approve a landscape plan that conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(6)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(7)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(8)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(9)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(j)  Subdivision of property developed under the CR district. Upon completion of a development of property in the CR district, no portion of the property involved in said development shall be severed or sold unless said severed parcel and the development thereon complies with all provisions set forth for the CR district. Further, the remaining parcel and development thereon shall also comply with said CR district provisions. Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale of any dwelling or commercial units provided all common areas, required yard areas, common recreational areas, and similar areas required under the provisions of the CR district are retained in trust or otherwise for the benefit of all tenants and owners of any interest of any of the structures on the original area developed as a unit. Further, prior to the issuance of a building permit or approval of the development plans as set forth in section 41-441, deed restrictions prohibiting the alienation of all land areas not devoted to buildings shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the County of Orange, State of California. Said restrictions shall include a statement that said deed restrictions shall be irrevocable for a period of not less than thirty (30) years. A copy of said deed restrictions shall be filed with the planning department prior to the issuance of a building permit to the owner of the original project. 
(k)  Dedication for public right-of-way. If a parcel zoned CR is to be developed in accordance with the provisions set forth for this district and said parcel abuts a street not improved to city standards, the owner shall dedicate the necessary street easement to the city and improve said street so as to be in accordance with the design standards and specifications of this Code of Ordinances prior to the issuance of utility release by the building department. 
(l)  Trash collection areas. All trash and garbage collection areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a five-foot block wall with adequate access to and from these areas for collection vehicles. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.275; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-850, § 1, 6-20-66; Ord. No. NS-1721, § 2, 4-2-84; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 9, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-445. - Operational standards in the CR district. 
All retail and business uses in the CR district shall be conducted and located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195. 
(Ord. No. NS-2114, § 3, 3-4-91)  
Secs. 41-446—41-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 18. - M1 (LIGHT INDUSTRIAL) 
 
Sec. 41-471. - Applicability of division. 
M1 (light industrial) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.280; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-472. - Uses permitted in the M1 district. 
The following uses are permitted in the M1 district: 
(a)  The compounding, processing, or treatment of raw or previously treated materials into a finished or semi-finished product, excluding those uses specified in section 41-489.5. 
(b)  The manufacture of products from raw or previously treated materials, excluding those uses specified in section 41-489.5. 
(c)  The assembly of products from raw or previously treated materials, excluding those uses specified in section 41-489.5. 
(d)  The packaging or distribution of previously prepared products or materials, excluding those uses specified in section 41-489.5. 
(e)  Wholesale establishments where the primary trade is business to business sale of products, supplies, and equipment. 
(f)  Storage of previously prepared goods, products or materials for eventual distribution or sales where the goods, products or materials are the property of the owner or operator of the building or structure. 
(g)  Machine shop or other metal working shops. 
(h)  Warehousing. 
(i)  Impound yards (storage only) with no office or dispatching operations. 
(j)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments in conjunction with plant operation for such establishment on the premises. 
(k)  Eating establishments not specified in section 41-472.5. 
(l)  Research laboratories that do not generate hazardous waste materials. 
(m)  Service stations with no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of the gross floor area devoted to non-automotive related product sales. 
(n)  Truck, boat and heavy equipment sales, rental, and service. 
(o)  Movie, photography, musical or video production studios. 
(p)  Bulk products sales (twenty-five (25) cubic feet or greater) when such products are the primary sales activity. 
(q)  Public utility structures. 
(r)  Blueprinting, photoengraving, screen printing and other reproduction processes. 
(s)  Wholesale nursery and plant storage. 
(t)  Contractor's yard. 
(u)  Automotive repair and service, including body and fender repair, painting, and engine replacement. 
(v)  Home improvement warehouse store. 
(w)  Sales of industrial products, supplies and equipment used for final product manufacture. 
(x)  Lumberyard, including mill and sash work if conducted entirely within an enclosed building. 
(y)  Recycling facilities not in excess of forty-five thousand (45,000) gross square feet and in compliance with section 41-1253 of this Code including: 
(1)  Small collection facilities. 
(2)  Large collection facilities. 
(3)  Light processing facilities. 
(z)  Adult entertainment businesses, subject to compliance with the requirements of article XVII of this chapter. 
(aa)  Storage and distribution of hazardous materials. 
(bb)  Passenger transportation services. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.281; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord, No. NS-976, § 1, 8-18-69; Ord. No. NS-996, § 1, 12-15-69; Ord. No. NS-1035, § 5, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 7, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1080, § 3, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 7, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1275, § 2, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-1352, § 2, 4-4-77; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 7, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 41, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1748, § 1, 10-1-84; Ord. No. NS-1834, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. NS-1934, § 1, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 8, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2306, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. NS-2373, § 7, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2443, § 2, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2470, § 5, 5-21-01; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 8, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 41-472.1. - Ancillary uses permitted in the M1 district. 
The following uses are permitted when ancillary to any use permitted by section 41-472 or to any use permitted subject to a conditional use permit: 
(1)  Administrative office use occupying up to thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area; 
(2)  Product sales or service uses occupying up to five (5) per cent of the gross floor area; 
(3)  Child care facilities occupying up to thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area; provided, however, that no combination of uses permitted by this section shall exceed thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area. 
(4)  The outside storage of Class I and Class II liquids (as defined in the fire code of the City of Santa Ana) in above-ground fixed storage tanks when properly screened pursuant to section 41-622 of the Code, as it may be amended from time to time. As used herein, "tank" means a vessel containing more than sixty (60) gallons. 
(5)  Enclosed storage where the goods, materials or supplies stored are the property of the owner or operator of the building or structure occupying up to thirty (30) per cent. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 9, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 21, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2442, § 3, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 9, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 41-472.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the M1 district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the M1 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Principal industrial uses if occupying less than seventy (70) per cent of the gross floor area with the remainder of the floor area allocated to office use only. 
(b)  Storage of new or used buildings or houses. 
(c)  Child care facilities other than as permitted by section 41-472.1. 
(d)  Trade schools which provide instruction which requires the operation of heavy equipment or machinery normally associated with manufacturing operations such as woodworking or machine shops. 
(e)  Kennels for the temporary care and lodging of dogs and other domesticated household animals. 
(f)  Eating establishments permitted in section 41-472 which operate between 12:00 and 5:00 a.m. and which are within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential use. 
(g)  Eating establishments with drive-through window service. 
(h)  Petroleum and gas storage. 
(i)  Freight, bus and truck terminal. 
(j)  Industrial medical clinics which offer medical services by referral only and do not offer overnight stays. 
(k)  Administrative office use ancillary to a permitted industrial use occupying more than thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area. 
(l)  Heavy processing recycling uses. 
(m)  Car wash facility. 
(n)  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use to a restaurant or eating establishment, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
(o)  Commercial storage not within five hundred (500) feet of an arterial street (as defined in the city's circulation element) or freeway or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a freeway intersection. 
(p)  Mini-warehouse uses; provided that no conditional use permit shall be granted unless a written finding is made that the parcel on which the use is proposed is not within five hundred (500) feet of an arterial street (as defined in the city's circulation element) or freeway, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a freeway intersection. 
(q)  Recreational vehicle, vehicle and/or boat storage yard; provided that no conditional use permit shall be granted unless a written finding is made that the parcel on which the use is proposed is: not within five hundred (500) feet of an arterial street (as defined in the city's circulation element) or freeway, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a freeway intersection. 
(r)  Data center uses; provided that no conditional use permit shall be granted unless a written finding is made that the parcel on which the use is proposed is: not within five hundred (500) feet of an arterial street (as defined in the city's circulation element) or freeway, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a freeway intersection. 
(s)  Indoor sport facility, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-482. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 42, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1834, § 2, 2-3-86; Ord. No. NS-1934, § 2, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-1979, § 1, 11-15-88; Ord. No. NS-2122, § 3, 4-15-91; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 10, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2306, § 2, 12-2-96; Ord. No. NS-2316, § 1, 3-17-97; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 12, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 22, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2470, § 6, 5-21-01; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 10, 4-15-02; Ord. No. NS-2776, § 5, 9-2-08)  
Sec. 41-473. - Operational standards in the M1 district. 
(a)  Any activity permitted in this district shall be conducted in such a manner as not to have a detrimental effect on permitted adjacent uses by reason of refuse matter, noise, light, vibration, or lack of proper maintenance of grounds or buildings. 
(b)  Outdoor storage of materials, products, equipment or vehicles, shall be screened by a solid fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height. Materials, products or equipment stored outdoors shall not be piled higher than the height of the fence or wall, nor encroach into required parking and landscape areas. 
(c)  A solid wall or fence not less than eight (8) feet in height is required along any rear or side lot line abutting property which is either used, zoned, or designated on the General Plan for residential purposes. 
(d)  Public utility electric distribution and transmission substations shall be enclosed within a solid wall or fence not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(e)  All major compounding, processing, packaging or assembly of articles of merchandise, treatment of products and vehicle maintenance and repair, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. In addition, service bays for ancillary vehicle maintenance and repair shall be completely screened from view from the public street. 
(f)  All property shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and attractive condition, including but not limited to structures, landscaping, parking area, walkways, and trash enclosures. 
(g)  Loading areas shall not be visible from arterial streets or from streets adjacent to front yards. Loading areas facing other streets shall be screened with decorative walls of a material compatible with the building design and by bermed landscaping abutting such walls. Loading areas not facing a street shall be setback at least thirty-five (35) feet from the property line. 
(h)  Railroad tracks are not allowed on any street side of a building. If railroad tracks and loading docks are located other than at the rear of a building area, the tracks and the loading dock shall be completely screened from view from any street. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.282; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-635, § 8, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-1080, § 3, 5-17-71; Ord. No. NS-1708, § 8, 12-19-83; Ord. No. NS-1834, § 3, 2-3-86; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 11, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2470, § 7, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-474. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.283; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 13, 12-4-61)  
Sec. 41-475. - Yards abutting streets—Generally. 
(a)  A yard is required along any lot line which abuts a public street which, except as provided in section 41-476 or section 41-476.5, shall be of an area not less than the length of such lot line in feet multiplied by: 
(i)  Twenty (20) feet, if the street is designated in the general plan of the city as an arterial street; or 
(ii)  Ten (10) feet, if the street is not so designated as an arterial street. 
(b)  The yard required by paragraph (a) shall include a strip immediately adjacent to the street and shall be of a width not less than: 
(i)  Ten (10) feet, if the street is designated in the general plan of the city as an arterial street; or 
(ii)  Five (5) feet, if the street is not so designated as an arterial street. 
(c)  The area of any one (1) vehicular driveway shall be considered part of the area of any yard required by paragraph (a) to the extent that: 
(i)  The driveway is approximately perpendicular to the street; and 
(ii)  The driveway does not exceed thirty (30) feet in width. 
(d)  Except as provided in paragraph (c), any yard required by this section shall be landscaped. Signs are permitted in such yards provided they are in compliance with the Sign Ordinance of the City of Santa Ana. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.284; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1301, § 1, 4-5-76; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 12, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-476. - Same—Reduction of requirements on previously developed streets. 
The minimum area requirement imposed on any lot by paragraph (a) of section 41-475 shall be reduced by one-half (½) if seventy-five (75) per cent of the lineal frontage of the side of the street on which the lot is located, measured to the next intersecting cross streets in each direction, has been developed in nonconformity with such requirements. Yard requirements shall be determined separately with respect to each street upon which the lot abuts. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.285; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1301, § 2, 4-5-76)  
Sec. 41-476.5. - Same—Preservation of existing yards on previously developed streets. 
Existing yard areas which exceed those required by paragraph (a) of section 41-475 shall be preserved if seventy-five (75) per cent of the lineal frontage of the side of the street on which the lot is located, measured to the next intersecting cross streets in each direction, has been developed in excess of such requirements. Yard requirements shall be determined separately with respect to each street upon which the lot abuts. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 13, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-477. - Landscaping. 
Front yard: 
(a)  One (1) 24-inch box canopy tree shall be provided for each twenty-five (25) linear feet of front yard (exclusive of driveways). Such trees may be placed in clusters. 
(b)  Six (6) five-gallon size shrubs shall be provided per twenty-five (25) linear feet of front yard (exclusive of driveways). As an alternative, the use of three (3) five-gallon size shrubs and ten (10) one-gallon shrubs is acceptable provided the plant material adds color and variety to the design. 
(c)  The front yard shall be planted in turf or acceptable dry climate ground cover. A ground cover is required in shrub areas and as accents in small pockets. Redwood header boards or similar barriers shall be placed between turf and other plant materials. 
(d)  Berms in the front yard having more than a 4:1 slope shall be planted in ground cover. Turf is not acceptable. 
(e)  When parkway trees are required by the city, they shall be integrated with the onsite landscape plan to ensure proper spacing and species selection. 
(f)  A minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall be planted and maintained where the off-street parking area abuts any public street, except at approved driveways. 
Parking area: 
(g)  In parking areas available to parking by the general public, a landscape planter shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces. Each planter shall have minimum dimensions of six (6) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length including concrete curbing. Each planter shall be bordered on two (2) sides minimum by parking area. The planter strips shall run parallel to the parking spaces and be consistently spaced throughout the parking area. Each planter shall require one (1) 15-gallon size tree, five (5) five-gallon shrubs plus ground cover. 
(h)  In lots that are solely used by employees of the company, a landscape planter shall be provided for every five (5) consecutive parking spaces. Each planter shall have minimal dimension of four (4) feet by four (4) feet, including concrete curb. Each planter shall require one (1) 15-gallon size tree and a suitable ground cover or low growing shrubs. These planters may be located between parking spaces so as to maximize the amount of available space for parking. Planters may also be consistent with general parking landscape requirements. Each parking area shall be enclosed by perimeter planters abutting the lot or parking spaces, except for the driveways. 
(i)  The choice of plant material shall be trees and/or shrubs, with a ground cover in keeping with the size and limitations of the area. Ground covers alone are not acceptable. A minimum of one (1) 15-gallon tree shall be provided for each ten (10) parking spaces, or portion thereof. 
(j)  Parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles shall not encroach into landscape areas. 
Buffer: 
(k)  A landscaped planter of a width not less than ten (10) feet is required along any interior lot line to the extent such lot line abuts any property which is neither zoned for industrial uses, nor indicated on the general plan of the city as planned for industrial purposes. 
General: 
(l)  A plant list shall be shown on the required plot plan to obtain a building permit for the building for which the parking area is provided. The list shall include the botanical and common names of the plant to be used, the sizes to be planted, and the quantity of each. The plants shall be listed alphabetically and assigned key numbers to be used in locating the plants on the plan. 
(m)  All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained at all times. 
(n)  Redwood chips, decorative stone and other inorganic materials are not acceptable substitutes for ground cover or turf. 
(o)  All trees in parking areas shall be placed in root barriers. 
(p)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(q)  The landscaping shall be contained in planting areas that are enclosed by minimum six-inch high concrete curbs. 
(r)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(s)  Compliance with all provisions of this section shall be required except for minor modifications approved by the planning division. 
(t)  All appurtenances, such as transformers, backflow preventers, trash enclosures, signage, meters, and lights, shall be shown on landscape plans and screened with plant materials. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.286; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1301, § 3, 4-5-76; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 14, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 10, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-478. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.287; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1301, § 4, 4-5-76; Ord. No. NS-2176, § 4, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 15, 12-18-95; Ord. No. 2404, § 1, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 41-479. - Caretaker quarters in the M1 district. 
Permanent quarters for a guard, custodian, or caretaker are permitted in the M1 district when incidental to a permitted primary use, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Such quarters shall maintain the setback requirements set forth in sections 41-475, 41-476 and 41-477. 
(2)  There shall be no more than one (1) such quarters on any one (1) lot. 
(3)  The maximum floor area shall be limited to seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(4)  The floor area design shall be limited to one (1) bedroom, a kitchen, a living room and a bathroom. 
(5)  The quarters shall be architecturally compatible with the structures used for the primary use on the lot. 
(6)  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for the quarters, in addition to other required off-street parking on the lot. 
Such parking spaces shall be located immediately adjacent to the quarters and reserved for the exclusive use thereof. 
(Ord. No. NS-1936, § 1, 11-16-87)  
Sec. 41-480. - Service stations, automobile servicing, and automobile repair in the M1 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter for commercial uses, service stations and automobile servicing are subject to the requirements of 41-374, and automobile repair is subject to the requirements of 41-385. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 12, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-481. - Minimum lot size and street frontage in the M1 district. 
Each lot within the M1 district shall have at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of area and one hundred (100) feet of street frontage. 
(Ord. No. NS-2275, § 16, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-482. - Indoor sport facility in the M1 district. 
In addition to the provisions of this chapter, indoor sport facilities shall comply with the following development and operational standards: 
(a)  All business activities shall by conducted and located within an enclosed structure. 
(b)  Any outdoor storage of equipment or materials shall be fully screened by a decorative masonry block wall. 
(c)  No indoor sport facility shall operate before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week. 
(d)  Ancillary uses including: meeting rooms, snack bars and equipment rental or sales are permitted within an indoor sport facility provided that their gross floor area of the ancillary use does not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the total building area. 
(e)  Ancillary uses shall operate in conjunction with the primary recreation use, and shall maintain the same or fewer hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2776, § 6, 9-2-08)  
Secs. 41-483—41-487. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - M2 (HEAVY INDUSTRIAL) 
 
Sec. 41-488. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 17, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-488, which pertained to applicability of the division and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.300, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-489. - Regulations governing the M2 district. 
Property which is located in the M2 (Heavy Industrial) use district is subject to all the regulations applicable to property in the M1 district pursuant to Division 18 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 43, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1936, § 2, 11-16-87; Ord. No. NS-1979, § 2, 11-15-88; Ord. No. NS-2114, § 4, 3-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 18, 12-18-95)  
Sec. 41-489.5. - Additional uses subject to a conditional use permit in the M2 district. 
In addition to uses permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to sections 41-489 and 41-472.5, the following uses may be permitted in the M2 district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
a.  Acid manufacturing. 
b.  Junkyards, automobile wrecking yards and salvage yards, and impound yards. 
c.  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
d.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
e.  Gas or acetylene manufacture. 
f.  Glue manufacture. 
g.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
h.  Sites for the transfer, disposal or dumping of rubbish, garbage, trash, or refuse. 
i.  Any facility where payment is offered for blood or plasma donations. 
j.  Crematories. 
k.  Hazardous waste treatment facilities. 
l.  Recycling facilities in excess of forty-five thousand (45,000) gross square feet and in compliance with section 41-1253. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 44, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 19, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 2, 10-6-97; Ord. No. NS-2443, § 3, 9-18-00; Ord. No. NS-2646, § 3, 3-15-04; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 9, 11-21-17 )  
Sec. 41-490. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 20, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-490, which pertained to operational standards and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.302, and Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960.  
Sec. 41-491. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 20, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-491, which pertained to building height and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.303; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-553, § 14, adopted Dec. 4, 1961.  
Sec. 41-492. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 20, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-492, which pertained to yard and landscape requirements and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.304; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-1301, § 5, adopted April 5, 1976.  
Sec. 41-493. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 20, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-493, which pertained to off-street parking and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.305; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-1301, § 6, adopted April 5, 1976.  
Sec. 41-494. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 20, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-494, which pertained to service stations, automobile servicing, and automobile repair in the M2 district, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2118, § 13, adopted March 18, 1991.  
Secs. 41-495—41-503. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 20. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 41-504. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-504, which pertained to applicability of regulations in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.320; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965.  
Sec. 41-505. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-505, which pertained to the purpose of the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.320; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-506. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-506, which pertained to the uses permitted in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.322; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 9, adopted Sept. 8, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 9, adopted July 17, 1972; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 9, adopted Nov. 19, 1979; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 45, adopted June 25, 1984; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-507. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-507, which pertained to operational standards in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.323; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; Ord. No. NS-1721, § 3, adopted Apr. 2, 1984; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 3, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-508. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-508, which pertained to building height in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.324; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 4, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-509. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-509, which pertained to building site area in the LM district and derived from Ord. No. NS-553, § 15, adopted Dec. 4, 1961; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 5, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-510. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-510, which pertained to required yards in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.326; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965; and Ord. No. NS-1970, § 6, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Sec. 41-511. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-511, which pertained to off-street parking in the LM district and derived from Code 1952, § 9230.327; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-782, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1965.  
Sec. 41-512. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2353, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998, repealed the former § 41-512, which pertained to landscaping in the LM district and derived from Ord. No. NS-1970, § 7, adopted Aug. 1, 1988.  
Secs. 41-513—41-519. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 21. - C-SM (SOUTH MAIN STREET COMMERCIAL DISTRICT) 
 
Sec. 41-520. - Applicability of division. 
C-SM (South Main Street commercial district) district is specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-521. - Uses permitted in the C-SM district. 
The following uses are permitted in the C-SM district: 
(a)  Retail and service uses. 
(b)  Professional, administrative, and business offices. 
(c)  Public parking lots and parking structures. 
(d)  Animal hospitals and veterinarians. 
(e)  Gymnasiums, health clubs, and martial arts studios. 
(f)  Public utility structures, including electric distribution and transmission substations. 
(g)  Restaurants, cafes, coffeehouses, and eating establishments, other than those provided in section 41-522, excluding the establishment of drive through service facilities. 
(h)  Schools and studios operated for commercial or public purposes. 
(i)  Child care facilities. 
(j)  Art galleries, museums and exhibit halls. 
(k)  Plant nurseries. 
(l)  Theaters. 
(m)  Furniture stores. 
(n)  Youth amusement rides ancillary to grocery, general merchandise and department retail store uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00; Ord. No. NS-2487, § 7, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 41-522. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the C-SM district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C-SM district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
a.  Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. 
b.  Outdoor and indoor recreational or entertainment uses including night clubs, other than those set forth in section 41-521. 
c.  Hotels, motels, lodging houses, care homes, fraternity houses and sorority houses. 
d.  Thrift and resale stores, antique shops and collectable stores, excluding pawn shops and auction houses. 
e.  Eating establishments open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. and located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of residentially zoned or used property, measured from property line to property line. 
f.  Laundromats. 
g.  Ancillary outdoor dining facilities located in the front yard area. 
h.  Banquet facilities, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
i.  Banquet facilities as an ancillary use, subject to development and operational standards set forth in section 41-199.1. 
j.  Automobile repair and automobile servicing. 
k.  Retail markets having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area which are open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
l.  Churches and accessory church buildings. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00; Ord. No. NS-2445, § 7, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 2730, § 2, 12-18-06; Ord. No. NS-2931, § 10, 11-21-17 ; Ord. No. NS-2938, § 4, 2-20-18 )  
Sec. 41-523. - Operational standards. 
(a)  All business activities in the C-SM district shall be conducted and located within an enclosed building, except as otherwise provided in section 41-195, and except that the following business activities, to the extent permitted under section 41-365 and section 41-365.5, may be conducted outside of an enclosed building: 
(1)  Plant nurseries. 
(2)  Recreational or entertainment uses. 
(3)  Youth amusement rides. 
(b)  No outside storage. Any and all storage of goods and supplies shall be located inside the building and limited to products sold at retail on the premises or utilized in the course of business within the building. 
(c)  Public utility electric distribution and transmission substations shall be screened by a fence at least six (6) feet high, except as restricted by sections 36-45, 36-46, and 36-47 of this Code. 
(d)  Youth amusement rides shall comply with the standards in section 41-366 for C1 districts. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00; Ord. No. NS-2487, § 8, 2-4-02)  
Sec. 41-523.5. - Standards for automobile repair and automobile servicing in the C-SM district. 
Automobile servicing and automobile repair are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No outdoor overnight vehicle storage is permitted except as permitted by section 41-1302. 
(2)  No auto repair or auto body activity within three hundred (300) feet of property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week. 
(3)  Driveway access on through lots shall not be allowed onto streets primarily servicing property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(4)  Building elevations containing service or repair bays shall not face toward a public street or toward residential property if the elevations are within three hundred (300) feet of property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(5)  A six (6) foot high minimum masonry block wall shall be provided along side and rear property lines not abutting public streets. For properties where at least one C-SM zoned parcel is combined with at least one R2-B zoned parcel, a six (6) foot high minimum masonry block wall shall not be required along the property line between the C-SM and R2-B zoned parcels. Walls or fences excluding chain-link shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches high within fifteen (15) feet of public streets. If the site abuts a commercial development, the planning manager may reduce or delete the wall requirement. Flowering vines should be planted at intervals along the wall to discourage graffiti. 
(6)  Exterior building elevations facing public streets shall be a minimum of fifty (50) per cent of the storefront in clear glass. 
(7)  Security fencing, if provided in addition to the perimeter masonry wall, shall be of a decorative design compatible with the masonry wall. All gates and fencing shall remain free of signs or other advertisements. Gates shall remain open during business hours and shall satisfy public works agency requirements for vehicular stacking. 
(8)  Auto repair buildings shall be designed in consideration of the context of the site and area. The design shall complement and be compatible with the predominant architectural theme of the area or of the integrated development site if the auto repair facility is within such a development. 
(Ord. No. NS-2730, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 41-524. - Building height. 
No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-525. - Front yard setback requirement. 
There shall be no front yard building setback allowed except for developments which provide outdoor dining areas subject to the approval of guidelines established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-526. - Side yard and building setback requirements. 
There are no side yard requirements, except on corner lots with parking facing the side street, the side yard shall be not less than five (5) feet. Additionally, no part of a building above the first fifteen (15) feet in height may be located within twenty (20) feet of the vertical plane of a side lot line if the lot is contiguous to residentially zoned or used property on such side. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-527. - Rear yard and building setback requirements. 
There is no rear yard requirement, except that property abutting residentially zoned or used property shall have a rear yard landscape buffer of not less than five (5) feet where parking is provided. Additionally, no part of a building above the first fifteen (15) feet in height may be located within twenty (20) feet of the vertical plane of a rear lot line if the lot is contiguous to residentially zoned or used property on the rear. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-528. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  When no building is present on the site, a minimum five-foot landscaped area along the front property line shall be required for any proposed development. 
(b)  A landscaped area not less than five (5) feet wide shall be maintained along any property line to the extent it serves to separate property zoned or used for residential purposes from any off-street parking area. 
(c)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the developer shall submit to the city and the planning division shall approve a landscape plan that conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(e)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(f)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(g)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(h)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00; Ord. No. NS-2801, § 11, 12-23-09)  
Sec. 41-529. - Lot size and lot frontage requirements. 
Each lot, which is used for commercial purposes in the C-SM district, shall have at least six thousand (6,000) square feet of area and fifty (50) feet of street frontage. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-530. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in the manner prescribed in article XV of this chapter, except that required parking for any C-SM zoned parcel may be granted by the zoning administrator administratively, to be located within five hundred (500) feet of the C-SM use it serves. For zoning administrator consideration, an application shall be submitted in writing to the city planning department upon forms provided by the department and shall include the following: 
(1)  A full statement of the special circumstances and conditions relied upon as grounds for the request. The statement shall address at a minimum, how meeting the minimum parking requirements for the proposed C-SM use on-site as prescribed in article XV of this chapter, would result in severe and unreasonable hardship for the property owner. 
(2)  Documentation indicating sufficient off-street parking exits in the form of a parking lot or parking structure within five hundred (500) feet of the site which meets the minimum requirements for the proposed C-SM use as prescribed in article XV of this chapter. 
(3)  Documentation indicating that the structure in the C-SM zone, for which the request is made, is designed, intended and used for nonresidential purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-531. - Walls and fences. 
(a)  No walls or fences are permitted in the front yard areas, provided however, walls or fences may be permitted in approved dining areas and parking lots subject to the approval of guidelines established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  A minimum six-feet high solid masonry wall shall be provided along any property line abutting property used, zoned or designated within the city's general plan for residential purposes. 
(c)  Wrought iron or similar architecturally compatible fencing may be used in all other applications provided such fencing does not exceed forty-eight (48) inches high within fifteen (15) feet of the front property line. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 41-532. - Signage—South Main Street district. 
The following sign regulations and guidelines shall apply in the Commercial South Main Street District only. The provisions of this section shall be applied in conjunction with chapter 41, article XI, "On-Premise Signs" of this Code, provided however, in the event of a conflict between the provisions within this section and the remainder of the City of Santa Ana Sign Ordinance as outlined in chapter 41, article XI, "On-Premise Signs," the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
The number and area of signs as outlined in this section are intended to be maximum standards and do not necessarily insure architectural compatibility. As a result, in addition to the enumerated standards within this section, consideration shall be given to a sign's relationship to the overall design of the subject property and its given surroundings. 
A planned sign program, pursuant to sections 41-880 through section 41-884 of this chapter, shall be required for all buildings with more than two (2) tenants to ensure signage compatibility for the building. Planned sign programs must complement the architecture of the building or commercial complex and are subject to the same approval process and review as a sign permit. 
(a)  Definitions. The terms used in this section shall be construed as defined herein. Unless specifically defined in this section, all other terms shall have the same meaning as set forth in chapter 41, article XI of this Code. 
(1)  Main sign. The largest single permitted sign on the leasable tenant space. 
(2)  Blade/arcade sign. A type of projecting sign which is attached to the building and protrudes over the sidewalk area. 
(3)  Mimetic sign. A symbol or ornament which provides a direct reference to the product being sold or the type of business activity at a given location. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  This section applies to all signs and advertising displays in the South Main Street commercial district. 
(2)  This section does not apply to signs and advertising displays of the following types and descriptions: 
a.  Any billboard or other off-premise commercial advertising sign regulated by article XII of this chapter. 
b.  Any sign located in the public right-of-way and installed or maintained by the public works agency of the city or by any other public entity having the legal authority to maintain the sign. 
c.  Any sign located within a building or enclosed area and designed to be viewed primarily by persons inside of such building or enclosed area. 
d.  Any sign on a vehicle or other mobile unit, unless such vehicle or mobile unit is parked or stationed near a business activity advertised or identified by the sign and for the primary purpose of attracting public attention to such business activity. 
e.  Any temporary sign taped or otherwise affixed to a window in such a manner as to be easily removed, provided that the total area of such sign in any one (1) window does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the area of each window. 
f.  Non-freestanding incidental sign area not exceeding two (2) square feet in size per elevation and attached flush to a door, wall or window containing information on hours of operation, deliveries, credit cards accepted, or similar information. 
g.  The changing of copy on an approved changeable copy sign, provided the copy identifies the business or service provided. 
(c)  Additional regulations. No sign is permitted that: 
(1)  Is an A-frame, sandwich board or other portable, temporary advertising display. 
(2)  Is temporary or special event flags, banners, festoons, flag canopies or other displays, except as permitted by a special event sign permit. 
(3)  Is a sculptured, molded or otherwise fabricated representational object used for the purpose of visually conveying business identification or product advertising, except as approved by a planned sign program. 
(4)  Is an aerial or balloon type of sign. 
(5)  Conflicts with standards established by resolution of the city council pertaining to the colors and materials of signs adopted for the purpose of promoting signage, which is visually attractive and harmonious with its surroundings. 
(6)  Duplicates or repeats copy on the same sign. 
(7)  Is a graphic of paint or other material on a building for the purpose of amplifying or directing attention to a sign, unless approved by the planning director. 
(8)  Advertises or directs a use not being made on the premises where such sign is displayed or which identifies a product, activity, interest, service or entertainment not available on the premises where such sign is displayed. Any such sign shall be immediately removed at the time the use, product, activity, interest, service or entertainment is no longer made or available on the premises. 
(d)  Main signs. Each leasable tenant space shall be limited to one (1) main sign from the following signage types. However, all businesses within the same building or complex of buildings shall use the same sign type. 
All main signs must comply at a minimum, with the following general design criteria: 
• All individual letter signs shall be installed to appear flush-mounted with no exposed raceways containing electrical transformers or components. 
• All signs shall be for business identification containing the recognized trade name of the business only. 
• No sign shall use mirrors reflecting a direct light source or utilize flashing, blinking or sequenced lights. 
• Internally illuminated cabinet wall signs are strictly prohibited. 
• The top of any main sign shall not be higher than the building on which it is located and in no event higher than twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(1)  Projecting signs. 
a.  Awning signs. Signs can be applied to awnings according to the following criteria: 
(i)  Letters shall be a maximum of fourteen (14) inches and located on the front face or any valance element of the awning. The sign area shall not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the total awning area with a maximum area equal to one (1) square foot per linear foot of awning width. 
(ii)  A logo may be incorporated into the sign, with additional sign area allowed, provided the total sign does not exceed thirty (30) per cent of the total awning area with a maximum of one and one-half (1½) square feet per linear foot of awning width. 
(iii)  Letters and logos shall be sewn or silk-screened onto the awnings in an approved contrasting color. 
(iv)  Each awning that is separated by a distance of at least eight (8) inches may contain an identical sign except that the size of the sign shall be determined by the width of each separate awning. The combination of such signs shall be deemed as one (1) sign for purposes of this section; provided however, the aggregate dimensions of the combination of signs shall comply with the criteria set forth in subsection (i) above. 
(v)  No plastic awning signs shall be permitted. 
(vi)  No internally illuminated awning signs shall be permitted. 
b.  Blade/arcade signs. The following requirements will apply when blade or arcade signs are used: 
(i)  The maximum volume allowed shall be nine (9) cubic/square feet. The sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in any one (1) direction. The volume/dimensions used to determine size shall not include the bracket or suspension structure. 
(ii)  Acceptable materials include painted, polished and patina metal; painted and stained wood; glass; and inlaid stone. 
(iii)  The lowest point of any blade/arcade sign must be eight (8) feet above any pedestrian walkway. 
(iv)  The bracket design shall be integrally planned and detailed and shall be highly ornamental in nature. Brackets shall be consistent throughout their use on any particular building. 
(v)  One (1) blade/arcade sign may be located at each customer entrance. Each sign must be identical and the combination of such signs shall be deemed as one for the purposes of this section; provided however, the aggregate dimensions of the combination of signs shall comply with the criteria set forth in subsection (i) above. 
(vi)  Small scale "mimetic" blade/arcade signs (e.g. barber shop pole) are encouraged where appropriate architecturally in addition to one (1) blade/arcade sign. Final design approval is at the discretion of the planning manager. The combination of such signs shall be deemed as one for the purposes of this section. 
(2)  Flush-mounted signs. 
a.  Individual letter wall signs. The following criteria will apply when individual letters are used: 
(i)  Individual letters shall not exceed fourteen (14) inches in height, with the first letter capitals at a maximum height of sixteen (16) inches. 
(ii)  No more than one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each primary elevation of a leasable tenant space. 
(iii)  Signs using individual letters shall not exceed in length, two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the overall length of the storefront. 
(iv)  Signs shall not exceed a maximum of one (1) square foot per linear foot of the building frontage with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet. 
b.  Permanent signs on glazing. Lettering and logos may be applied directly on glazed areas in accordance with the following requirements: 
(i)  Signs on glazing shall be limited to the first floor of buildings. 
(ii)  Letters are to be a maximum of ten (10) inches. 
(iii)  The total area of the sign shall be no greater than forty (40) per cent of the total glazed area upon which it is applied or fifteen (15) square feet, whichever is smaller. 
(iv)  Acceptable sign techniques are sandblasted or etched glass, professionally painted lettering, professionally or custom fabricated and applied vinyl, metal leaf and stained glass. 
(v)  Each glazed area on either side of a customer entrance may contain an identical sign. The combination of such signs shall be deemed as one (1) for the purposes of this section. 
c.  Exposed neon. Exposed neon signs may only be used in conjunction with food and entertainment uses. Where used, the following criteria must be met: 
(i)  The use of exposed neon is limited to main signs only. 
(ii)  Neon, fiber optics and other high-intensity signs, which exhibit glare and high contrast with their surroundings, are discouraged. Additional lighting may be required to adjust the ambient light background of the proposal. 
(iii)  Signs shall not exceed the maximum area of one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet. 
d.  Plaque signs/fascia panel. The following requirements apply: 
(i)  The length of the fascia panel/plaque shall be a maximum of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the overall storefront. 
(ii)  The height of individual letters shall not exceed fourteen (14) inches, with the first letter capitals a maximum of sixteen (16) inches. 
(iii)  The plaque/fascia panel design and finish shall be integrated with the storefront design. 
(iv)  Individual letters shall not exceed seven (7) inches in depth from the face of the surface upon which they are mounted. 
(v)  Acceptable materials include cast stone, wood and metal panels with individual metal and wood letters, neon and custom tile. 
(vi)  Letters may be no closer than six (6) inches from the edge of the plaque/fascia panel. 
(vii)  The fascia panel shall not exceed a maximum area of one (1) square foot per lineal foot of the building frontage with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet. 
(e)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted in the South Main Street commercial district as follows: 
(1)  Number. No more than one (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted on an integrated development site. A minimum of one hundred (100) feet of street frontage shall be required for a freestanding sign. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  No freestanding sign shall be permitted on any site which does not have street frontage. 
b.  A freestanding sign shall be located only in a landscaped planter, with such planter not less than four (4) feet in any direction from the edge of the planter to the sign. The planning manager may reduce the amount of required landscaping for freestanding signs on sites with legal nonconforming landscaped setbacks. No sign shall obstruct or remove any required landscape materials. 
c.  No freestanding sign shall be placed closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line. 
d.  No freestanding sign for a commercial use shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of land used, zoned, or designated on the general plan for residential purposes on the same street frontage as the proposed sign. 
e.  No freestanding sign shall be located in the triangular area(s) measured fifteen (15) feet by fifteen (15) feet where a driveway enters onto a street, or in any other area which may obstruct the vision of motorists so as to create a safety hazard. Additionally, all signs are subject to sections 36-45 to 36-47 of this Code regarding obstructions to vision at corner intersections. 
(3)  Height and area. Freestanding signs shall not exceed five (5) feet in overall height from curb level unless otherwise stated in this section. The sign face area shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
(4)  Design. 
a.  All signs shall be architecturally compatible with the development on which they are located. Materials and features present in the architecture of the development should be replicated in the design of the freestanding sign. Both solid base or pole base designs are allowed provided the design is architecturally compatible with the development. Final design approval is at the discretion of the planning manager. 
b.  The copy area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the sign face. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall be for the development name only, not to exceed a total of five (5) items of information. 
d.  No sign shall use mirrors reflecting a direct light source or utilize flashing, blinking or sequenced lights. No sign shall utilize unshielded incandescent, fluorescent or other lighting, except neon. 
(f)  Special event signs or displays. No person shall install or maintain or allow to be installed or maintained on property occupied by such person any special event sign or display, except in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  The special event sign or display shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a permit issued by the zoning administrator, who may approve, approve with conditions, or deny such permit. 
(2)  The special event sign or display shall not be maintained for more than fourteen (14) successive days, except that grand opening signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Further, sign permits for grand openings shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the certificate of occupancy of the business is issued. 
(3)  No more than four (4) special event sign permits, including grand opening signs, shall be issued for each business with a valid certificate of occupancy during each calendar year. 
(4)  Such special event sign or display shall include no more than banners and parking lot light pole flag displays and shall not include flag canopies, aerial signs or freestanding signs. 
(5)  The special event banner sign shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area and shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. NS-2420, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Secs. 41-533—41-536. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 22. - PCD (PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT) 
 
Sec. 41-537. - Applicability of division. 
PCD (planned community development) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.360; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-538. - Purpose. 
As part of the general plan of community development of the city, the purpose of this district is to encourage, preserve and improve the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city by encouraging the use of contemporary land planning principles and coordinated community design. 
The planned community development district is created in recognition of the economic and cultural advantages that will accrue to the residents of an integrated, planned community development of sufficient size to provide related areas for various housing types; retail and service activities; industrial operations; recreation, school, public facilities; and other uses of land. This district is designed for use where the area comprising such development project is under single ownership at the time of its classification of this district. 
(Code 1952, § 9230,361; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-539. - Minimum PCD area. 
To be reclassified to the PCD district an area shall contain not less than five hundred (500) contiguous acres under single ownership or controlled by a single entity at the time of application and until the effective date of the ordinance approving the proposed general plan of development. 
An area of less than five hundred (500) contiguous acres may be added to an existing PCD district provided said land is made a part of the original general plan of development in all respects prior to its incorporation into said district by way of amendment of the general plan of development as provided in section 41-540. "Contiguous" shall mean having a common boundary with or physically so located that in the opinion of the city council said additional area bears a significant relationship to the approved and adopted general plan of development. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.362; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-540. - Procedure for reclassification to PCD district. 
In addition to the procedure outlined in section 41-659 through section 41-667, there shall be provided by the applicant, prior to the acceptance of the petition for reclassification by the planning department, a general plan of development. Said general plan of development shall consist of maps, descriptive statements of objectives, principles and standards used in its formulation, and shall include the following components: 
(1)  Land use component. 
(2)  Circulation component. 
(3)  Population component. 
(4)  Subdivision design component. 
(5)  Services and facilities component. 
(6)  Construction order component. 
The general plan of development may also include additional components. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.363; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62; Ord. No. NS-2356, § 1, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-541. - Land use component. 
A land use component shall consist of a map or maps, setting forth the distribution, location and extent of the acres of land devoted to each category of land use proposed as part of the general plan of development. Such uses may include single-family residential, two (2) family residential, three (3) or more family residential, mixed types of residential; neighborhood retail shopping facilities, community retail shopping facilities, regional retail shopping facilities, office facilities, service facilities; wholesale or goods-distribution facilities; general types of industrial facilities; education, religious, recreation, public and semipublic facilities; or other categories of public or private uses of land. Said component shall also contain a descriptive statement of objectives, principles and standards used for its formulation. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.364; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-542. - Circulation component. 
A circulation component shall consist of a map or maps, setting forth the general location and extent of all transportation facilities proposed as part of the general plan of development. Such facilities may include major and local thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, heliports; and the delineation of such systems on the land; one-way street systems; grade separations; divided roads; left-turn lanes; subways; monorail routes; and such other matters as may be related to the provision for the circulation of traffic within the planned community related to the land use component. Said circulation component shall include a designation of proposed street widths. Said component shall also contain a descriptive statement of objectives, principles and standards used for its formulation. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.365; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-543. - Population component. 
A population component shall contain a descriptive statement of the standards of population density and building intensity for the various proposed land uses, including estimates of future population characteristics and change within the planned community correlated with the other components of the general plan of development. The supporting data shall include, but not be limited to, dwelling (housing) units per acre for the various residential uses proposed; and square footage by type for the various offices and retail facilities including sufficient data to calculate traffic generation, parking requirements, water consumption, sewerage needs and the necessary capacity of related utilities and services, traditionally rendered by public or private organizations for a population of such size, as is projected for the completed, planned community. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.366; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-544. - Subdivision design component. 
A subdivision design component shall contain a descriptive statement of the principles governing the proposed subdivision of land or air including lot design for various proposed land uses. This component shall be in sufficient detail so that it can serve as the basis for determining the conformity of any site plan to the general plan of development. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.367; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-545. - Services and facilities component. 
A services and facilities component shall contain a map or maps setting forth the general location and extent of any and all existing and proposed systems for sewerage, domestic water supply and distribution, refuse disposal, drainage, local utilities and any rights-of-way, easements, facilities and appurtenances necessary therefor. Said component shall also contain a descriptive statement setting forth objectives, principles and standards used for its formulation, as well as a detailed statement describing the proposed ownership, method of operation, and maintenance of each such service and facility. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.368; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-546. - Construction order component. 
A construction order component shall contain a map or maps setting forth the proposed chronological order of construction relating each proposed use and structure to the construction of the various services and facilities as may be required herein or as part of the general plan of development. Said component shall include estimated completion dates and shall specify the proposed order of request for utility release or other authority to occupy completed structures so as to provide a basis for determining the adequacy of the related services and facilities for each separate construction phase. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.369; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-547. - Additional components. 
The general plan of development may include any additional components including, but not limited to, an economic feasibility study or an economic benefits analysis if either of such is considered necessary by the applicant or required by the planning commission or city council for the physical development of the project or to aid in evaluating the impact and effect on other existing or proposed facilities and services of the city; a recreation component; public buildings component providing consideration for administrative and public safety quarters; and any others required, depending upon the nature of the particular proposed development. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.370; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-548. - Maps and reports. 
The general plan of development shall include supporting maps drawn to scale, diagrams, charts, descriptions, reports and explanation of methods utilized in its formulation. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.371; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-549. - Reports from city departments. 
Prior to submission of a proposed general plan of development to the planning commission, the plan shall be referred to the department of public works, department of building safety, fire department, police department, recreation and parks department and library department. Each of said departments shall submit to the planning department a written evaluation and report concerning those aspects of the proposed plan which concern the particular department. Said reports shall be forwarded along with the plan to the planning commission and city council. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.372; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-550. - Method of adoption of the general plan of development. 
Public notification of the hearing on the general plan of development shall be incorporated into the notice of proposed reclassification as required in sections 41-659 through 41-667. Specific mention of any proposed modification or amendment of any other ordinance of this city or section of this Code shall be included in said notice. 
Action by the planning commission and city council on the request for reclassification may be concurrent with but shall not precede the adoption of the entire general plan of development. Said plan as presented may be approved, modified, conditionally approved or rejected in part or in entirety by the planning commission and the city council. The action of the planning commission on the request for reclassification and on the general plan of development shall be advisory only but shall include recommended conditions of approval of the general plan of development. 
(Code 1952, § 9230,373; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-551. - Method of amendment of general plan of development. 
Any amendment or substantial change of the adopted general plan of development shall proceed as prescribed in section 41-550. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.374; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-552. - Bonding to assure conformance to general plan of development and agreements. 
To assure that any improvements specified as part of the general plan of development or as a necessary prerequisite to the utility release or authority to use or occupy any area or structure completed under the terms of said plan or each phase as outlined in the construction order component, or any agreements executed by the city council according to the provisions of this chapter, a corporate surety bond or cash bond must be furnished guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work or agreements and the payment of any costs to the city in a sum equal to the total as recommended by the department of public works and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.375; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-553. - Approval of surety bonds by city council. 
Prior to certification of the site plans as required in section 41-555, the department of public works shall determine the amount of corporate surety bond or cash bond as required by section 41-552, and submit said amount to the city council for approval. 
Said corporate surety bond or cash bond shall cover each separate facility or utility required as part of each phase of development as outlined in the approved construction order component of the general plan of development. Provided, however, part of the corporate surety bond, or cash bond amount may be released when any specific part of each phase is completed, upon recommendation of the department of public works and the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.376; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-2060; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Secs. 41-554, 41-555. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1700, § 3, enacted Nov. 21, 1983, repealed §§ 41-554 and 41-555, relative to site plans. Said sections were derived from Code 1952, §§ 9230.377, 9230.378; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1962.  
Sec. 41-556. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any provisions of chapters 27 or 34 of this Code; or conflict between a clearly specified detail of the adopted general plan of development and provisions of chapters 27 and 34 of this Code; or any combination of the above, then the provisions of the ordinance approving or adopting the general plan of development enacted by the city council shall govern if, and only if: 
(1)  The notice of public hearing as required herein states the nature of the conflict, the identification of the Municipal Code section with which there is conflict, and the extent to which it is proposed to modify said section; and 
(2)  The ordinance enacted by the city council approving or adopting the general plan of development makes specific reference to the extent to which any specific Municipal Code section is modified. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.379; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-557. - Effect of minimum area requirements on conveyed lots or building sites. 
In the event any real property in the adopted general plan of development is conveyed in total or in part after adoption of said general plan of development as long as the property remains zoned PCD, the buyers thereof shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter and the adopted general plan of development. However, nothing herein shall be construed to create nonconforming lots, building sites, buildings, or uses by virtue of any such conveyance of lot, building site, building or part of the development credited in conformance with said plan. Subsequent structural additions or alterations may be made provided the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances are adhered to, to the extent that said ordinances may apply. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.380; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-558. - Subdivision of territory of general plan of development. 
In the event the subdivision of all or part of the territory within the boundaries of the adopted and recorded general plan of development is proposed or required by law, the provisions of section 41-554 may be excluded as part of the site plan provided they are required by and submitted as part of the subdivision procedure as required by the subdivision regulations of this city, chapter 34 of this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.381; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-559. - Specific exceptions. 
Since developments of the scope allowed by this district were not contemplated prior to the passage of certain regulatory sections contained in this chapter and chapters 27 and 34 of this Code, the following specific deviations are allowed if specifically stated on the approved and adopted plan with reference to the conflicting Municipal Code section as provided for herein. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-560. - Connection to city waterlines or alternative. 
In the event the city is, in the opinion of the city council, unable for any reason to provide speedy and direct connection to city domestic water facilities, an alternative facility may be approved by the city council provided an agreement is entered into between the owner of the alternative domestic water system and the city council assuring that its construction, operation and maintenance are to city standards. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-561. - Connection to city sewers or alternative. 
In the event the city is, in the opinion of the city council, unable for any reason to provide speedy and direct connection to the city sewerage system, an alternative system may be approved by the city council provided an agreement is entered into between the owner of the alternative sewerage system and the city council assuring its construction, operation and maintenance are to city standards. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-562. - Street width. 
The minimum width of streets may be less than sixty (60) feet, provided: 
(1)  The proposed street width is clearly specified on the general plan of development. 
(2)  Sufficient data is submitted as part of the required components of the general plan of development to determine that the proposed street width is sufficient to accommodate anticipated traffic volume. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-563. - Private streets. 
Whenever such intent does not contradict the provisions of this chapter or chapters 27 and 34 as they relate to the streets and highways element of the city's general plan of community development or the protection of opportunities for reasonable development of surrounding land adjacent to a development proposed in this chapter, streets which are intended to be kept continuously closed to public travel or are at all times posted as private streets may be so shown upon a final map of subdivision, provided an agreement is entered into between the owner of said private streets and the city council assuring their construction, operation and maintenance are to city standards. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-564. - Cul-de-sac length. 
The length of cul-de-sac streets may exceed five hundred (500) feet, but in no case thirteen hundred (1,300) feet, provided: 
(1)  Through property easements are provided to allow the looping of domestic water and sewer lines to the satisfaction of the director of public works; and 
(2)  Through property easements to the nearest accessible street are provided sufficient for the movement of public safety vehicles on instant demand and such vehicular route is so maintained as to remain passable at all times. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.382.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-565. - Recreation use areas and buildings. 
In the event certain land areas and buildings are provided within the planned community for private recreational use, the owner of such land and buildings shall enter into an agreement with the city council to assure the continued operation and maintenance to a predetermined reasonable standard. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.383; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-566. - Reclassification from the PCD district. 
Any application for reclassification from the PCD district to any other district contained within this chapter or hereafter enacted shall be deemed and construed to be a proposed amendment to the adopted general plan of development. Said application shall be processed as prescribed in section 41-551. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.384; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-567. - Uses permitted in the PCD district. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law within the city, any use of land or buildings which is clearly designated by type or category on the approved and adopted general plan of development and subsequently approved site plans, shall be permitted in the PCD district. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.385; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62; Ord. No. NS-1036, § 10, 9-8-70; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 46, 6-25-84)  
Sec. 41-568. - Height limitations. 
All property within the PCD district is declared to be in height district I. 
(1)  No building or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in overall height on any lot or area designated for residential use in the adopted general plan of development. 
(2)  On any lot or portion thereof or area, designated for professional, commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential land use in the adopted general plan of development, no building or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height within one hundred forty (140) feet of property designated for residential land use on the adopted general plan of development. 
(3)  Should paragraph (2) above be met, any lot or area designated for professional, commercial, industrial or other nonresidential land use in the adopted general plan of development may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height provided such building or structure has four (4) lineal feet of setback for each one (1) foot of building height measured from subject building to any property or area designated for residential land use in the adopted general plan of development. 
(4)  Should paragraphs (2) and (3) above be met, there shall be provided and maintained on the property in question a fifteen (15) foot landscaped strip along any abutting property line or area boundaries delimiting residential land use in the adopted general plan of development. Said fifteen (15) foot landscaped strip shall include not less than one (1) tree for every ten (10) lineal feet of landscaped strip and said tree shall be not less than ten (10) feet in height at time of planting; trees to be of any of the species as set forth in section 41-602. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.386; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-569. - Required yard; determination as related to private streets. 
Required yards shall be measured from the nearest wall of the main building to the street line or alley line of said private travel way. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.387; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-570. - Front yard, residential. 
There shall be a front yard of not less than ten (10) feet on all residential lots or building sites. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.388; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-571. - Side yard; residential. 
There shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet on all residential lots or building sites unless the main structure is constructed flush against a similar structure on an adjacent lot or site. On corner lots or building sites the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten (10) feet; or there shall be a total combined side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet on each residential lot or building site allowing a minimum of zero (0) feet in one side yard. In no case shall there be less than a ten (10) foot side yard on the street side of a corner lot. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.389; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-572. - Rear yard, residential. 
There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet on all residential lots or building sites unless the required front yard is increased a distance equivalent to the same reduction in rear yard, thereby resulting in a possible zero (0) foot rear yard. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.390; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-573. - Exception to yard provisions. 
In any area designated on the adopted general plan of development for combination residential and commercial uses on the same lot or building site, the front and side yards required for residential uses may be waived when such residential uses are erected above the ground floor of a building in which the ground floor is used exclusively for nonresidential purposes. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.391; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-574. - All yards; nonresidential. 
There are no yard requirements, except that there shall be a yard of not less than ten (10) feet on all street sides of all lots or building sites used for nonresidential purposes. Said required yards shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.392; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-575. - Maximum residential lot or building site coverage. 
The following maximum lot coverage shall be applied to multiple-family residential land use categories designated on the adopted general plan of development: 
Not more than fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to main and accessory building area, driveways, open or enclosed parking areas and covered patios. The remaining fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to landscaping; lawn area; noncommercial outdoor recreational facilities incidental to the residential development, such as private swimming pools, putting greens and tennis courts; walkways, uncovered patio areas; fences and necessary fire-fighting equipment and installations; further, the open space required by this section shall be arranged and provided in such a manner that it is accessible and usable for the purpose intended herein. Said open space shall not be devoted to commercial agricultural pursuits or any other activity in conflict with the stated purpose of this district. For purposes of the calculations required by this section, private streets shall not be included in total lot or building site area. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.393; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62)  
Sec. 41-576. - Nonresidential land use operational standards. 
All uses of property designated on the approved and recorded general plan of development or subsequently approved site plans shall be operated and conducted in full compliance with the operational standards section of the most restrictive commercial or industrial district in which said specific use is permitted by article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.394; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62) 
Editor's note— The text must be read in conjunction with the division heading.  
Sec. 41-577. - Off-street parking. 
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in the manner and number prescribed by article IV of this chapter. However, of the off-street parking required by article IV, not less than one (1) parking space per dwelling unit shall be a covered parking stall; that is, said stall shall be in a carport or garage. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.395; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62) 
Editor's note— The text must be read in conjunction with the division heading.  
Sec. 41-578. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1721, § 5, enacted April 2, 1984, repealed § 41-578, relative to signs in PCD districts. Said section was derived from Code 1952, § 9230.396; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960; and Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1962.  
Sec. 41-579. - Accessory buildings. 
Accessory buildings to be constructed on any lot or building site in any area designated on the adopted general plan of development for residential development shall comply with section 41-603. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.397; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62) 
Editor's note— The text must be read in conjunction with the division heading.  
Sec. 41-580. - Minimum gross floor area. 
The following uses shall be subject to the following minimum square feet of gross floor area per dwellings unit, exclusive of garages, carports and unenclosed porches and patios: 
(1)  Bachelor apartment: Four hundred and fifty (450) square feet. 
(2)  One-bedroom apartment: Six hundred and fifty (650) square feet. 
(3)  Two or more bedroom apartment: Eight hundred (800) square feet and one hundred (100) square feet for each bedroom in excess of two (2). 
(Code 1952, § 9230.398; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62) 
Editor's note— The text must be read in conjunction with the division heading.  
Sec. 41-581. - Interpretation of district provisions. 
Whenever a question arises concerning the interpretation of any section of this district it shall be the duty of the planning director to ascertain all facts concerning said question and forward all data to the planning commission for a recommendation and then to the city council for a determination. 
(Code 1952, § 9230.399; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-599, § 1, 8-20-62) 
Editor's note— The text must be read in conjunction with the division heading.  
DIVISION 23. - O (OPEN SPACE LAND) 
 
Sec. 41-582. - Applicability of division. 
O (open space land) districts are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, 2-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, 11-19-73)  
Sec. 41-583. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the O District is to provide for permanent open spaces in the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, 2-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, 11-19-73)  
Sec. 41-584. - Uses permitted in the O district. 
The following uses are permitted in the O District: 
(a)  Open-air recreational and entertainment uses, including bike or bridle trails, and buildings and uses accessory thereto. 
(b)  Government buildings, school buildings and facilities, public utility facilities, quasi-public and service facilities, flood-control structures, and uses accessory thereto. 
(Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, 2-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, 11-19-73; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 48, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2058, § 6, 5-7-90)  
Sec. 41-584.5. - Uses subject to a conditional use permit in the O district. 
The following uses may be permitted in the O district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit: 
(a)  Community gardens operated by a non-profit organizations. 
(b)  Production greenhouses and nurseries with no retail sales. 
(c)  Interpretive centers. 
(Ord. No. NS-2511, § 3, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 41-585. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2058, § 7, adopted May 7, 1990, repealed former § 41-585, which pertained to uses prohibited in the O District and derived from Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 1973.  
Sec. 41-586. - Building height. 
There is no limitation on building height. 
(Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, 2-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, 11-19-73)  
Sec. 41-587. - Yard requirements. 
There are no yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. NS-998, § 1, 2-2-70; Ord. No. NS-1191, § 1, 11-19-73)  
DIVISION 24. - PRD (PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT) 
 
Sec. 41-588. - Applicability of division. 
PRD (planned residential development) suffixes are specifically subject to the regulations contained in this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-1112, § 1, 4-3-72)  
Sec. 41-589. - Description and purposes. 
The RE (residential-estate), R1 (single-family residence), R2 (multiple-family residence), R3 (medium-density multiple-family residence), R3H (high-density multiple-family residence), R4 (suburban apartment), CR (commercial-residential), and P (professional) Districts may be modified at the time the zoning is first established or by amendment by adding to the district designation "PRD." The intent and purpose of the Planned Residential Development District is to allow a development planned and designed as a unit to produce an environment of stable, desirable character not out of harmony with its surrounding neighborhood and which meets standards of density, open space, light and air, pedestrian and vehicular access, and traffic circulation no greater than the regulations to which the "PRD" suffix is combined. 
(Ord. No. NS-1112, § 1, 4-3-72)  
Sec. 41-590. - Conditional use permit required. 
Any development, use or division of property within a PRD modified district classification, even though such development, use or division of said property may conform to the base zone to which the PRD modified district may be suffixed, requires the filing and approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1112, § 1, 4-3-72; Ord. No. NS-1186, § 3, 10-1-73; Ord. No. NS-1228, § 1, 2-18-75; Ord. No. NS-1700, § 5, 11-21-83)  
Sec. 41-591. - Development standards. 
Due to the complexity of planned residential developments, it is illogical and impractical to define herein an exact pattern for the arrangement of group dwellings for a parcel involving two (2) or more main dwellings; however, it is the intent of this district to provide a functional and nonmonotonous orientation of buildings with a maximum of open space around each main building consisting of courts, parkways, and patio areas, all oriented so as to provide separation of vehicular traffic from play areas and recreational area[s] for children and adults. 
Further, in order to more clearly define the intent of this district, there shall be on file in the office of the planning department illustrations entitled "Guides to Planned Residential Development." Said illustrations shall be approved by resolution by the planning commission and city council and shall show the desirable arrangement of buildings and open space, but are not designs which must be copied in order to secure approval of development plans as required by the provisions of the Planned Residential Development District. The following contemporary site design standards of principles are designed to provide assistance to the applicant: 
(a)  The overall plan shall be comprehensive, embracing land, buildings, landscaping and their interrelationships and shall conform in all respects to all adopted plans of all governmental agencies for the area in which the proposed development is located. 
(b)  The plan shall provide for adequate open space, circulation, off-street parking and pertinent amenities. Buildings, structures and facilities in the parcel shall be well integrated, oriented and related to the landscape features of the site. 
(c)  The proposed development shall be compatible with the general plan of land used and with circulation patterns on adjoining properties. It shall not constitute a disruptive element to the neighborhood and community. 
(d)  The internal street system shall not be a dominant feature in the overall design, rather it should be designed for the efficient and safe flow of vehicles without creating a disruptive influence on the activity and function of any common areas and facilities. 
(e)  Common areas and recreational facilities shall be located so as to be readily accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units and shall be well related to any common open space provided. 
(f)  Architectural harmony within the development and within the neighborhood and community shall be obtained so far as is practicable. 
(g)  The number of dwelling units shall be as indicated by the base district. 
(h)  No more than fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to main and accessory building area, driveways, open or enclosed parking areas and covered patios. The remaining fifty (50) per cent of the total lot area shall be devoted to landscaping; lawn area; noncommercial outdoor recreational facilities incidental to the residential developments such as private swimming pools; putting greens and tennis courts; walkways; uncovered patio areas; fences; and necessary fire-fighting equipment and installations. Further, the open space required by this section shall be arranged and provided in such a manner that it is accessible and usable for the purpose intended herein. Said open space shall not be devoted to commercial agricultural pursuits or any other activity in conflict with the stated purpose of this section and district. 
(i)  Only television and radio antennas which are located indoors or which are designed to serve all the occupants of the development shall be permitted. 
(j)  All usable open space not occupied by recreational facilities shall be densely landscaped and provided with a permanent underground irrigation system. 
(k)  All streets, alleys, walkways, and parking areas within the development which are not dedicated to public use shall be improved in accordance with improvement standards established by the department of public works and to widths as determined by section 34-165 relating to private street standards for planned residential development. Provisions acceptable to the city shall be made for the preservation and maintenance of all such streets, alleys, walkways and parking areas. All streets within a planned residential development shall provide adequate vehicular circulation for the development and for the area in which it is located. The vehicular circulation and the pedestrian circulation within a planned residential development shall be separated. A partial waiver of this requirement may be granted by the planning commission if it is determined that such partial waiver will not be inconsistent with adequate standards of pedestrian and vehicular circulation for the development and for the area in which it is located. 
(l)  The maximum building height and number of stories permitted shall not exceed the building height and number of stories permitted in the base district. However, the planning commission shall have the right to limit the number of stories in any or all of the buildings in a planned development, the base district regulations notwithstanding, when it finds that existing or proposed developments on adjacent properties, or properties across a street or alley, would be adversely affected unless such a limitation were imposed. 
(m)  Off-street parking shall be provided for each such development in compliance with section 41-617(b) and with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A one-vehicle garage shall be provided for each bachelor or one-bedroom unit. A two-vehicle garage shall be provided for each dwelling unit having two (2) or more bedrooms. Carports may be provided in lieu of garages if twenty-five (25) per cent or more of the total dwelling units are provided either for sale or lease as "affordable" units, as defined in the housing element of the general plan. 
(2)  Guest parking spaces may be uncovered and shall be so located as to be accessible to visitors and guests. 
(3)  The required parking spaces, garages or carports, or any portions thereof, may be grouped when it is determined by the planning commission that such grouping and the location thereof will be accessible and useful in connection with the proposed dwelling units in the development. 
(n)  The site in question for a planned residential development must be large enough to effectively carry out the intent and purposes of the planned residential development as stated in this division. 
(o)  When a planned residential development is to be divided for sale, lease or financing through the subdivision of said development, the provisions of section 34-57(1), Subdivisions, may be waived. A letter requesting waiver of the requirements of section 34-57(1) shall accompany the conditional use permit application and shall include a statement or supporting reason for said waiver request. Said waiver may only be granted in conjunction with the approval of the conditional use permit being applied for. 
(Ord. No. NS-1112, § 1, 4-3-72; Ord. No. NS-1124, § 2, 8-21-72; Ord. No. NS-1674, § 3, 3-21-83; Ord. No. NS-1832, § 2, 2-3-86)  
DIVISION 25. - SP (SPECIFIC PLAN) 
 
Sec. 41-592. - Applicability of SP (Specific Plan) division. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all property within a district which has been designated as SP (Specific Development) and for which a specific plan has been adopted by ordinance. The provisions in such a specific plan shall control the use and development of property in the SP district to the same extent as if set forth in full in this division. The provisions of this chapter which apply to the use and development of property generally in the city shall apply to property in the SP district except to the extent otherwise provided in the applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-592.1. - Purpose of SP district. 
The purpose of the SP district is to provide for the orderly implementation of adopted specific plans. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-592.2. - Uses permitted in the SP district. 
No use of property is permitted in the SP district except those uses stated in the applicable specific plan to be permitted uses or uses subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. No use of property which is required to have a conditional use permit by the applicable specific plan is permitted in the SP district in the absence of such conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-592.3. - Development standards in the SP district. 
The development of property in the SP district shall comply with all applicable development standards set forth in the applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 1, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-592.4. - Operational standards in the SP district. 
No activity shall be conducted in the SP district in a manner which violates any applicable provision of the applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 1, 7-1-91)  
DIVISION 26. - [SD] SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, adopted March 18, 1974 amended this Code by adding Div. 26, §§ 41-593—41-593.7. 
 
Sec. 41-593. - Applicability of division. 
The regulations contained in this division shall apply to all property within a district where the district symbol is combined with the "SD" (Specific Development) suffix and to all property within the "SD" (Specific Development) District, when applied as a separate district. In all cases where a plan in an SD District has been approved the "SD" symbol shall be followed by a number to designate the Specific Development plan number (e.g., SD-1) and the development that shall be permitted subject to the provisions of the approved specific development plan and the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74)  
Sec. 41-593.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The Specific Development District and suffix is authorized and established for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its residents by: 
(1)  Protecting and enhancing the value of properties by encouraging the use of good design principles and concepts, as related to the division of property, site planning and individual improvements with full recognition of the significance and effect they have on the proper planning and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(2)  Encouraging, securing and maintaining the orderly and harmonious appearance, attractiveness and aesthetic development of structures and grounds in order that the most appropriate use and value thereof be determined and protected. 
(3)  Providing a method whereby specific development plans are to be based on the general plan as well as other regulations, programs, and legislation as may in the judgment of the city be required for the systematic execution of the general plan. 
(4)  Recognizing the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and providing a method to implement this interdependence in order to maintain the values of surrounding properties and improvements and encouraging excellence of property development, compatible with the general plan for, and character of, the city, with due regard for the public and private interests involved. 
(5)  Insuring that the public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for improvements and beautification of streets and public facilities shall be protected by exercise of reasonable controls over the character and design of private buildings, structures and open spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74)  
Sec. 41-593.2. - Uses permitted and development standards "SD" suffix. 
When the "SD" symbol is applied as a suffix in combination with the district symbol, the specific development regulations are intended to apply only to those uses which are permitted in the zoning district to which the suffix is combined. In any case where the development standards of the specific development plan differ from the regulations of the base zone the specific development plan shall apply. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74)  
Sec. 41-593.3. - Uses permitted and development standards "SD" Individual District. 
Any use or development of property within an "SD" District where the "SD" symbol is not combined with another district shall be in compliance with the ordinance adopting the specific development plan for such property. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74; Ord. No. NS-1356, § 1, 4-18-77)  
Sec. 41-593.4. - Submission of development plans; architectural review. 
(a)  Any application for a permit for a building or structure in the SD district shall be accompanied or preceded by the filing with the director of planning of a specific development plan which shall be one (1) of either of the following types: 
(1)  A plan consisting of architectural drawings or sketches and plot plans, all to a workable scale, showing the elevation of the proposed building or structure, signs, proposed landscaping or other treatment of grounds around such building or structure, off-street parking and other physical features such as trees, hydrants, poles, and other installations, and in addition, such other plans, drawings or information as may be determined by the director of planning to be necessary to fully evaluate any requirement for a building permit; 
(2)  A plan consisting of standards and regulations pertaining to the following: 
(i)  The height, location, and bulk of buildings: 
(ii)  The location, arrangement and configuration of open space and building setback; 
(iii)  The location and design of off-street parking areas; 
(iv)  The number, size, and location of all signs; 
(v)  Such other regulations and standards as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes and intent of this division or to insure the proper execution of the general plan. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a specific development plan by the director of planning, the same shall be referred to the planning division for review and recommendations. The planning division shall review said plans for the purpose of ensuring that buildings, structures, and grounds will be in keeping with the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the harmonious development of the city or impair the desirability of investment or occupation in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74; Ord. No. NS-1356, § 2, 4-18-77; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 5, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-593.5. - Approval of specific development plans. 
No permit for a building or structure shall be issued for any property subject to the provisions of this division until the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  If the property is within a zoning district classification combined with an SD suffix, the applicant must obtain for said property a conditional use permit permitting use of the property in accordance with a specific development plan. Said conditional use permit shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied in accordance with the provisions of article V. All development shall be in compliance with all conditions of approval prior to issuance of a utility release by the director of building. 
(b)  If the property is within an SD district, the specific development plan must be adopted by ordinance of the city. Such ordinance, in addition to adopting the specific development plan, shall specify the uses permitted on such property, together with any restrictions or conditions pertaining to such uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74; Ord. No. NS-1356, § 3, 4-18-77; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 5, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-593.6. - Application and hearing. 
(a)  The specific development plan shall be submitted in the form required by the director of planning and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution, except that all governmental agencies are exempted from the fee requirement. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a specific development plan, the director of planning shall set the plan for public hearing at a regular or adjourned meeting of the planning commission, which is to be held not less than ten (10) days nor more than forty-five (45) days following completion of all requirements of applicable environmental quality laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  The director of planning shall give or cause to be given notice of the time and place of such hearing by mailing notices at least five (5) days prior to the date of such hearing to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the property, as shown on the latest available tax roll. The names and addresses of such owners shall be provided by the applicant at the time the plan is filed. 
(d)  Upon the date set for hearing the planning commission may hear or continue the matter. If a date for the continued hearing is announced in open meeting, no further notice thereof need be given. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74; Ord. No. NS-1356, § 4, 4-18-77)  
Sec. 41-593.7. - Division of property. 
No parcel subject to the provisions of this division may be divided or in any way reduced in area, except for land area acquired by a public agency, without first having received: 
(a)  Preparation of specific development standards and regulations for said parcel pursuant to section 41-593.6; or 
(b)  Approval by the planning commission of a proposed specific development plan for said parcel. 
(Ord. No. NS-1200, § 1, 3-18-74)  
Sec. 41-593.8. - Specific development plan approval time limits and extensions. 
The specific development plan shall not be deemed valid until all of the conditions as approved by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or city council have been complied with and released by the planning manager. The specific development plan approved in accordance with the procedures and considerations as provided in this division shall automatically become void after one (1) year from the effective date of such approval when the owner fails to institute an action to erect, build, alter, move or maintain the use of the property as specified in the terms and conditions of the specific development plan. However, at the initial hearing of the zoning administrator, planning commission or city council may provide, by appropriate conditional approval, for extensions of time beyond the two-year period. Furthermore, the city council by may, by resolutions, extend the date on which a specific development plan becomes void for a period or periods not exceeding three (3) years in total beyond the date it would otherwise become void. 
(Ord. No. NS-2803, § 10, 6-21-10)  
DIVISION 27. - [MO] (MILITARY OPERATIONS) 
 
Sec. 41-594. - Military operations of the Armed Forces of the United States of America. 
All property within a district with an MO (Military Operations) district classification shall be used exclusively for the military operations of the armed forces of the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. NS-1208, § 1, 4-15-74)  
DIVISION 28. - [OZ] OVERLAY ZONE 
 
Sec. 41-595. - Applicability of division. 
The regulations contained in this division shall apply to all property within a district where the district symbol is combined with the "OZ" (overlay zone) suffix and to all property within the "OZ" (overlay zone) district, when applied as a separate district. In all cases where a plan in an overlay zone district has been approved the "OZ" symbol shall be followed by a number to designate the overlay zone number (e.g., OZ1) and the development that shall be permitted subject to the provisions of the approved overlay zone development plan and the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 41-595.1. - Purpose and intent. 
The provisions of this division provide alternative standards and regulations to the underlying zoning district, where important site, environmental, safety, compatibility or design issues require additional flexibility. The overlay zone district and suffix is authorized and established for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its residents by: 
(a)  Protecting and enhancing the value of properties by encouraging the use of good design principles and concepts, as related to the division of property, site planning and individual improvements with full recognition of the significance and effect they have on the proper planning and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(b)  Encouraging, securing and maintaining the orderly and harmonious appearance, attractiveness and aesthetic development of structures and grounds in order that the most appropriate mix of uses and value thereof be determined and protected. 
(c)  Providing a method whereby overlay zone development plans are to be based on the general plan as well as other regulations, programs, and legislation as may in the judgment of the city be required for the systematic execution of the general plan. 
(d)  Recognizing the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and providing a method to implement this interdependence in order to maintain the values of surrounding properties and improvements and encouraging excellence of property development, compatible with the general plan for, and character of, the city, with due regard for the public and private interests involved. 
(e)  Ensuring that the public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for improvements and beautification of streets and public facilities shall be protected by exercise of reasonable controls over the character and design of private buildings, structures and open spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 41-595.2. - Uses permitted and development standards "OZ" suffix. 
When the "OZ" symbol is applied as a suffix in combination with the district symbol, the overlay zone regulations are intended to apply only to those proposed uses which are permitted or conditionally permitted in the overlay zone to which the suffix is combined. In any case where the development project does not choose to adhere to the overlay zone, the standards and regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 11, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-595.3. - Uses and development standards in the "OZ" district. 
Any matter which cannot be resolved solely by reference to the adopted overlay zone ordinance shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 41-595.4. - Submission of overlay zone site plans; architectural review. 
(a)  Any application for a permit for a building or structure in any district combined with the OZ suffix shall be accompanied or preceded by the filing with the planning manager of the overlay zone site plan as described in subparagraph (1) below. Any application for a permit for a building or structure in the OZ district shall be accompanied or preceded by the filing with the planning manager of an overlay zone site plan which shall be one of either of the following types: 
(1)  A plan consisting of architectural drawings or sketches and plot plans, all to a workable scale, showing the elevation of the proposed building or structure, signs, proposed landscaping or other treatment of grounds around such building or structure, off-street parking and other physical features such as trees, hydrants, poles, and other installations, and in addition, such other plans, drawings or information as may be determined by the planning manager to be necessary to fully evaluate any requirement for a building permit; 
(2)  A plan consisting of standards and regulations pertaining to the following: 
(i)  The height, location, and bulk of buildings: 
(ii)  The location, arrangement and configuration of open space and building setback; 
(iii)  The location and design of off-street parking areas; 
(iv)  The number, size, and location of all signs; 
(v)  Such other regulations and standards as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes and intent of this division or to insure the proper execution of the general plan. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an overlay zone site plan by the planning manager, the same shall be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The planning commission shall review said plans for the purpose of ensuring that buildings, structures, and grounds will be in keeping with the neighborhood and will not be detrimental to the harmonious development of the city or impair the desirability of investment or occupation in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 41-595.5. - Approval of overlay zone site plans. 
No permit for a building or structure shall be issued for any property subject to the provisions of this division until the following requirements have been met: 
(a)  If the property is within a zoning district classification combined with an OZ suffix and the applicant wants to apply the overlay zone, the applicant must obtain for said property an overlay zone site plan review permitting use of the property in accordance with an overlay zone plan. 
(1)  Said site plan review permit shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of article V of this chapter applicable to a conditional use permit. 
(2)  After the city council has completed the review of the written finding of fact of the planning commission pursuant to section 41-642, the property shall be subject to the standards and regulations of the overlay zone and any overlay zone site plan review conditions of approval. 
(3)  All development shall be in compliance with all conditions of approval prior to issuance of a utility release by the executive director of the planning and building agency. 
(4)  Upon the issuance of the utility release or the certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first, the executive director of planning and building shall amend the sectional district map to reflect the overlay zone as the sole zone on the property. 
(b)  If the property is within an OZ district, the overlay zone plan must be adopted by ordinance of the city. Such ordinance, in addition to adopting the overlay zone site plan, shall specify the uses permitted on such property, together with any restrictions or conditions pertaining to such uses. 
(c)  If an overlay zone site plan of the type specified in subparagraph (2) of section 41-595.3(a) as consisting of standards and regulations is approved, the applicant must thereafter prepare plans and drawings as specified in paragraph (1) of said section in conformity with such overlay zone plan and obtain approval thereof by resolution of the planning commission after review and recommendations by the planning manager. No building permit or utility release shall be issued except for development in accordance with such approved plans and drawings. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 12, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-595.6. - Application and hearing. 
(a)  The overlay zone site plan shall be submitted in the form required by the planning manager and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in such amount as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution, except that all governmental agencies are exempted from the fee requirement. 
(b)  The planning manager shall give or cause to be given notice of the time and place of such hearing by mailing notices at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the property, as shown on the latest available tax roll. The names and addresses of such owners shall be provided by the applicant at the time the plan is filed. 
(c)  Upon the date set for hearing the planning commission may hear or continue the matter. If a date for the continued hearing is announced in open meeting, no further notice thereof need be given. 
(Ord. No. NS-2739, § 3, 4-2-07)  
Secs. 41-596—41-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 41-600. - Applicability of article. 
The district regulations contained in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions and exceptions contained in this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9240; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-601. - Uses permitted. 
(a)  Every main building or group of buildings shall be located and maintained on a "lot" as defined herein. 
(b)  The following accessory uses, in addition to those hereinabove mentioned, shall be permitted in any district, provided that such accessory uses do not alter the character of the premises in respect to their use for the purpose permitted in such respective district: 
(1)  The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection with schools, colleges, universities, hospitals and other institutions permitted in the respective districts. 
(2)  Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in parks, playgrounds and golf courses. 
(c)  If any use is for any reason omitted from those specified as permissible in any district, or if ambiguity arises concerning the approximate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the planning director to ascertain all pertinent facts concerning such use and determine into which district such use shall be classified. The planning department shall file with the clerk of the council, the director of building and safety and the zoning administrator, a copy of the facts which indicate into which district a particular use should be classified. Such decision may be appealed to the planning commission whose decision may be appealed to the city council. 
(Code 1952, § 9241; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-602. - Height—Generally. 
(a)  There are established separate and distinct height districts I and II in which are contained special provisions allowing structures to exceed the maximum height permitted in the applicable land use districts. 
(b)  Unless otherwise designated on the appropriate sectional district maps, all land within or subsequently annexed or incorporated into the city is declared to be in height district I. 
(c)  All lots within height district I shall be subject to the following height exceptions and regulations: 
(1)  On any lot or portion of a lot in the A1, RE, R1, R2, R3, R3H and R4 districts, no structure shall exceed the height therein specified. 
(2)  On any lot or portion of a lot in the P, C1, C2, C4, C5, CR, M1, M2, LM, CM, O, and GC districts: 
(i)  No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height within one hundred forty (140) feet of any property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(ii)  Any structure on a lot or portion of a lot contiguous to or separated by a street, alley, flood-control channel or ditch, pedestrian walkway, or railroad right-of-way from property used or zoned for residential purposes may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that no part of said structure, exclusive of the first thirty-five (35) feet of height from street grade, intercepts a plane that rises one (1) foot in every four (4) lineal feet drawn from the nearest point of each property in the aforementioned districts toward the interior of the building site whereon it is proposed to erect a structure in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
Further, there shall be provided and maintained along all such property lines or zone boundary lines mentioned hereinabove a fifteen-foot landscaped strip. When said landscaped strip is contiguous to or is separated from a property used or zoned for residential purposes by any of the aforementioned ways other than a street, said landscaping shall include not less than one (1) tree for every ten (10) lineal feet of said landscaped strip. Said trees shall be twenty-four-inch box size at time of planting. 
(iii)  In addition to (i) and (ii) above, each part of any structure, exclusive of the first thirty-five (35) feet of height from street grade, shall be set in from one (1) or the other or from both side property lines not less than a combined total distance equal to one-half (½) of the overall height of the structure, signs included. Further, each part of the structure, exclusive of the first thirty-five (35) feet of height from street grade, shall be set in from the front or back or from both the front and the back property lines not less than a combined total distance equal to one-half (½) of the overall height of the structure, signs included. 
(d)  All lots within height district II shall be subject to the following height exceptions and regulations: 
(1)  Any structure may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height if both of the following provisions are complied with: 
(i)  Each part of any structure, exclusive of the first thirty-five (35) feet of height from street grade, shall be set in from one (1) or the other or from both side property lines not less than a combined total distance equal to one-half (½) of the overall height of the structure, signs included. 
(ii)  Each part of any structure, exclusive of the first thirty-five (35) feet of height from street grade, shall be set in from the front or the back or from both the front and the back property lines not less than a combined total distance equal to one-half (½) of the overall height of the structure, signs included. 
(e)  On any lot or portion of a lot not used or zoned for residential purposes, towers, including radio and television antennas, gables, spires, scenery lofts, cupolas, water tanks, silos, covering not more than ten (10) per cent of the ground area of the buildings at the base thereof, artificial windbreaks, windmills and similar structures, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be built and used to a greater height than the limit established for the district in which such structures are located, provided, however, that no structure in excess of the allowable building height shall be used for sleeping or eating quarters, or for any commercial purpose other than such as may be incidental to the permitted use of the main building. On any lot or portion of a lot used or zoned for residential purposes, all such structures and appurtenances shall be considered to constitute part of the building or structure for purposes of height determination. 
(f)  No accessory structure shall exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  This section does not apply to wireless communication facilities. 
(Code 1952, § 9242; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-553, § 17, 12-4-61; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 6, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-2102, § 2, 2-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2356, § 2, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-602.1. - Same—Nonapplication to multiple-family dwellings. 
The provisions of section 41-602 shall not apply to developments regulated by Article XIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1845, § 3, 6-2-86)  
Sec. 41-602.5. - Height exemption areas. 
There are hereby established within the city certain areas designated and delineated as "height exemption areas" on that certain map adopted by ordinance of the city council and incorporated herein by reference. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 41-602 any other provision of this chapter, there shall be no limitation on the height of any building constructed within a height exemption area; nor shall any yard or building setback requirement which is based upon the height of a building apply to any building constructed within a height exemption area. This section does not apply to wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-1822, § 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. NS-2102, § 3, 2-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2356, § 2, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-603. - Area—Generally. 
(a)  Any lot shown upon an official subdivision map duly approved by the city council and recorded in the office of the county recorder, or any lot for which a recorded contract of sale was in full force and effect prior to June 3, 1954, and the deed is so recorded in the office of the county recorder, may be used as a legal building site, subject to the conditions, limitations, and restrictions governing the district in which it is located. 
(b)  The following exception to yard requirements shall be applied with respect to all buildings, structures, and uses permitted in the A1, RE, R1, R2, R3, and P districts: Where forty (40) per cent or more of the lots along any block, excluding reverse corner lots and key lots, are developed with buildings, the required front yard for any new building or alteration to an existing building shall be not less than the arithmetical average of the front yards of said buildings. In computing said average front yard, main buildings situated entirely on the rear one-half (½) of any lot along said block shall not be included. Notwithstanding this subsection, no front yard shall be less than twenty (20) feet from a front property line. 
(c)  In any commercial district, the front and side yards required for dwellings, apartments, hotels and boardinghouses may be waived when such uses are erected above the ground floor of a building when said ground floor has no required front and side yard. 
(Code 1952, § 9243; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, § 8, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-618, §§ 1, 2, 10-15-62; Ord. No. NS-635, §§ 9, 10, 3-4-63; Ord. No. NS-932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-944, § 1, 12-2-68; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 51, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 22, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-604. - Same—Through lots. 
(a)  At each end of a through lot there shall be a front yard of a depth required by this chapter for the district in which the respective street frontage is located; provided, however, that there may be an accessory building in one (1) of such front yards in accordance with subsection (c). 
(b)  Where a through lot has depth of one hundred fifty (150) feet or more, said lot may be assumed to be two (2) lots with the rear line of each approximately equidistant from the front lot lines; provided, however, that each portion shall then be treated as a separate lot insofar as the provisions of this chapter apply, and provided that such lots were recorded and held under separate ownership prior to December 31, 1939. 
(c)  Where a through lot has depth of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet, an accessory building not exceeding one (1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height may be located in one (1) of the required front yards if such building is at least five (5) feet from any side lot line and a distance of at least ten (10) per cent of the lot depth from the street line abutting the front yard in which such building is to be located; provided, however, that such accessory building shall not project beyond the front yard line established by procedures set forth in this chapter, but such accessory building need not be located more than twenty (20) feet from the street line. 
(Code 1952, § 9243.1; Ord. No. NS-932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 23, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-605. - Same—Patios and architectural features. 
(a)  Cornices, eaves, chimneys, and similar architectural features may extend into the required yards of the A1, RE, and R1 districts as follows: A distance not to exceed forty-eight (48) inches into any required front, rear, and/or side yard of the street side of a corner lot; and a distance not to exceed eighteen (18) inches into any other required side yard. The aforesaid architectural features may extend into the required yards of the R2 and R3 districts as follows: A distance not to exceed forty-eight (48) inches into any required front, rear, and/or side yard of the street side of a corner lot; and a distance not to exceed six (6) inches into any other required side yard. 
(b)  A wholly or partly enclosed covered patio attached to a residence shall maintain the same yards as required for the main building, except as set forth in subsection (c). A patio with a roof having open-frame or eggcrate construction shall be considered a covered patio. 
(c)  A landing place may extend into any yard to a distance of six (6) feet across one-half (½) of the width or depth of the lot; provided that such landing place shall have its floor no higher than the entrance floor of the building. Stairs leading from the ground to said landing place may project beyond said six (6) feet. Further, an open railing no higher than three (3) feet may be placed around said landing place. A covered patio may encroach up to ten (10) feet into the required rear yard. Nothing herein shall prohibit the extension of an unenclosed, nonroofed, open patio into any and all required side and rear yards. 
(d)  Any cornice, eave, chimney, or similar architectural feature, patio cover or canopy may extend into any other required open space provided for in this chapter, other than required yards, a distance not to exceed two (2) feet; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the full extension of an uncovered patio into said required open space. 
(Code 1952, § 9243.2; Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 52, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 24, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-606. - Same—Accessory buildings in A1, RE, R1, R2 and R3 districts. 
(a)  On an interior lot an accessory building up to fifteen (15) feet in height shall have a side and rear yard of not less than three (3) feet, and an accessory building over fifteen (15) feet in height shall have a side yard of not less than five (5) feet and a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet, except if the lot rears and/or sides upon an alley, said accessory building, if a garage, shall maintain a distance of not less than twelve (12) feet from the center line of the alley. 
(b)  On a corner lot an accessory building may be built not less than ten (10) feet to the lot line on the street side of the lot, and shall maintain the same rear and side setback requirements based on the height of the accessory building as set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)  On a reversed corner lot an accessory building located in a required rear yard shall not extend beyond the required front yard line of the lot to the rear. 
(d)  When any rear lot line or portion thereof is a side lot line of a key lot, an accessory building shall be not less than five (5) feet from said line. 
(e)  There shall be a minimum 20-foot drive clearance between any property line abutting a street and the entrance of a garage. 
(Code 1952, § 9243.3; Ord. No. NS-932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 53, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 25, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-607. - Same—Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  For an attached accessory garage, carport, or other accessory building, including an open breezeway, patio cover or trellis, the same yards shall be maintained as are required for the main building except as provided in subsection 41-606(e). 
(b)  No provision set forth in this chapter shall permit any violation of any setback established as prescribed in article VII of this chapter. 
(c)  Where property fronts, sides, or rears onto any primary street, as shown on the adopted master plan of streets and highways, the required front, rear, or side yard for the district in which said property is situated shall be measured from the future right-of-way line adopted for such primary street; provided, however, with respect to the determination of required front yard for a lot zoned A1, RE, R1, R2 or and fronting on such primary street, where forty (40) per cent or more of the lots along that block, excluding reverse corner lots and key lots, are developed with buildings, then paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of section 41-603 shall apply. 
(d)  The front yard on key lot in any residential district shall be not less than three-fourths (¾) the required front yard for the district in which located. 
(e)  No part of any yard shall be used for the off-street parking of motor vehicles, trailers (which shall, for purposes of this subsection (e), include but not be limited to any vehicle included within the definition of "trailer," "trailer coach" or "camp trailer" as set forth in Vehicle Code sections 630, 635 and 242, respectively), or boats or for storage of personal property, which is: 
(1)  The front yard, or a side yard which faces on a street, on any lot used for a single-family or two-family dwelling; or 
(2)  Within any area adjacent to a street which is required to be used as a yard by the yard requirements imposed by this chapter; or 
(3)  Within twelve (12) feet of the centerline of an alley; provided, however, that driveways providing direct access to a garage accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling may be used for the parking of operable motor vehicles incidental to such use. Yard areas other than those specified above may be used for the off-street parking of motor vehicles, trailers, or boats and for storage of personal property, provided such use is incidental to the primary use of the lot. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection (e) shall be deemed or interpreted to permit a motor vehicle to park on residential property, which is otherwise prohibited pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(f)  Any setback line or required yard, whichever is greater, shall determine the building line. 
(g)  There shall be a distance of not less than fifteen (15) feet between detached dwelling units and main buildings. 
(h)  In the RE, R1, R2, R3 and R4 districts and at any residential use in a Specific Development zoning district, there shall be no display, storage of materials or supplies, no stock in trade or commodity sold upon the premises, no service rendered, no professional equipment, apparatus or business equipment or trucks kept or stored on the premises, no person, employee, or assistant in connection therewith engaged for services on the premises or dispatched from the premises; and no mechanical equipment used except as is customarily used for housekeeping purposes. For purposes of this subsection (h), the word "truck" shall mean any of the following vehicles (except when kept or stored within a fully enclosed garage): 
(1)  A "commercial vehicle" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 260, with a weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds "gross vehicle weight rating" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 390; or 
(2)  A commercial vehicle that exceeds eight (8) feet in total outside width, or seven (7) feet in height (including any load thereon), or twenty-one (21) feet in length in total bumper to bumper length; or 
(3)  A "tank vehicle," which shall mean any commercial vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid or gaseous material within a tank that is permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or the chassis, including, but not limited to, cargo tanks and portable tanks, as defined in Part 171 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (this definition does not include portable tanks having a rated capacity under one hundred (100) gallons), or a motor vehicle holding hazardous wastes or hazardous materials which is required to display placards or markings pursuant to Vehicle Code section 27903; or 
(4)  A "general public paratransit vehicle" or a "paratransit vehicle" or a "transit bus" as defined in Vehicle Code sections 336, 462 and 642, respectively, but not a "vanpool vehicle" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 686; or 
(5)  A "schoolbus" or a "school pupil activity bus" or a "youth bus" as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 545, 546 and 680, respectively; or 
(6)  A "semitrailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 660; or 
(7)  A pickup truck with a "utility body" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 471; or 
(8)  A stake bed truck which shall mean any motor vehicle with a bed surrounded by side rails or endrails or a stake gate; or 
(9)  A "utility trailer" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 666; or 
(10)  A "watering truck" or a "water tender vehicle" as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 675.5 and 676.5, respectively; or 
(11)  "Special construction equipment" vehicles as defined in California Vehicle Code section 565; or 
(12)  A "tow truck" or a "tow dolly" as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 615 and 617, respectively; or 
(13)  A "tour bus" or a "trailer bus" as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 612 and 636, respectively; or 
(14)  A "truck tractor" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 655; or 
(15)  An "armored vehicle" as defined in California Vehicle Code section 115; or 
(16)  A "taxicab" as defined in Article II of Chapter 32 of the Code, commencing with section 32-3. 
This subsection (h) shall not apply to any vehicle which is making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure; except when the building or structure is used as a home occupation as defined in section 41-192.1 et seq. of the Code. Nor shall this subsection (h) apply to any vehicle parked for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure. Nor shall this subsection (h) apply to any vehicle which is screened by a fence or wall from visibility (at ground level) from the public right-of-way, so long as the vehicle does not violate subsections (1) or (2) of this subsection (h). 
(i)  No wires, ropes, beams, boards or similar connecting material or device, which is attached to any building or structure or to any appurtenance thereon, including television or radio antennas, shall be attached to or connected with the ground or any fixture within any required front yard setback as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9243.4; Ord. No. NS-932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 4, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-1470, § 1, 8-20-79; Ord. No. NS-2111, § 54, 4-1-91; Ord. No. NS-2419, § 2, 2-22-00; Ord. No. NS-2457, § 6, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 41-608. - Same—Modifications in yard regulations. 
The following modifications in yard regulations may be undertaken: 
(a)  Since the general yard provisions of this chapter have to be applied to numerous types of conditions and shapes of parcels occasioned by varying street layouts and subdivisions of property, it is not advisable to attempt to define herein those cases which warrant exceptions and modifications to the general yard requirements of this chapter, therefore, authority is hereby given the zoning administrator, as a part of his administrative function, to determine in writing the application of the specific requirements of this chapter in harmony with their purpose and intent so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public peace, health, safety, and welfare secured, and substantial justice done under the following circumstances: 
Where the application of yard regulations cannot be determined or may be interpreted in more than one way as to cause confusion in the administration of such regulations or general yard provisions with respect to irregularly shaped lots such as those resulting from some angular or curved streets, particularly triangular or irregular shaped lots with more than four (4) lot lines, or reverse corner lots developed in such a manner where the front yard is unclear such regulations or provisions may be modified or interpreted by the zoning administrator in writing as to an individual lot or to all lots of similar type involving a common problem and the building shall be governed by such interpretation. No fence or accessory building, the location of which is determined in whole or in part by yards, shall be erected or established upon any lot which is so irregularly or oddly shaped as to cause confusion relative to interpretation of such regulations until the yard provisions of this chapter shall have been determined as set forth above. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  The zoning administrator may, as a part of his administrative function, authorize a ten (10) per cent reduction in required side, front, and/or rear yard provided said determination shall be in writing and show that the reduction is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  The zoning administrator may, as part of his administrative function, authorize a temporary directional sign in permitted districts if said sign complies with all planning department standards set out below. Said authorization shall be in writing with the following conditions of approval: 
(1)  That the proposed temporary directional sign be not larger than ten feet by twenty feet (10' by 20'); said sign shall be nonilluminated in any residential or professional district, and non-flashing in any commercial or industrial district. 
(2)  That the sign be not more than thirty-five (35) feet in overall height from the ground. 
(3)  That the sign not be located on or project into any existing or future city right-of-way or any building setback. 
(4)  That the zoning administrator may grant a six (6) month extension of time at the expiration date of the initial six (6) month period if it has been determined that said extension of time is necessary for the initial sale of homes in the tract. Said extension shall require a five dollar ($5.00) fee. 
(5)  That the applicant post a cash bond in the amount determined by the director of building safety and housing to guarantee the removal of each sign at the expiration of the period of the conditional use permit, and that the applicant and/or the owner of the property on which the sign is located enter into an agreement with the city authorizing the city to enter upon the premises, destroy the sign, and declare the cash bond forfeited should said sign not be removed upon the expiration of the conditional use permit. 
However, the planning director may determine to circulate public notice and hold a public hearing when a proposed temporary directional sign is so located as to be of importance to the adjoining property owners or be in conflict with the orderly development of the area. 
The requirement of a plot plan, cash bond, and legal agreement shall be fulfilled prior to planning department approval of a building permit. 
(Code 1952, § 9243.5; Ord. No. NS-932, § 1, 8-19-68; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 26, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-609. - Landscape. 
Where a landscape, as defined in section 41-100, is required by the provisions of this chapter, said landscape shall be continuously maintained by proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants and decorative materials when necessary, and the regular watering of plants. 
(Code 1952, § 9244.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-908, § 2, 1-2-68)  
Sec. 41-609.5. - Same—Hedge and planter requirements in the residential zones. 
(a)  All hedges in the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4 and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, located within the required front yard or any required landscape area of a parcel shall not exceed four (4) feet in height on those streets defined and designated in the circulation element of the city's general plan as arterial streets and three (3) feet in height on all other streets. As used in this section, "hedge" means a boundary or barrier formed by a dense row of shrubs or trees designed to enclose, divide or protect an area covering at least fifty (50) per cent of the linear frontage of a parcel. 
(b)  All landscape planters in the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4 and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, located within the required front yard or any required landscape area of a parcel shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height. As used in this section, "landscape planter," means a wall used to enclose, divide or protect an area designed to be filled with landscaping. 
(Ord. No. NS-2433, § 2, 6-19-00)  
Sec. 41-610. - Wall and fence requirements in the residential zones. 
(a)  All walls and fences located in the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Front yard fences four (4) feet in height on those streets defined and designated in the circulation element of the city's general plan as arterial streets and three (3) feet in height on all other streets, measured from the top of the curb or established grade upward. 
(2)  All other walls and fences shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, measured from the top of the curb or established grade upward . 
(3)  In other districts, walls and fences shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height where the wall or fence extends into the required front yard or any required landscaped area. 
(b)  In the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, no front yard fence over eighteen (18) inches in height shall be constructed without the issuance of a permit therefore by the planning and building agency. The permit shall be issued if the fence conforms to the following provisions: 
(1)  Front yard fences shall be composed of only the following materials: wood; wrought iron; tubular steel, stone; brick; stucco; or decorative block such as slump stone or split-faced block; 
(2)  Spikes, stakes or other sharp metal objects shall not be permitted; 
(3)  Arbors located in the required front yard or required landscaped area shall only be permitted over walkways, and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, six (6) feet in width and three (3) feet in depth. 
(c)  Any wall or fence expressly permitted by this section or any other section of this chapter shall comply with the provisions set forth in chapter 36 of this Code. 
(d)  In the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, chain link fencing material is not permitted except in a rear yard or side yard which is not viewable from a public street. 
(e)  In the RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, and at any residential use in a specific development zoning district, excluding SD No. 19, barbed wire is not permitted as part of a wall or fence. 
(f)  As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Fence or wall shall mean a barrier which serves to enclose, divide, or protect an area, or is used to prevent intrusion from the outside of a parcel to the interior of such parcel, exclusive of any such barrier which forms part of a building or structure. 
(2)  Front yard fence shall mean a fence or wall (as defined in this section) within the required front yard or any required landscape area of a parcel, built from permitted materials and designed and constructed so as to permit visibility between or through fence elements over eighteen (18) inches in height. Those portions of the front yard fence eighteen (18) inches in height and lower may be constructed of opaque or solid materials. Elements over eighteen (18) inches in height shall be spaced no closer than four (4) inches apart, with each member no wider than four (4) inches across. Elements wider than four (4) inches across shall be considered pilasters. Pilasters may be no wider than sixteen (16) inches across, and may be no closer than eight (8) feet on center. except for pilasters supporting a four-foot wide maximum entry gate. 
(3)  Barbed wire includes both straight-line and looped ("concertina") varieties. 
(4)  Public street does not include alleys. 
(5)  Arbor means a decorative framework or structure formed of vines, branches, or lattice work. 
(Code 1952, § 9244; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 9, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-1892, § 1, 4-6-87; Ord. No. NS-2433, § 3, 6-19-00)  
Sec. 41-610.5. - Wall and fence requirements in the industrial and commercial zones. 
(a)  In the industrial and commercial zones, walls and fences shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height where the wall or fence extends into the required front yard or any required landscaped area. 
(b)  On any lot in a C1, C2, C4, or C5 district, a concrete block wall not less than five (5) feet in height shall be erected along any property line contiguous to any residentially zoned property, except that such wall shall not exceed the height limitations prescribed in subsection (a) of this section. This requirement may be waived by the planning commission upon a finding that the abutting property is in a period of transition to nonresidential use, or that, due to special circumstances, the wall would not promote the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Barbed wire is not permitted as part of a wall or fence except as follows: 
(1)  In the M1, M2 and LM districts: barbed wire is permitted subject only to the restrictions set forth hereinafter. 
(2)  In the C1, C2, C4 and CM districts: barbed wire is permitted only in a rear year or side yard which is not viewable from a public street and is subject to the restrictions set forth hereinafter. 
(3)  Barbed wire may not be used above the height limitations set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(4)  Barbed wire may not be used as part of any wall or fence which is adjacent to property used for residential purposes or to property which is used as a school, church, park, or youth center. 
(Ord. No. NS-1732, § 49, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 10, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 21, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2433, § 4, 6-19-00; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 13, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-611. - B-suffix—Parking 
(a)  Any district or any part thereof regulating the use of land established under articles II and III of this chapter may be modified, either at the time the zoning is first established, or by amendment, by the district designation "B," adding as a use permitted in that zone, subject to a conditional use permit, the exclusive parking of motor vehicles in connection with any commercial use or for private parking. 
(b)  The following shall not be permitted when property is used for parking pursuant to the "B" suffix: 
(1)  The storage of new or used vehicles for sale or lease; 
(2)  The sale of hydrocarbon substance or any other property; 
(3)  Servicing or repair of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1952, § 9245; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, § 9, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-1064, § 1, 2-1-71; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 3, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-1756, § 11, 1-7-85; Ord. No. NS-2386, § 1, 6-7-99)  
Sec. 41-611.1. - Development standards; conditions. 
(a)  The following development standards shall apply to property when used for parking pursuant to the "B" suffix: 
(1)  All parking areas shall [be] appropriately drained and paved, meeting specifications of the executive director of the public works agency. 
(2)  Vehicle access to and from the parking area shall not be from a street which provides access primarily to nearby residentially zoned property. 
(3)  All site lighting shall be arranged as to not unreasonably interfere with adjacent residences. 
(4)  When the property in question abuts property used or zoned for residential purposes, a six-foot high masonry wall shall be erected between said property and [the] residential property; however, the masonry wall shall not exceed four (4) feet in height between the front property line and the established building line of adjacent residential property. 
(5)  Landscaping shall be provided for in the manner as described by section 41-618, article IV of this chapter with the following additional requirements: 
a.  A minimum ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be planted and maintained where the off-street parking area abuts any public street providing access primarily to nearby residentially zoned property. 
b.  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in off-street parking areas having combined area equal to at least five (5) per cent of the total area used for parking and vehicle access. 
c.  When said "B" modified lots would otherwise be contiguous to property zoned RE, R1, R2, R3, R3H, or R4 were it not for their separation by a street, a four-foot high decorative wall shall be constructed to the rear of the required ten-foot boundary landscaping. 
(b)  In addition to the development standards imposed by subsection (a) of this section, additional conditions may be imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit in the same manner as other conditional uses pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
(c)  A fully dimensioned site plan showing all parking spaces, vehicle access and landscaping treatment shall be submitted in duplicate as part of the conditional use permit application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2386, § 2, 6-7-99)  
Sec. 41-612. - Oil well regulations. 
No person shall erect, establish or maintain within an agricultural, residential or commercial district, any oil well or derrick, or the business of drilling or operating for the discovery or production of oil, gas, hydrocarbons, or other kindred substances. 
No person or entity shall conduct any surface-based survey for the discovery of oil or hydrocarbons, or similar substance without receiving and holding a valid permit to do so from the director of public works. Such permit may be sought by use of the following procedures: 
(1)  Any person or entity seeking a permit to conduct a surface-based survey for the discovery of oil or hydrocarbons, or similar substances shall file an application therefor with the director of public works. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(2)  The applicant, in addition to completing the application, shall answer any relevant questions concerning either himself or the proposed survey operation. 
(3)  The director of public works shall issue the permit if he shall be satisfied that the proposed survey operation will not interfere with the comfort and repose of the citizens of the community or damage property by the creation of excessive vibration, noise or other phenomena; or unduly interfere with vehicular traffic within the city. The permit will be limited as to area and time of operation, and may be subject to such conditions as the director of public works feels are necessary to protect the public interests. 
(4)  The issuance of a permit may be subject to: 
(a)  The permittee's furnishing a cash or surety bond conditioned upon his operation's being performed in conformance with the permit issued; 
(b)  The permittee's providing the City of Santa Ana with a certificate or public liability and property damage insurance naming the City of Santa Ana as an additional insured for the permitted survey operation in an acceptable amount. 
(5)  following the issuance of a permit, if the permittee fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions of the permit, the director of public works shall forthwith revoke the permit and declare any bond forfeited. 
(6)  Should the director of public works deny an application for a permit or revoke a permit and forfeit any security thereunder, the aggrieved party may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting if the notice of appeal is filed at least ten (10) days prior to said meeting, and in the event it is not, it will then be placed on the agenda of the meeting thereafter. 
(7)  When the director of public works finds that any person holding a permit under the provisions of section 41-612 of Chapter 41 has violated the provisions of this section he may revoke such permit. No such revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing by certified mail of his right to appeal the revocation decision pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be effective only upon final decision of the city council. In the event that the decision of the director of public works revoking the permit is sustained after timely appeal, or if no appeal is filed, the security deposit is forfeited. 
(Code 1952, § 9246; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-961, § 1, 4-7-69; Ord. No. NS-1235, § 17, 12-9-74)  
Secs. 41-613—41-617(nn). - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2091, § 2, adopted Nov. 19, 1990, repealed former §§ 41-613—41-617(nn), which pertained to off-street parking requirements. For similar new provisions, see Art. XV of this chapter. Formerly, such sections derived from §§ 9247—9247.4, 9247.4(e)—9247.4(jj) of the city's 1952 Code, as amended by the following legislation: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
NS- 455 	1 	 6-20-60 
NS- 521 	10, 11 	 6-19-61 
NS- 959 	4 	 3-17-69 
NS-1402 	1 	 1-16-78 
NS-1525 	1 	 4-21-80 
NS-1532 	11—14 	 6-16-80 
NS-1602 	1, 2, 4—7 	10-26-81 
NS-1647 	1 	 9-20-82 
NS-1674 	4, 5, 8—14 	 3-21-83 
NS-1831 	1, 2 	 2- 3-86 
NS-1833 	1 	 2- 3-86 
NS-1860 	10 	 9-15-86 
NS-1939 	7 	 1- 4-88 
  
Sec. 41-618. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2275, § 22, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, repealed § 41-618, which pertained to landscaping requirements and derived from Ord. No. NS-1078, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 3, 1971; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 1974; Ord. No. NS-1674, § 15, adopted March 21, 1983; and Ord. No. NS-1860, § 11, adopted Sept. 15, 1986.  
Sec. 41-619. - Prohibited additions to residential buildings. 
(a)  No addition shall be made to a residential building if such addition would promote the ability of the owner or occupant of the building to create an illegal additional dwelling unit in the building. 
(b)  The planning manager is authorized to issue guidelines implementing subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any decision of the planning manager that a proposed addition violates subsection (a) of this section may be appealed to the planning commission, whose decision on the matter shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2263, § 1, 9-18-95) 
Editor's note— Prior to the re-establishment of § 41-619 by Ord. No. NS-2263, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 1995, the section was part of the reserved sections described under §§ 41-619.1—41-619.12 below.  
Secs. 41-619.1—41-619.12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1721, § 5, enacted April 2, 1984, repealed §§ 41-619—41-619.12, relative to the location, size, number and type of signs permitted in the city. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1025, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1186, § 4, adopted Oct. 1, 1973; and Ord. No. NS-1226, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1974.  
Secs. 41-619.13—41-619.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 7, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed §§ 41-619.13—41-619.17, which pertained to amortized nonconforming signs and derived from Ord. No. NS-1025, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1970; Ord. No. NS-1210, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 9, 1974; and Ord. No. NS-1721, § 4, adopted Apr. 2, 1984.  
Secs. 41-619.18—41-619.54. - Reserved.  
Secs. 41-619.55, 41-619.56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 41-619.55 and 41-619.56, dealing with the location of and specifications for off-premises advertising signs, were repealed by Ord. No. NS-1722: § 2, enacted April 16, 1984. Said sections were derived from Ord. No. NS-1040 § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1970, and Ord. No. NS-1210, § 3, adopted Sept. 9, 1974.  
Sec. 41-620. - Permits for relocated residential structures. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  "Department" shall mean the department of planning and development services. 
(2)  "Factory-built house" shall mean that term as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(3)  "Manufactured home" shall mean that term as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(4)  "Mobile home" shall mean that term as defined in Sections 18008 and 18817 of the Health and Safety Code of the state; and such term shall include a "new mobile home," as defined in Health and Safety Code, Section 18009, as well as a "used mobile home," as defined in health and Safety Code, Section 18014. 
(5)  "Person" shall mean any individual, individuals, partnership, unincorporated association, corporation, or other type of firm or entity. 
(6)  "Relocated residential building" shall mean any existing building or structure used for residential purposes, wherever located, which is proposed to be moved or relocated to a lot or parcel in the city, which lot or parcel is situated within the R1, R2, R3, R3H, RE or P Districts. 
(7)  "Residential structure" shall mean and include any factory-built house, manufactured home, mobile home, or relocated residential building as defined hereinabove. 
(b)  No person shall move or relocate any residential structure onto any lot or parcel situated within the R1, R2, R3, R3H, RE or P districts, unless such person has first obtained a permit from the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Applications for a permit shall be in writing and filed with the department upon forms provided by the department and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of street and official house number, the name of the tract or block number and zone use legend, the lot or parcel number and its dimensions, including where the residential structure is proposed to be placed on the lot or parcel. 
(2)  A description of the structural characteristics of the building. 
(3)  A plot plan, indicating the dimensions of all existing and proposed building locations, yards and setbacks. 
(4)  The estimated value of the residential structure. 
(5)  A floor plan, indicating the minimum floor space area of each room within the residential structure, excluding porches, breezeways and garages. 
(6)  A list of the names and addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the lot or parcel involved, as shown on the latest available tax roll. 
(7)  Such other and further information as the zoning administrator determines is needed to assist him in deciding whether to issue the permit. 
(8)  Each application shall be signed by the record owner or owners of the affected lot or parcel, or the duly authorized agent in writing for such owner or owners. 
(d)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the zoning administrator shall set the application for a hearing before him which is to be held not less than twenty-one (21) days after the date of filing. 
(f)  The zoning administrator shall give or cause to be given notice of the date, time and place of such hearing by mailing a notice to the person filing the application at least five (5) days prior to the date of such hearing. In additional, the zoning administrator may give such notice to any other interested person or persons as he deems appropriate. 
(g)  Upon the date set for a hearing, the zoning administrator may on that date continue the matter, so long as such continuance is for a reasonable period of time. Any continuance for a period in excess of thirty (30) days from the original date of the hearing shall require the concurrence of the applicant. If a date for a continued hearing is thereupon announced by the zoning administrator in open hearing, no further notice thereof need be given by the zoning administrator to the applicant. 
(h)  If he finds that each of the following requirements have been met, the zoning administrator shall approve the application and grant the permit: 
(1)  The residential structure proposed to be moved or relocated is comparable in value, size (square footage of liveable floor space, excluding porches, breezeways and garages), structural quality, type of construction, design, appearance, and overall physical upkeep and condition, to residences located in the area adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of, the lot or parcel on which the residential structure is proposed to be moved or relocated. 
(2)  That moving or relocation of the residential structure will not be detrimental, decrease or diminish the value of real properties located adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of, the lot or parcel on which the residential structure is proposed to be moved or relocated. 
(3)  That the move or relocation of the residential structure will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in the zoning district in which the affected lot or parcel is situated. 
(4)  That approval of the permit will not adversely affect the general plan of the city, or any specific plan of the city applicable to the lot or parcel on which the residential structure is proposed to be moved or relocated. 
(i)  If the zoning administrator does not find that all of the requirements set forth in subsection (h) have been met, he shall deny the application for the permit. 
6)  In granting a permit, the zoning administrator may impose such conditions, including requiring modifications to the design and appearance of the residential structure, as are necessary to assure compatibility with existing housing in the area adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of, the affected lot or parcel; or as may be desirable to protect the public health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(k)  In granting or approving an application for a permit, the zoning administrator shall make a written finding which shall specify all facts relied upon in rendering his decision and in attaching conditions and safeguards. A copy of the decision, together with the written finding of fact, shall be filed with the planning commission, with the department, and mailed to the applicant. 
(l)  Within fifteen (15) days from the date of the zoning administrator's decision, the applicant, if the zoning administrator's decision is adverse to the applicant, or any other interested person, may appeal such decision to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the reason or reasons why the decision of the zoning administrator is incorrect, and shall be filed with the director of the department upon forms provided by the department. Such appeal shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. 
(m)  Upon receipt of an appeal, the director shall present such appeal to the planning commission at its next regular meeting. At such meeting, the planning commission shall set the appeal for public hearing within thirty (30) days from the date of such regular meeting. Not later than ten (10) days prior to the date of said public hearing, the planning commission shall give written notice of the date, time and place of its hearing to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the lot or parcel involved, as shown on the latest available tax roll. 
(n)  At its public hearing, the planning commission may either affirm, reverse, change or modify the decision of the zoning administrator. The planning commission may continue its public hearing in the same manner as permitted for the zoning administrator pursuant to subsection (g) of this section. In rendering its decision, the planning commission shall be governed by the criteria set forth in subsection (h)(1) through (4) of this section. if the planning commission reverses the decision of the zoning administrator, approves the application and grants the permit, the planning commission may impose conditions to such approval in the same manner as granted to the zoning administrator pursuant to subsection (j) of this section. The decision of the planning commission shall be final with no further right of appeal. The decision of the planning commission shall be filed with the clerk of the council, with the department, and mailed to the applicant. 
(o)  The zoning administrator may, after twenty (20) days notice by mail to the applicant and/or record owner or owners of the affected lot or parcel, and after a duly noticed public hearing in accordance with the provisions of subsection (m) of this section, revoke a permit, on any one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  That the permit was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(2)  That the permit has been exercised by the person granted the permit, or his representatives, successors, or assigns, contrary to the terms or conditions of approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation not excused by the permit. 
(3)  That the permit is being or has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety or so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(p)  The person whose permit has been revoked by the zoning administrator may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator in writing to the planning commission within ten (10) days after such decision by the zoning administrator. The planning commission shall hear said appeal within thirty (30) days after the date such appeal is filed. Public notice of the planning commission's hearing on such appeal shall be given in accordance with the provisions of subsection (m) of this section. The planning commission, after hearing, may affirm, reverse, change or modify the decision of the zoning administrator. A copy of the decision of the planning commission shall be filed with the clerk of the council, with the department, and mailed to the applicant. The decision of the planning commission shall be final with no further right of appeal. 
(q)  The requirements of this section shall be in addition to, and not a substitute for, the provisions and requirements set forth in Article VIII (sections 8-1760 to 8-1804) of Chapter 8 of this Code, pertaining to house moving. 
(Ord. No. NS-1634, § 2,6-7-82)  
Sec. 41-621. - Helicopters, heliports, and helistops: Regulations. 
No helicopter shall land or take off and no heliport or helistop shall be established in any R1, R2, R3, or R4 District. In any district other than R1, R2, R3, or R4, no helicopter shall land or take off and no heliport or helistop shall be established unless a conditional use permit shall first have been secured for the establishment, maintenance and operation of such use, and then only in conformity with any conditions imposed thereby. 
The planning director may approve temporary helistops in any zoning district of the city for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for use in connection with major construction sites or special events if he determines that such helistops will not unduly interfere with the health, safety and welfare of persons owning property in the surrounding area and be may attach appropriate conditions to such approval. 
(Ord. No. NS-1039, § 2, 9-21-70) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1039, § 2, added a new section relating to helicopters, etc., designated § 41-619. At the direction of the city the section was redesignated as § 41-621 inasmuch as § 41-619 had been added to the Code by Ord. No. NS-1025.  
Sec. 41-622. - Mechanical equipment or appurtenances: Regulations. 
All mechanical equipment or appurtenances located on the roof or on the exterior of a building shall be screened. 
Every application for a building permit for the development of property shall be submitted to the planning department and shall be accompanied by detailed architectural drawings and plot plans, all to a workable scale, showing the elevation and location of the proposed screening structures or facilities, existing buildings and proposed addition, and any other pertinent information considered appropriate by the applicant or planning director pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1159, § 2, 3-19-73; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 27, 5-1-06; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 14, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-622.5. - Location of mechanical equipment. 
(a)  When located outside of a building, no comfort cooling equipment, mechanical absorption equipment, compressor, pump, pool heater and associated equipment shall be located between a building wall and a side property line. 
(b)  Strict compliance with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived by the planning manager if the equipment will be located so as to have no adverse noise impacts on neighboring property. 
(Ord. No. NS-2226, § 2, 7-18-94)  
Sec. 41-623. - Trash bin enclosures. 
(a)  One (1) trash bin enclosure shall be provided for each commercial or industrial establishment and for each residential building consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units; except that for commercial or industrial establishments sharing vehicular access and parking in an integrated development, one (1) shared trash bin enclosure may be provided for each group of four (4) or less such establishments, provided that any such shared trash bin enclosure shall be maintained as freely accessible to all establishments originally assigned to share in its use. 
(b)  All trash and utility areas shall be screened from public streets and alleys and adjacent properties. Trash and utility areas shall be physically integrated into the project and shall include an off-street loading area of three hundred (300) square feet with no single dimension less than ten (10) feet. 
(c)  The director of community development shall issue standards for the construction of trash bin enclosures required by this section, and maintain such standards on file in the department of planning. All trash bin enclosures required by this section shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards. 
(Ord. No. NS-1674, § 16, 3-21-83; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 12, 9-15-86)  
Sec. 41-624. - Installation of dish antennas. 
(a)  No dish antenna may be installed unless a land use certificate has been issued for such dish antenna pursuant to Article V of this chapter. A land use certificate shall be issued for a dish antenna if and only if the installation of the dish antenna will conform with the standards set forth in this section, subject to modification as provided in subsection (e) hereinbelow. 
(b)  The standards for installation of dish antennas on property located in a residential zone or used for residential purposes are as follows: 
(1)  The dish antenna shall not be located on any yard or building area which is viewable from any street (including freeways but excluding alleys). 
(2)  The dish antenna shall be screened from view from surrounding property by fencing or landscaping. 
(3)  The area occupied by a dish antenna shall not be considered as open space, and no dish antenna shall be installed which would cause the property to become nonconforming to any open space requirement of this chapter. 
(c)  On property which is neither located in a residential zone nor used for residential purposes, a dish antenna must be screened from view from any street (including freeways but excluding alleys) within one thousand (1,000) feet of the antenna and from any property which is zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(d)  Screening pursuant to this section shall be done through landscaping whenever practical. Screening other than landscaping shall be architecturally integrated with the building(s) on the property. 
(e)  With regard to dish antennas designed for satellite signal reception, the standards set forth hereinabove shall be modified upon a showing by the applicant that their strict application would operate to impose unreasonable limitations on, or prevent, reception of satellite-delivered signals, or to impose costs on the applicant that are excessive in light of the purchase and installation cost of the antenna. Any such modification shall preserve such screening of the antenna as is compatible with usable satellite signal reception at reasonable cost. 
(Ord. No. NS-1755, § 2, 12-17-84; Ord. No. NS-2011, § 1, 7-3-89)  
Sec. 41-625. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2442, § 2, adopted Sept. 18, 2000, repealed in their entirety the provisions of § 41-625 which pertained to above-ground outside storage of flammable and combustible liquids and derived from Ord. No. NS-1878, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 1986.  
Sec. 41-626. - Underground utility installations. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the ordinance, all projects described below shall be required to install electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed, added to, or converted, shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. Conduits required for telephone or community antenna television shall be installed to utility specifications by the electrical permit holder prior to inspection of electrical conduit. 
(1)  When any property is developed with a new or relocated building or structure. 
(2)  When an addition is proposed to a single family residence or duplex in excess of fifty (50) percent of the existing floor area. 
(3)  When an addition is proposed to a multi-family or non-residential structure in excess of twenty-five (25) percent of the existing floor area. 
(b)  For existing single-family and duplex (two-family) structures, a new service meter may be installed without the utility wires and cables being installed underground provided that the new meter to be installed is a dual function service box which may be converted for underground service when appropriate. 
(c)  For existing multifamily, commercial, and industrial structures, a change of service may be permitted with a waiver from the requirements of subsection (a), above, if approved by the planning director. Waivers may be granted if, after a review of aesthetic and technical considerations, a determination is made that environmental or other conditions affecting the site make the underground installation of wires or cables unreasonable or impractical. Requests for waivers shall be in writing on forms provided by the planning department. The decision of the designee may be appealed to the planning commission by filing an appeal application to the planning department within ten (10) days. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. The form and content of the waiver application and appeal application shall be determined by the executive director of the planning and building safety agency. 
(d)  For existing single-family and duplex (two-unit) structures, a waiver as outlined in subsection (c) may be granted for expansion of the existing structures as referenced in subsection (a), provided no additional dwelling units are created. 
(e)  In addition to the waiver provisions of this section outlined in subsections (c) and (d), minor exceptions may be granted from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section for new or relocated buildings or structures subject to the standards set forth in section 41-638. 
(f)  Underground utility installations. The requirements of this section shall not apply to construction of new accessory dwelling units provided, however, that all utility cables or wires between the primary residence and a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. NS-1955, § 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. NS-2906, § 2, 12-20-16 ; Ord. No. NS-2940, § 7, 4-3-18 ) 
Cross reference— Underground utilities installation requirements in subdivisions, § 34-82 et seq.; underground utility districts, Ch. 37.  
Sec. 41-627. - Landscaping requirements for churches. 
The landscaping requirements for a church shall be the same as set forth in section 41-372 of this chapter regardless of the use district in which the church is located; provided, however, that in the residential use districts the width of the landscaped area adjacent to the street in the front yard shall not be less than the minimum front yard required for residential developments in such districts. 
(Ord. No. NS-1978, § 1, 11-15-88)  
Sec. 41-628. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-629. - Zoning administrator; administrative functions. 
The zoning administrator may, as a part of his administrative function, authorize: 
(1)  The temporary use of trailers for office space which are utilized in conjunction with any permitted use in the P, C1, C2, C4 and C5 districts for a period of time not exceeding two (2) years from the date of approval; provided said determination shall be in writing and show that the temporary office use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2)  The construction of open buildings in the C1, C2, and C5 districts; provided said determination shall be in writing and show that the open buildings are not detrimental to the surrounding area and the open portions of the structures are not visible from adjacent properties or public streets. 
However, the planning director may determine that a variance is necessary when a proposed temporary office trailer or an open building is so located as to be of importance to the adjoining property owners or to be in conflict with the orderly development of the area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1078, § 3, 5-3-71; Ord. No. NS-1226, § 5, 10-7-74; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 15, 6-21-10)  
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES, MINOR EXCEPTIONS, AMENDMENTS, AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT PLAN APPROVALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 41-630. - Planning commission duties, authority. 
The planning commission is hereby authorized under conditions herein provided to grant minor exceptions to, and variances from the provisions of this chapter, and to grant conditional use permits for uses in any zone in which such uses may be conditionally permitted. 
(Code 1952, § 9250; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 31, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-631. - Zoning administrator, powers and duties. 
The zoning administrator is authorized to act on minor exceptions as listed in section 41-632(a)(3). 
(Code 1952, § 9250.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 32, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-632. - Conditional use permit, variance and minor exception applications—Initiation, scope. 
(a)  In accordance with the procedures outlined in this article, application may be made for: 
(1)  Conditional use permit for a specific use of land or buildings in a land use district wherein such use may be so conditionally permitted. 
(2)  Variance from the development standards of this chapter. 
(3)  Minor exception to obtain a waiver or modification of those zoning provisions which pertain to the following: 
(a)  Lineal dimensions of yards. Modifications granted shall not exceed by more than twenty (20) per cent the minimum requirements. 
(b)  Separation between buildings and other structures. Modifications granted shall not exceed by more than fifty (50) per cent the minimum requirement. 
(c)  Lot coverage. Modifications granted shall not exceed by more than twenty (20) per cent the maximum coverage permitted. 
(d)  Height of buildings. Modifications granted shall not exceed by more than twenty-five (25) per cent the maximum height permitted. 
(e)  Signs. Area modifications granted shall not exceed by more than twenty (20) per cent the maximum area permitted. 
(f)  Setback and future right-of-way lines. 
(g)  Off-street parking. Modifications granted for reductions in required number of stalls shall not exceed by more than twenty (20) per cent the minimum ordinance requirement and pursuant to the standards contained in section 41-638.1. 
(h)  Operational standards. Modifications granted may include minor exceptions to screening and landscape requirements but shall not include exceptions to provisions pertaining to uses permitted in the open. 
(i)  Walls and fences. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1015, § 1, 5-18-70; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 11, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 11, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-2334, § 3, 11-3-97; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 33, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-633. - Same—Filing; form and content. 
Application for conditional use permit, variance or minor exception shall be in writing and filed in the city planning department upon forms provided by the department and shall include the following information: 
(a)  A full statement of the special circumstances and conditions relied upon as grounds for application. 
(b)  An outline of the proposed use, including adequate plans and a legal description of the property involved. 
(c)  For public notification required for any public hearings the provisions of Santa Ana Municipal Code section 2-153(c) shall apply. 
(d)  Each application shall be signed by the record owner or agent for the owner if notarized certificate of power of attorney is filed with the application. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 34, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-634. - Same—Filing fees. 
Every application under this chapter for a minor exception, variance, conditional use permit or appeal to the planning commission or city council shall be accompanied by a filing fee. No application shall be accepted for filing without the required fee, except that all governmental agencies are exempted from the fee requirement. The city council shall from time to time by resolution adopt a schedule of fees to be charged, a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the planning department. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1186, § 1, 10-1-73; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 35, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-635. - Hearing on application—Hearing date. 
Upon the filing for a minor exception, variance or conditional use permit, the director of planning shall set the application for public hearing at a regular or an adjourned meeting which is to be held not less than seven (7) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing date. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 36, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-636. - Same—Notice of hearing. 
All public notification requirements shall comply with the provisions of Santa Ana Municipal Code section 2-153(c). 
(Code 1952, § 9250.6; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 37, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-637. - Same—Continuances. 
Upon the date set for a hearing the council, planning commission or zoning administrator may on that date continue the matter. If a date for the continued hearing is thereupon announced in open meeting, no further notice thereof need be given. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.7; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-638. - Standards for granting applications for minor exceptions, variances and conditional use permit and appeals. 
(a)  The council and planning commission, and in the case of minor exceptions, the zoning administrator may grant according to the procedure outlined in this chapter: 
(1)  Conditional use permits for specific uses located at a particular location when it shall be deemed: 
(i)  That the proposed use will provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general well being of the neighborhood or the community; and 
(ii)  That the proposed use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity; and 
(iii)  That the proposed use will not adversely affect the present economic stability or future economic development of property in the surrounding area; 
(iv)  That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in this chapter for such use; and 
(v)  That the proposed use will not adversely affect the general plan of the city or any specific plan applicable to the area of the proposed use. 
(2)  Variances from and minor exceptions to the provisions of the Municipal Code when it appears that all of the following have been established: 
(i)  That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance is found to deprive the subject property of privileges not otherwise at variance with the intent and purpose of the provisions of this chapter; 
(ii)  That the granting of a variance or minor exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of one (1) or more substantial property rights; 
(iii)  That the granting of a variance or minor exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to surrounding property; 
(iv)  That the granting of a variance or minor exception will not adversely affect the general plan of the city. 
(b)  In granting any conditional use permit, variance or minor exception, the zoning administrator, planning commission or council may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary and desirable to protect the public health, safety or welfare in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.8; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 12, 11-19-79; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 50, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 38, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-638.1. - Minor exceptions from off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Minor exceptions from the off-street parking regulations referenced in this section shall be subject to grant or denial by the planning manager based upon the standards set forth in this section and not upon the standards set forth in section 41-638. 
(b)  A minor exception from the requirement that required parking areas be integrated such that a vehicle need not enter a street to move from one (1) aisle to another may be granted if: 
(i)  The stalls in an aisle are all reserved or assigned so as to be unavailable for parking by persons permitted to park in another aisle; or 
(ii)  A parking area serves an office use and is immediately across a street or alley from it; or 
(iii)  The parking area is wholly or partly within a structure. 
(c)  A minor exception may be granted from the provisions of this chapter requiring each use to have its required number of off-street parking stalls to allow: 
(i)  Two (2) or more independent uses to share required parking stalls provided no conflict will arise between parking for one (1) use and parking for another due to differences in time of primary utilization of parking as between such uses. 
(ii)  Any use conducted in a building which cannot reasonably be considered as within the scope of any other section of this article setting minimum parking space requirements, unless a parking demand analysis is required at the discretion of the planning manager. 
(d)  A minor exception may be granted from the off-street parking design requirements of this chapter to allow for tandem parking if the parking area is adequately managed by a valet service or parking management plan. 
(e)  No minor exceptions shall be granted under this section if the effect would be to substantially increase difficulties of vehicle maneuverability or traffic congestion. Any minor exception granted under this section may be conditioned to avoid such adverse impacts, including the condition of maintaining parking according to an approved parking site and/or management plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-1602, § 8, 10-26-81; Ord. No. NS-1831, § 4, 2-3-86; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 6, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-638.2. - Standards for graffiti abatement. 
(a)  Condition tentative maps. In approving tentative or parcel maps, conditional use permits, variances, or other similar land use entitlements, the city shall consider imposing any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related conditions, at the public hearing required by law for approval of the tentative or parcel map, conditional use permit, variance or other similar land use entitlement: 
i.  Use of anti-graffiti material. Developer shall apply an anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the executive director of planning and building or designee, to the publicly-viewable surfaces on the improvements to be constructed at the site deemed by the executive director of planning and building, or designee, to be likely to attract graffiti; 
ii.  Right of access to remove graffiti. Developer shall grant, prior to resale of any of the parcels that are within the territory of the map, the right-of-entry over and access to such parcels, upon forty-eight (48) hours posting of notice by authorized city employees or agents, to the city for the purpose of removing or "painting over" graffiti; 
iii.  Supply city with graffiti-removal material. Developer shall, for a period of two (2) years after the resale of the final lot, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of graffiti; or 
iv.  Owner to immediately remove graffiti. Developer shall, either as part of the general conditions, covenants and restrictions, or separate covenants recorded against individual lots, prior to resale of any of the parcels, covenant in a form satisfactory to the city that the owner of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed thereon. 
(b)  Design of potential graffiti-attracting surfaces. Any applicant for design review approval, conditional use permit, special use permit, development agreement, or other form of development or building permit shall, to the extent deemed feasible by the executive director of planning and building or designee, have designed any building structures visible from any public or quasi-public place is such a manner to consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not limited to the following: 
i.  Use of a protective coating to provide for the prevention of or the effective and expeditious removal of graffiti; 
ii.  Use of additional lighting as a means of deterrence; 
iii.  Use of non-solid fencing; 
iv.  Use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; 
v.  Use of architectural design to break up long, continuous walls or solid areas; or 
vi.  Use of a water projection system activated by a motion sensor. 
(c)  Retro-fit existing graffiti-attracting surfaces: Non-residential structures. The following provisions may be incorporated in a graffiti eradication order issued pursuant to article VII of chapter 17 of this Code, at the discretion of the city and/or hearing officer. 
i.  At owner's expense. Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land used for non-residential purposes that has been defaced with graffiti more than five (5) times in a 12-month period shall be declared a public nuisance and required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property owner, with features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. In exercising the authority hereunder, the city may not impose a cost on the property owner of an amount greater than that established or approved by city council. 
ii.  At city's cost. The owner of property used for non-residential purposes on which is located a surface of a structure that has been defaced with graffiti more than five (5) times in a 12-month period shall permit the city to enter the property and, at the city's cost, make modifications as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. NS-2720, § 6, 8-7-06; Ord. No. NS-2798, § 4, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 41-638.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 41-638.5, pertaining to standards for granting applications for conditional use permits for care homes, derived from Ord. No. NS-1297, § 4, adopted Feb. 17, 1976, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1732, § 51, enacted June 25, 1984.  
Sec. 41-639. - Planning commission to make finding of fact; filing, review. 
In granting or denying a variance, conditional use permit or minor exception, the planning commission shall make a written finding which shall specify all facts relied upon by said commission in rendering its decision and in attaching conditions and safeguards. A copy of the decision of the planning commission, together with the written finding of fact, shall be filed with the clerk of the council, with the city planning division, and mailed to the applicant. All decisions of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council by any interested party, individual or group pursuant to section 41-645 or set for public hearing by the city council pursuant to section 41-642. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.9; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 7, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-640. - Zoning administrator to make finding of fact—Referral to planning commission for hearing. 
In granting or denying a minor exception, the zoning administrator shall make a written finding which shall specify all facts relied upon in rendering his decision and in attaching conditions and safeguards. A copy of the decision together with the written finding of fact shall be filed with the clerk of the council, with the city's planning department, and mailed to the applicant. All decisions of the zoning administrator on applications for minor exceptions shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission pursuant to section 41-645. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.10; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1123, § 12, 7-17-72; Ord. No. NS-1507, § 13, 11-29-79; Ord. No. NS-1870, § 2, 11-17-86; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 39, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-641. - Same—Referral to planning commission. 
In the event the zoning administrator is of the opinion any minor exception request is of such magnitude as to be of special interest to the people of the City of Santa Ana and the planning commission, he may continue the hearing to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission, who shall then process the application in the manner prescribed in section 41-639 of this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.10; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 40, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-642. - Review of decision of planning commission by city council; hearing. 
Upon the filing, by the planning commission, of a written finding of fact with the clerk of the council, the council may review and appeal said finding as set forth herein and in the timeframe set forth in section 41-645(b). 
If the council is dissatisfied with the action of the planning commission or is of the opinion that the matter is of such magnitude as to be of special interest to the people of the city it may, by majority vote, set the matter for a public hearing to be held at a regular or adjourned meeting with public notification made by the planning department as was required for the initial hearing; otherwise, all decisions of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.11; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 8, 9-16-17 )  
Secs. 41-643, 41-644. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2847, §§ 41, 42, adopted August 5, 2013, repealed §§ 41-643, 41-644 in their entirety. Former §§ 41-643, 41-644 pertained to review of decision of zoning administrator by planning commission as to conditional use permit and variance applications; hearing; review of decision of zoning administrator and confirmation of planning commission by council, respectively and were derived from Code 1952, §§ 9250.12, 9250.13; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, adopted June 20, 1960 and Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, adopted November 17, 1969.  
Sec. 41-645. - Appeals from decisions of planning commission and/or zoning administrator—Generally. 
(a)  An appeal from a decision or requirement of the planning commission or zoning administrator may be made by any interested party, individual or group. 
(b)  Any appeal made under the terms of this article shall be made within ten (10) calendar days following the date of the decision by the planning commission or zoning administrator. Further, said appeal period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day following said date of the decision by the planning commission or zoning administrator. If said tenth calendar day ends on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the ten (10) day period shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the next regular business day. 
(c)  All appeals shall be in writing and on forms provided by the planning department and shall specify wherein there was any error of decision or requirement by the commission or zoning administrator. Furthermore, a copy of said appeal shall be filed with the planning department and the clerk of the council. 
(d)  Upon receipt of said appeal of the decision of the planning commission, the planning department shall set the matter for hearing by the council. In the event the matter is an appeal from a ruling by the zoning administrator, the matter shall be heard by the planning commission. 
(e)  All appeals shall be heard in the same manner as prescribed for the original hearing. 
(f)  Upon filing of an appeal, the planning department shall forward to the clerk of the council a copy of the written findings, maps, papers and exhibits upon which the decision of the planning commission and/or zoning administrator was based. 
(g)  The council, or in the case of a zoning administrator appeal, the planning commission, may, after public hearing, affirm, reverse, change, modify the original decision and may make any additional determination it shall consider appropriate within the limitations imposed by this chapter. Such decision shall be filed with the clerk of the council, and the city planning department; one (1) copy thereof shall be sent to the applicant. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.14; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, § 18, 6-19-61; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 43, 8-5-13; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 9, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-645.5. - Same—Preparation of a letter of public convenience or necessity for off-sale alcohol conditional use permits. 
(a)  In the event that a business requesting a conditional use permit for an off-sale alcohol license is located within an area deemed to have an undue concentration of said licenses as determined by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control pursuant to Section 23958 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, then that business may apply to the planning commission for the preparation of a letter of public convenience or necessity as a component of the application for the conditional use permit. The process of consideration of this request will be governed by article V regarding the processing of conditional use permits except that the following findings must be made. 
(1)  In granting said letter of public convenience or necessity the applicant must prove and the planning commission must find that: 
(i)  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the character of development in the immediate neighborhood and will be in harmony with the overall objectives of the general plan. 
(ii)  The economic benefit outweighs the negative impacts to the community as whole. 
(iii)  The issuance of the license will provide a needed service not currently being met in the community 
(iv)  There exist special and unusual circumstances present here to justify a new retail alcohol outlet when there are already similar alcohol uses existing nearby. 
(v)  The business cannot operate profitably without a liquor license. 
(vi)  The applicant has demonstrated reasonable efforts to seek community input. 
(b)  Within two (2) days following the date of a planning commission decision on the preparation of a letter of public convenience or necessity, the planning manager shall send a written report of such decision to the members of the city council. If, within twenty-one (21) days following the date of such a planning commission decision, the city council sets the matter for public hearing, then the decision of the planning commission shall be vacated and the decision regarding the preparation of a letter of public convenience or necessity shall be heard and decided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-1870, § 1, 11-17-86; Ord. No. NS-1994, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. NS-2245, § 5, 3-6-95; Ord. No. NS-2334, § 4, 11-3-97; Ord. No. NS-2847, § 44, 8-5-13)  
Sec. 41-646. - Same—Council to make finding of fact. 
In granting or denying an appeal, the council shall make a written finding which shall specify all facts relied upon by said council in rendering its decision and in attaching conditions and safeguards, and shall fully set forth wherein the facts and circumstances fulfill or fail to fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter. A copy of the resolution together with the written finding of fact shall be filed with the clerk of the council, in the city planning department; one (1) copy thereof shall be sent to the applicant. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1952, § 9250.15; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-646.5. - Findings for conditional use permits related to superstores. 
(a)  Additional findings. In making the findings otherwise required by this article for approval of a conditional use permit, prior to approval of a superstore the planning commission or city council, as appropriate take into consideration of all economic benefits and costs to the city, and as relevant, the region, of the proposed use based upon information contained in an economic impact analysis, as provided below, and any additional information submitted by staff or the public. 
(b)  Procedure. An application for a conditional use permit for a superstore shall follow the procedures otherwise required by this chapter, and in addition the applicant shall prepare and submit an economic impact analysis report as defined herein. The analysis, at a minimum, shall identify the benefits and costs to the city of the proposed superstore on grocery or retail shopping centers within a three-mile radius. The city manager or designee: 
(1)  Shall approve in advance the individual or firm preparing the report; which approval may, at the city's option, be satisfied by use of an individual or firm identified on a pre-approved list; and 
(2)  Such list may designate additional information on benefits and cost that shall be included in the analysis. 
(Ord. No. NS-2734, § 7, 2-5-07)  
Sec. 41-647. - Utilizing conditional use permits, variances, minor exceptions; time limits, extensions. 
A conditional use permit, variance or minor exception shall not be deemed vaild until all of the conditions as approved by the zoning administrator, planning commission, and/or city council have been complied with and released by the planning manager. A conditional use permit, variance or minor exception approved in accordance with the procedures and considerations as provided in this article, shall automatically become void after two (2) years from the effective date of such approval when the owner fails to institute an action to erect, build, alter, move or maintain the use of the property as specified in the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit, variance or minor exception; however, at the initial hearing the planning commission or zoning administrator may provide, by appropriate condition of approval, for extensions of time beyond the two-year period. Furthermore, the city council may, by resolution, extend the date on which a conditional use permit, variance or minor exception becomes void for a period or periods not exceeding three (3) years in total beyond the date it would otherwise become void. 
Acceptable action shall be considered to be actual construction, alteration, repairs and use of structures and land. Preparation of plans, financial negotiations, estate settlements, or change of property owners are not considered sufficient evidence of an action. 
(Code 1952, § 9251; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1669, § 1, 1-17-83; Ord. No. NS-2236, § 1, 12-5-94; Ord. No. NS-2334, § 5, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 41-647.5. - Violation of conditional use permits, variances and minor exceptions. 
(a)  Failure to comply with any condition of a conditional use permit, variance or minor exception as approved by the zoning administrator, planning commission and/or city council is a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to maintain any condition of a conditional use permit, variance or minor exception as approved by the zoning adminstrator, planning commission and/or city council is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. NS-2334, § 6, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 41-648. - Status of approved conditional use permits, variances or minor exceptions. 
Any variance granted prior to July 18, 1957, upon which an acceptable action has not been instituted as defined in section 41-647, shall, on the effective date of this chapter, become null and void. 
Any approved conditional use permit, variance or minor exception which has been exercised in the manner set forth in the terms of approval and has thereafter ceased to exist or has been suspended for at least one (1) year shall be declared void and any further use of the premises, building, or structure shall conform to the requirements for the district in which located. 
(Code 1952, § 9252; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-649. - Modification of approved conditional use permits, variances or minor exceptions. 
Any modification of an approved conditional use permit, variance or minor exception shall necessitate the refiling of a new application which shall be processed as required in the aforementioned sections of this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9253; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-650. - Conditional use regulations. 
Any conditionally permitted use shall be subject to the yard, height, area, off-street parking, loading, sign and operational standards set forth for the district in which said use is proposed to be located. However, the zoning administrator, planning commission or council may impose other conditions considered necessary to insure the safe and reasonable development of the area in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the surrounding property owners. Further, the zoning administrator, planning commission or council may modify the regulations set forth for the district in which located when it is considered that strict enforcement of said regulations will cause undue hardship to the applicant. 
(Code 1952, § 9254; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-651. - Revocation procedure for conditional use permits, variances, and minor exception permits. 
The planning commission may, after twenty (20) days notice by mail to the record owner of the property and to the tenant of said property, if any, and after a public hearing, revoke a conditional use permit, a variance, or a minor exception permit, on any one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  That the conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit, was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(2)  That the conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit, has been exercised by the person granted the conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit, or his representative, successors, or assigns, contrary to the terms or conditions of approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation not excused by the conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit. 
(3)  That the use permitted by the conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit, is being or has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare, or safety or so as to constitute a nuisance. 
The person whose conditional use permit, variance, or minor exception permit has been revoked by the planning commission may appeal the decision of the planning commission in writing to the city council within ten (10) days after such decision by the planning commission. The city council, after public hearing, may affirm, reverse, change or modify the original decision of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 8-6-73)  
Sec. 41-652. - Reasonable accommodation—Application process. 
(a)  Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process. The agency shall prominently display in both city hall and the planning and building agency a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this division. 
(b)  Applicability. To make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request reasonable accommodation under this division to modify a land use or zoning standard, regulation, policy, and procedure of the city as may be necessary to afford the individual with a disability equal opportunity to the use and enjoyment of their dwelling. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by filing an application under this section. 
(c)  Application. An application for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the executive director of the planning and building agency, or in the form of a letter addressed to the executive director. 
(d)  Privacy. Any information related to a disability status and identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(e)  Assistance. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(f)  Timing. A request for reasonable accommodation may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(g)  Filing fees. There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 4, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 41-653. - Same—Review. 
(a)  Executive director review. An application for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the executive director of the planning and building agency, or his or her designee, as appropriate. 
(b)  Decision. Within sixty (60) days of acceptance of the application as complete, the executive director shall issue a written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny an application for reasonable accommodation in accordance with section 41-654 and shall notify the applicant of the decision. The written decision shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the executive director's findings on the factors stated in section 41-654. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the executive director may request additional information from the applicant consistent with the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, specifying in detail the information that is required. If a request for additional information is made, the sixty-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
(c)  Referral to other reviewing authority. The executive director shall have the authority, upon his or her sole discretion, to refer any reasonable accommodation application to any other reviewing authority, including, but not limited to, the planning commission, the zoning administrator, or the historic resources commission, to review the reasonable accommodation application and make a determination on the same in accordance with the applicable sections. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 5, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 41-654. - Same—Standards. 
(a)  Findings. The decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny an application for reasonable accommodation shall be based on a finding of consistency with the Acts and shall take into consideration all of the following factors: 
1.  Whether the housing or housing related facilities, which are the subject of the request, will be used by an individual with a disability under the Acts. 
2.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts. 
3.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
4.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
5.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would be contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements of adjacent properties. 
6.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation adequately considers the physical attributes of the property and structures. 
7.  Whether alternative reasonable accommodations could provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
8.  Whether the property is in compliance with the then existing laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request. If any non-compliance is through no fault of the applicant or unrelated to the request for reasonable accommodation, the executive director may waive this requirement. However, such a waiver shall not preclude the city from requiring that the existing violations be corrected in accordance with the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(b)  Conditions of approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the executive director of the planning and building agency may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation will comply with the findings required by this section. Conditions may be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are unnecessary to afford the individual with a disability for whom the reasonable accommodation was granted the use and enjoyment of the dwelling. 
(c)  Restrictive covenant. When applicable, the city shall enter into a restrictive covenant with the owner of the property which provides that prior to any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property, or at the time the need for the reasonable accommodation is no longer necessary, that the owner of the property shall bring the property into conformance with the city's zoning code to the extent that relief was provided under the zoning code as part of the request for reasonable accommodation. The restrictive covenant shall be recorded against the property being granted the reasonable accommodation. The restrictive covenant shall provide that the reasonable accommodation does not run with the land and shall terminate upon any sale, transfer, lease or other conveyance of the property. Upon submittal of a new application for a successor in interest to the property, the executive director may consider a continuation of the reasonable accommodation if it is consistent with and does not extend the original approval. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 6, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 41-655. - Same—Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Time extension; voidance; revocation. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this article may be extended, voided, or revoked for the same reasons and in the same manner as a conditional use permit, as detailed in article V of this chapter, or for any violations of this article, or for any violations of the terms and conditions of the reasonable accommodation, or if any law is violated in connection with the use of the reasonable accommodation. 
(b)  Resubmittal of applications. No request for reasonable accommodation that has been denied in whole or in part shall be filed again within six (6) months from the date of such denial except upon proof of changed conditions or by permission of the executive director of the planning and building agency. 
(c)  Modifications. A request to modify an approved reasonable accommodation shall be treated as a new application, unless in the opinion of the executive director the requested modification results in only a minor change, is within the authority of the executive director to approve, and is consistent with the original approval. 
(d)  Appeals. The applicant requesting the accommodation may appeal an adverse determination or any conditions or limitations imposed in the written determination as provided in chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2813, § 7, 3-21-11)  
Secs. 41-656—41-658. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Note— See the amendment footnote to Art. V. 
 
Sec. 41-659. - Initiation of proceedings. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience and general welfare justifies such action, the planning commission or council upon their own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested persons shall, initiate proceedings to amend, supplement or change the districts designed on the affected sectional district map established by this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9255; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-660. - Filing of application. 
Application for change of district shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission shall provide forms for such purpose and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements. 
Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-661. - Filing fee for amendment applications. 
Every amendment application shall be accompanied by a filing fee. No amendment application shall be accepted for filing unless it is accompanied by the required fee. The city council shall from time to time by resolution establish the fee required by this section, and a schedule of all fees under this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the planning department. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69; Ord. No. NS-1186, § 2, 10-1-73)  
Sec. 41-662. - Investigation. 
The planning commission shall cause to be made by its members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter, with previous amendments and in substantial conformance with the general plan. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-663. - Notices. 
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the director of planning shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. The date of such public hearing and location of the property and nature of the request shall be given in the following manner: 
(a)  By publishing at least once and not less than ten (10) days before the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(b)  The planning commission may further require posting, not less than five (5) days prior to said hearings, placards on such property and for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of such property. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-664. - Public hearing. 
Public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as hereinbefore required. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued provided that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-665. - Decision by planning commission. 
The decision of the planning commission in recommending the amendment of any sectional district map shall be advisory only. 
(Code 1952, § 9255.6. Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-666. - Finding of fact transmitted to city council. 
Within ten (10) days after final action by the planning commission recommending an amendment of any sectional district map, its recommendations together with complete records of the case shall be forwarded to the council. 
(Code 1962, § 9256.7; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
Sec. 41-667. - Council action. 
The council after receipt of the report and recommendation from the planning commission shall hold a final hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as hereinbefore prescribed in this chapter. No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a change of zone until same shall have become final by the adoption of an ordinance by the council. 
(Code 1955, § 9255.8; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-989, § 1, 11-17-69)  
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT PROJECT PLAN APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 41-668. - Definitions. 
(a)  Development project. As used in this division, the term "development project" includes any of the following projects: 
(1)  The new construction of any building or buildings, and additions to any existing building or buildings, if new floor space of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more is constructed or added; but excluding the following: 
a.  Single family homes; 
b.  Room additions to duplexes; 
c.  Tenant improvements not involving a change of use; 
d.  Facade improvements; 
e.  Equipment covers or structures to cover equipment. 
(2)  Tenant improvements involving an intensification or change in occupancy classification. 
(3)  Any project that requires a discretionary approval, excluding conditional use permits for operation of eating establishments between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. and conditional use permits for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Discretionary approval. As used in this division, the term "discretionary approval" means a conditional use permit, variance, minor exception, tentative map approval, change in use district designation, or similar entitlement for development, the granting of which involves the exercise of discretion, other than the plan approval process set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83; Ord. No. NS-2102, § 4, 2-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2303, § 1, 11-1-96; Ord. No. NS-2356, § 3, 7-6-98; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 10, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-669. - Plan approval. 
No building permit shall be issued for any development project unless consistent with plans that have been approved for such development project in accordance with this division, except as otherwise provided in a discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 10, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-670. - Standards for approval. 
Plans for a development project shall be approved if the development project, as proposed in the plans, satisfies the following standards: 
(1)  The development project is consistent with the general plan and with any applicable specific plan adopted pursuant to California Government Code, Section 65450 et seq. 
(2)  The development project is consistent with development design and architectural standards adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(3)  The development project provides for adequate vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation and vehicular parking. 
(4)  The development project provides for adequate access for city emergency and service vehicles and equipment. 
(5)  The development project provides for adequate utility services. 
(6)  The development project complies with all applicable standards and regulations set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to landscaping requirements, trash area enclosures, and screening requirements for loading and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83)  
Sec. 41-671. - Filing of application for plan approval. 
(a)  All applications for plan approval for development project shall be filed with the director of planning and development services. The director of planning and development services shall, by written departmental regulations, establish procedures, forms and requirements for the filing of such applications, as appropriate to determine whether the development project will comply with the standards set forth in section 41-670. 
(b)  The city council may by resolution establish a fee to compensate the city for the administrative cost of the plan review process established by this division, including the appeal process set forth in section 41-674. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83)  
Sec. 41-672. - Hearing. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, whenever approval of plans for a development project will constitute a substantial or significant deprivation of property rights of other landowners, the director of planning and development services shall set the matter for public hearing and provide notice of the time and place of the hearing to all persons, including businesses, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll, as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the application. The notice shall be given by direct mailing to the owners at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a public hearing is required pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the applicant may be required to provide the director of planning and development services with a list of the names and addresses of the property owners entitled to notice under said subsection (a). 
(c)  If the development project requires a discretionary approval in order to proceed, and if the application for such discretionary approval requires a public hearing by the planning commission or the city council, then no hearing need be held on the development plan separate and apart from the hearing on the application for the discretionary approval; provided, however, in such event: 
(1)  The notice of hearing on the application for the discretionary approval shall meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  Any approval of the development project plans by the director of planning and development services shall be subject to the condition that such plans be subsequently approved by the planning commission or city council following the hearing; 
(3)  The hearing shall extend to and include all issues relevant to development project plan approval under this division; and 
(4)  The planning commission or city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans for the development project following the hearing. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83)  
Sec. 41-673. - Decision on development project plans. 
(a)  After receipt of a complete application for development project plan approval, the director of planning and development services shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans. Conditions of approval shall be limited to those which reasonably relate to the purpose of assuring compliance with the standards set forth in section 41-670, and with requirements, if any, for subsequent discretionary approvals. 
(b)  In addition to rendering a decision on the plans, the director of planning and development services shall provide direction to the applicant on the following matters: 
(1)  The conformance of the project with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and any design and architectural guidelines adopted by the city council. 
(2)  The application to the development project or regulations, procedures, and fees established by or pursuant to this Code. 
(3)  Subsequent discretionary approvals required for the project, if any. 
(4)  Departments and agencies of the city which will be involved in the determination of requirements for the development project. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83)  
Sec. 41-674. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a determination of the director of planning and development services pursuant to section 41-673 may appeal such determination to the planning commission, which may then approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plan subject to the same standards and limitations as apply to the director of planning and development services under this division. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(b)  Any decision on a development plan approved pursuant to section 41-672(c) may be appealed according to the same procedures established for appeal of a decision on the application for a discretionary approval which is required for the development project. 
(Ord. No. NS-1700, § 2, 11-21-83)  
DIVISION 4. - LAND USE CERTIFICATES 
 
Sec. 41-675. - Land use certificates. 
Whenever a land use certificate is required for any use or activity by the provisions of this chapter, the procedures for issuance of such land use certificate shall be as follows: 
(a)  Applications for a land use certificate shall be filed by the applicant with the director of planning and development services on such forms as may be provided by the director and shall be accompanied by such filing fee as may be set by resolution of the city council. The application shall provide such information and documentation as the director shall, by departmental regulation, determine to be appropriate. 
(b)  The director of planning and development services shall issue the land use certificate if he determines that the use or activity will be conducted in accordance with the applicable requirements specified in this chapter; otherwise, he shall deny the land use certificate. The land use certificate, if granted, shall specifically identify the grantee and the nature and location of the use or activity to be permitted, and the limitations imposed by this chapter on such use or activity. In the event that the use or activity is one which is limited by the provisions of this chapter to a maximum number of days per period of time, the land use certificate may designate the dates on which such use or activity is permitted. 
(c)  See section 41-196 for land use certificate ABC license requests. 
(Ord. No. NS-1729, § 2, 6-4-84; Ord. No. NS-2334, § 7, 11-3-97)  
Sec. 41-676. - Revocation of land use certificates. 
The director of planning and development services may revoke a land use certificate, after notice and opportunity to be heard by the grantee, upon his determination that the land use certificate is being exercised in a manner contrary to the regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the use or activity permitted by the land use certificate. 
(Ord. No. NS-1729, § 2, 6-4-84)  
Sec. 41-677. - Appeals from denials or revocations of land use certificates. 
Any applicant for a land use certificate whose application is denied by the director of planning and development services, and any grantee whose land use certificate is revoked by the said director, may, within ten (10) days following such decision, appeal such decision to the planning commission, in which event the decision of the director shall be vacated, and the planning commission shall determine whether to issue or revoke the land use certificate in accordance with the requirements of this chapter applicable thereto. The applicant or grantee shall be given at least five (5) days prior written notice by the director of the time and place at which the planning commission will consider the application or revocation and shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard by the planning commission prior to its decision being made. The director or the planning commission may provide such other notice of a hearing on the matter as they deem appropriate. An appeal pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing by the applicant or grantee and shall be accompanied by a fee equal to one-half (½) of the original application fee. The decision of the planning commission shall be final with no further right of appeal. 
(Ord. No. NS-1729, § 2, 6-4-84)  
Sec. 41-678. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 
 
Sec. 41-679. - Applicability of article. 
Nonconforming buildings and uses are subject to the regulations contained in this article. 
(Code 1952, § 9260; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-680. - Maintenance of structure. 
A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained, said maintenance to consist of repair work necessary to keep a building or structure in sound condition. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.1; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-681. - Enlargement or exterior structural alteration of building; conformance required; exceptions. 
No nonconforming building or building occupied by a nonconforming use shall be enlarged nor shall the exterior walls of such a building be structurally altered in any manner unless such building and the site on which it is located will thereafter conform to all applicable provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in sections 41-681.1 through 41-681.4. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.2; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1732, § 52, 6-25-84; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 3, 11-19-84; Ord. No. NS-1835, § 1, 2-3-86; Ord. No. NS-1961, § 4, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-681.1. - Rehabilitation of nonresidential buildings—Sites of less than fifteen thousand square feet. 
Rehabilitation of any nonconforming building which is used for any nonresidential purpose and which is located on a site having less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or gross area is subject to the following exceptions from section 41-681: 
(1)  Rehabilitation which is limited to structural alterations without any building expansion is permitted if all signage on the building and the site on which it is located is brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter, except that, in the case of such alterations being undertaken by a tenant on a site having more than one (1) tenant, such alterations are permitted if all signage on the area leased by such tenant is brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Rehabilitation which includes expansion of the building is permitted when the total floor area of all such expansions occurring in any five-year period does not exceed ten (10) per cent of the floor space of the building as it existed at the beginning of such time period, provided that the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  All signage on the building and the site on which it is located shall be brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. With regard to sites having more than one (1) business occupant, only the occupant undertaking the building expansion is required to achieve conformity with the applicable off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
c.  Landscaping shall be improved to bring the site on which the building is located into closer compliance with the landscaping requirements of this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the planning director. 
d.  Bicycle parking shall be improved to bring the site on which the building is located into closer compliance with the bicycle parking requirements of this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the planning director. 
(3)  Rehabilitation which includes expansion of the building is permitted when the total floor area of all such expansions occurring in any five-year period exceeds ten (10) per cent but does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the floor space of the building as it existed at the beginning of such time period, if the building and the site on which it is located is brought into conformity with all of the requirements of this chapter except those pertaining to building setbacks (minimum yards), minimum lot size, and minimum street frontage. With regard to sites having more than one (1) business occupant, only the occupant undertaking the building expansion is required to achieve conformity with the applicable off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 5, 6-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2787, § 5, 6-8-09)  
Sec. 41-681.2. - Same—Sites of fifteen thousand square feet or more. 
Rehabilitation of any nonconforming building which is used for any nonresidential purpose and which is located on a site having fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more of gross area is subject to the following exceptions from section 41-681: 
(1)  Rehabilitation which is limited to structural alterations without any building expansion is permitted if all signage on the building and the site on which it is located is brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter, except that, in the case of such alterations being undertaken by a tenant on a site having more than one (1) tenant, such alterations are permitted if all signage on the area leased by such tenant is brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Rehabilitation which includes expansion of the building is permitted when the total floor area of all such expansions occurring in any five-year period does not exceed ten (10) per cent of the floor space of the building as it existed at the beginning of such time period, provided that the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  All signage on the building and the site on which it is located shall be brought into conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. With regard to sites having more than one (1) business occupant, only the occupant undertaking the building expansion is required to achieve conformity with the applicable off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
c.  Landscaping shall be improved to bring the site on which the building is located into closer compliance with the landscaping requirements of this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the planning director. 
d.  Bicycle parking shall be improved to bring the site on which the building is located into closer compliance with the bicycle parking requirements of this chapter, as deemed appropriate by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 6, 6-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2787, § 6, 6-8-09)  
Sec. 41-681.3. - Rehabilitation of multiple-family dwellings. 
Rehabilitation of a nonconforming building which is a multiple-family dwelling, including structural alteration and/or enlargement, is permitted subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  There shall be no enlargement which would intrude into any required yard. 
(2)  There shall be no enlargement which would result in a new nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  There shall be no increase in the number or size of bedrooms unless the site on which the building is located will be in conformance with the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 7, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-681.4. - Rehabilitation of single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(a)  Rehabilitation of a nonconforming building whose primary use is a single-family dwelling or a two-family dwelling is permitted: 
(1)  In a residential district or a specific development where residential is permitted, or 
(2)  In a P district where the continuance of the use is not barred by section 41-683 and the building complies with the minimum yard requirements applicable to buildings located in the R2 district. 
(b)  Structural alterations and additions may be made where the total floor area of all such expansions occurring in a five-year period does not exceed forty (40) per cent of the floor space of the building as it existed at the beginning of said time, provided: 
(1)  The number of bedrooms is not increased; 
(2)  The number of dwelling units is not increased; and 
(3)  No new nonconformances with the requirements of this chapter are created. 
(c)  Structural alterations and additions which exceed forty (40) per cent of the total floor area as it existed at the beginning of a five-year period; include the creation of new bedrooms; or remodeling which involves the demolition of more than fifty (50) per cent of the building shall be permitted; provided: 
(1)  The number of dwelling units is not increased; 
(2)  The parking is brought into conformance with code provisions; 
(3)  No new nonconformities with the requirements of this chapter are created; and 
(4)  A minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of usable, continuous, non-front yard open-space, excluding driveways and parking areas is provided. Any open space with a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet by fifteen (15) feet shall be deemed continuous open space. 
(d)  Where rehabilitation of a building involves more than fifty (50) per cent of a building wall which encroaches into a front or side yard setback is demolished or is structurally altered, the remainder of the building wall shall be demolished. Any subsequent building wall shall conform to all provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, an existing two-car garage with a minimum dimension of eighteen (18) feet by eighteen (18) feet exterior dimension shall be considered conforming. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section, remodel shall mean to reconstruct, or to make over in structure or style, but shall exclude re-roof, window replacement, exterior finish replacement and repair or similar modifications. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, the limitations on adding a dwelling unit listed in subsections (a), (b), and (c) shall not apply to accessory dwelling units as defined and regulated in Section 41-194 of this Chapter. Existing non-conformities on a property otherwise eligible to build an accessory dwelling unit shall not disqualify it from building an accessory dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 8, 6-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 28, 5-1-06; Ord. No. NS-2940, § 8, 4-3-18 )  
Sec. 41-681.5. - Rehabilitation of emergency shelters for homeless. 
Rehabilitation of a nonconforming building which is an emergency shelter for homeless, including structural alteration and/or enlargement, is permitted subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  An existing emergency shelter for homeless with a minimum of thirty-five (35) beds may expand to up to seventy-five (75) beds. 
(2)  The rehabilitated emergency shelter for homeless must conform with all signage, building setback, architectural standards, and landscaping requirements of the underlying zone, as well as all emergency shelter for homeless standards, except separation criteria, found in this chapter. 
(3)  There shall be no enlargement which would result in a new nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 7, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 41-682. - Restoration of damaged buildings. 
A nonconforming building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake, explosion or similar occurrence, may be restored and the nonconforming use continued, provided that the cost of repair or restoration does not exceed the building's fair market value prior to the date of the damage. In the repair or restoration of such building, there shall be no enlargement of such building nor any increase in the area of a nonconforming use within such building. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.3; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60, Ord. No. NS-1753, § 4, 11-19-84)  
Sec. 41-683. - Discontinuance of nonconforming building or use. 
Except as provided in section 41-683.5, if a nonconforming use is discontinued, or if a nonconforming building is vacant, unused or unoccupied for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent use must conform in every respect to the provisions of this chapter, and a nonconforming building may not thereafter be used or occupied until it conforms in every respect to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.4; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1550, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 5, 11-19-84)  
Sec. 41-683.5. - Discontinuance of nonconforming use of building used for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
If a nonconforming use of a building for the sale of alcoholic beverages for either on-site or off-site consumption is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, any subsequent use of the building must conform in every respect to the provisions of this chapter. Any such use, whether primary or incidental, which does not have a required permit shall be deemed a nonconforming use within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-1550, § 2, 11-17-80; Ord. No. NS-1729, § 3, 6-4-84; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 6, 11-19-84)  
Sec. 41-684. - Expansion of a nonconforming use. 
A nonconforming use of land or buildings shall not be expanded on the same or nearby property. A nonconforming use of part of a building shall not be expanded or extended into any other part of such building. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.5; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 7, 11-19-84)  
Sec. 41-685. - Change of a nonconforming use. 
(a)  The conversion of a residence in any commercial or industrial district to a use permitted in that district shall conform in every respect to all requirements and conditions set forth for such new use by this chapter. 
(b)  Except as specified in section 41-685.5, a commercial use in the M1 or M2 district which is a nonconforming use by reason of the absence of a conditional use permit may be changed to another commercial use without the necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.6; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-521, § 19, 6-19-62; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 8, 11-19-84; Ord. No. NS-1961, § 9, 6-6-88; Ord. No. NS-2209, § 5, 12-20-93; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 16, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-685.5. - Intensification of use. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use and a use in a nonconforming building shall not be changed to another use if an intensification of use would result. 
(b)  As used herein, "intensification of use" means a change of use of land or buildings where more off-street parking spaces are required for the new use than were required for the previous use and/or where the new use would have greater adverse environmental effects than the previous use. 
(c)  The determination of whether a change of use would result in an intensification of use shall be made by the planning director. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the planning director that the new use would have greater adverse environmental effects than the previous use shall be entitled to have such issue submitted to the planning commission for final determination. Otherwise, the decision of the planning director shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-1961, § 10, 6-6-88)  
Sec. 41-686. - Additional uses on lots of nonconforming use or building. 
While a nonconforming use or building exists on any lot, no other use, including, but not limited to, off-premises commercial advertising signs, shall be permitted even though such other use would otherwise be conforming. This section does not apply to wireless communication facilities. 
(Code 1952, § 9160.7; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-1753, § 9, 11-19-84; Ord. No. NS-2102, § 5, 2-4-91; Ord. No. NS-2356, § 4, 7-6-98)  
Sec. 41-687. - Nonconforming junk and auto salvage yards. 
(a)  All junk or salvage yards situated in residential, commercial or light industrial districts shall be screened from adjacent properties and public streets by a solid wall or fence with solid gates to a height of not less than eight (8) feet, nor more than ten (10) feet. Further, the storage of wrecked vehicles and salvage materials shall not be piled higher than the wall or fence around such storage or work area. 
(b)  All junk or salvage yards in the heavy industrial district shall be screened from adjacent properties and public streets by a solid wall or fence with solid gates to a height of not less than eight (8) feet, nor more than twelve (12) feet. Further, the storage of wrecked vehicles and salvage materials shall not be piled higher than the wall or fence within the front twenty-five (25) feet of the yard along adjacent properties and public streets, and stacks elsewhere on the site shall be no higher than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Solid fences or walls shall be constructed of any combination of masonry, brick, metal or wood with the approval of the planning department and shall be continuously maintained. 
(d)  No salvage materials, wrecked automobiles or automobiles purchased for salvage shall be permitted to remain outside the solid fences or walls surrounding the junk and auto salvage yards. 
(e)  All legal but nonconforming junk and auto salvage yards may continue, provided that they conform to the operational standards required in this section within six (6) months from the effective date of this section. 
(Code 1952, § 9260.9; Ord. No. NS-991, § 1, 12-1-69)  
Sec. 41-688. - Late-night eating establishments. 
From and after the date occurring two (2) years after the date of adoption of the ordinance adding this section to the municipal code [Jan. 18, 1994], no eating establishment which is a nonconforming use by reason of being open for business at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall continue to operate during such hours unless a conditional use permit to do so has been granted to such establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2213, § 5, 1-18-94) 
Editor's note— Former § 41-688, which pertained to compliance with off-street parking regulations in cases of addition to or alteration of nonconforming building and derived from Ord. No. NS-1674, § 17, adopted Mar. 21, 1983, was repealed by Ord. No. NS-1961, § 11, adopted June 6, 1988.  
Sec. 41-689. - Nonconforming service stations. 
When a nonconforming service station is rehabilitated or intensified, or a use is changed on the premises, the fifteen-foot street frontage setback requirement may be reduced, provided that an equivalent area of landscaping is provided at a location on-site in the view of the public street and approved by the planning manager. 
(Ord. No. NS-2118, § 14, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-690. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-690.1. - Amortization of non-conforming transient/residential hotels. 
Any use of real property existing on June 7, 1999, which is a transient/residential hotel as defined in section 41-139 of this Code, but which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all regulations and design and development standards adopted by the city, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued until July 1, 2004. On or before such date, all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved in accordance with the provisions of section 41-690.4 below. 
(a)  Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as a transient/residential hotel for a continuous period of one (1) year shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use. 
(b)  Amortization—annexed property. Any transient/residential hotel which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the regulations and design and development standards for transient/residential hotels shall be terminated by July 1, 2004 or within one (1) year of the date of annexation, whichever comes later, unless an extension of time has been approved in accordance with the provisions of section 41-690.4. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 8, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-690.2. - Reducing long-term occupancies in nonconforming transient/residential hotels. 
(a)  Nonconforming transient/residential hotels with existing long-term occupancies shall notify such guests of the pertinent provisions of this chapter. Such notice shall be provided to current long-term guests at least thirty (30) days prior to January 1, 2002 and to new long-term guests established after July 1, 2001 at the time of occupancy. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted nor used to avoid the application of any rights of occupants pursuant to California Civil Code section 1940.1. 
(c)  Nonconforming transient/residential hotels shall not re-rent units for subsequent long-term occupancies after such units are vacated by long-term guests after July 1, 2001, unless and until either: 
(1)  The hotel/motel no longer meets the definition of a transient/residential hotel; or 
(2)  The transient/residential hotel has been placed in a SP (Specific Plan) or SD (Specific Development) district and has obtained a conditional use permit. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the phrase "long-term guest" or "long term occupancy" shall be a guest or occupancy with a stay exceeding twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or twenty-eight (28) days in any sixty (60) consecutive day period. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 8, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-690.3. - Annual self-audit of all hotels/motels. 
(a)  The operator or a hotel/motel shall keep written records of the name and permanent address of all persons renting a unit, together with the dates of occupancy, length of stay and room rate. 
(b)  Annually, commencing January 31, 2001, each hotel/motel shall submit to the City Planning and Building Agency a report or statement of the average number of long-term guests at the hotel/motel on the following four days of the prior year: January 1, April 1, June 1, and September 1. 
(c)  Each self-audit report or statement shall be subject to audit and verification by the city or its authorized agents, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records as may be necessary in their judgment to verify and determine the accuracy of the self-audit report or statement. The self-audit report or statement [shall] not be binding nor conclusive, nor shall the filing or failure to file such report or statement preclude the city from conducting an audit. 
(d)  Every operator of a hotel/motel shall keep and preserve for a period of not less than four (4) years all records as may be necessary to determine the percentage of long-term guests at the hotel/motel, which records shall be made available to the city or its agents at all reasonable times for purposes of conducting an audit. Each operator shall permit an examination of such books and records at a location within the city. In the event such books and records cannot be made available within the city, the operator shall reimburse the city for the cost of all transportation, lodging, meals, portal-to-portal travel time and other incidental costs reasonably incurred by the city in conducting the audit. Appropriately identified confidential or proprietary information furnished to the city as part of an audit shall remain confidential, unless they are furnished to the city as part of an application pursuant to section 41-690.4, civil action or criminal prosecution. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the phrase "long-term guest" or "long term occupancy" shall be a guest or occupancy with a stay exceeding twenty-eight (28) consecutive days or twenty-eight (28) days in any sixty (60) consecutive day period. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 8, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-690.4. - Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use. 
The owner or operator of a nonconforming transient/residential hotel as defined in section 41-139 may apply under the provisions of this section for a one-time only extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use. 
(a)  Time and manner of application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of section 41-139, may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application must be filed with the Planning and Building Agency at least six (6) months but no more than eighteen (18) months prior to the time established in section 41-690.1 for termination of such use. 
(b)  Content of application; fees. The application shall fully state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  Hearing procedure. The planning commission shall hear the application at a duly noticed public hearing to be held not later than forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
(d)  Approval of extension; findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the planning commission makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law: 
(1)  The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to a conforming use; and such investment was made prior to July 1, 2001; and 
(2)  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
(3)  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment; and 
(4)  Despite the applicant's good faith efforts, significant numbers of long-term hotel guests who have continuously been hotel guests prior to July 1, 2001, have not checked out. 
(e)  Appeal of decision. Any interested person may appeal the decision approving or denying such an extension pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 of this Code. The decision rendered by means of the provisions of Chapter 3 shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. NS-2471, § 8, 5-21-01)  
Secs. 41-691—41-697. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SETBACK LINES AND FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES 
 
Sec. 41-698. - Setback lines established. 
Setback lines along the following streets and portions of streets in the city are established and reestablished, between which setback lines and which streets, respectively, no person shall erect or move in any building, structure or thing, except that the construction or maintenance of a wall, fence or hedge of no more than four (4) feet in height between a setback line and the street line shall not be prohibited by this section if it complies with other provisions of this Code. 
The setback lines are located and described as follows: 
(1)  North Broadway, on both sides, from Tenth Street to Santa Clara Avenue, fifty-five (55) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of said street. 
(2)  North Broadway, on the east side, from Santa Clara Avenue to the Southern Pacific Railroad, one hundred (100) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of said street. 
(3)  North Flower Street, on both sides, from the north line of tract No. 748 to the south line of Santa Clara Avenue, eighty (80) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of said street. 
(4)  West Seventeenth Street, on the north side, from Bristol Street west to a point one hundred thirty-eight and seventy-one hundredths (138.71) feet east of the survey center line of Alona Street, one hundred forty (140) feet north of and at right angles to the survey center line of Seventeenth Street; and on the north side from Bristol Street to Baker Street, sixty (60) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of Seventeenth Street. 
(5)  West First Street, on the north side between Townsend Street and the Santa Ana River, fifty-five (55) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of First Street; on the south side between Daisy Street and the Santa Ana River, fifty-five (55) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of First Street. 
(6)  North Ross Street from Nineteenth Street to Santa Clara Avenue, on both sides, sixty-five (65) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of Ross Street. 
(7)  Cypress Avenue, on both sides, from Goetz Avenue to an unnamed street on the south, a distance of approximately four hundred (400) feet, thirty (30) feet from and at right angles to the survey center line of Cypress Avenue. 
(8)  Euclid (Verano) Street, on the east side, between the south line of proposed Lehnhardt Avenue and a point two hundred ten (210) feet north of the center line of Edinger Avenue, one hundred ten (110) feet from and measured at right angles to the surveyed center line of Euclid (Verano) Street. 
(9)  Edinger Avenue, on the north side, between a point two hundred seven (207) feet east of the surveyed center line of Euclid (Verano) Street and a point five hundred twenty (520) feet east of the surveyed center line of Euclid (Verano) Street, one hundred twenty (120) feet from and measured at right angles to the surveyed center line of Edinger Avenue. 
(10)  McFadden Avenue, on the north side, between a line parallel with and two hundred fifty-two (252) feet east of the center line of proposed Fairview Street, and a line parallel with and six hundred fifty (650) feet east of the center line of proposed Fairview Street, two hundred ten (210) feet from and measured at right angles to the center line of McFadden Avenue. 
(11)  Fairview Street, on the east side, between a line parallel to and two hundred fifty-four (254) feet north of the center line of McFadden Avenue and a line parallel to and one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet north of the center line of McFadden Avenue, two hundred ten (210) feet from and measured at right angles to the center line of Fairview Street. 
(12)  Fairview Street and Warner Avenue, southeast corner, described as: On the east side of Fairview Street, beginning at a point two hundred ten (210) feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue and extending southerly seven hundred eighty (780) feet from the center line of Warner Avenue, said setback line being measured two hundred fifty-nine (259) feet east of and at right angles to the center line of Fairview Street; and on the south side of Warner Avenue beginning, at a point two hundred ten (210) feet east of the center line of Fairview Street and extending easterly seven hundred eighty (780) feet from the center line of Fairview street, said setback line being measured two hundred fifty-nine (259) feet south of and at right angles to the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-2097, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-699. - Future right-of-way lines established. 
Future right-of-way lines are established and reestablished along certain streets and portions of streets within the city as hereinafter set out, and no person shall erect, move in, or structurally alter any building or structure between said future right-of-way lines and streets, respectively; however, nothing herein is intended to prohibit the construction or erection of a hedge, masonry wall or fence, provided said hedge, masonry wall or fence meets with the requirements of the district within which it is located and all other provisions of this Code of Ordinances. Parking spaces located in the area between a street and its future right-of-way line shall not be included in the determination of whether the uses served by those parking spaces have sufficient parking spaces under the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9271; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60; Ord. No. NS-625, 12-3-62; Ord. No. NS-777, § 1, 1-18-65; Ord. No. NS-917, § 1, 6-3-68; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-2097, § 2, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-700. - Alton Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Main Street and Halladay Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.1; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, amended §§ 9271.1—9271.29 of the 1952 Code, §§ 41-700—41-728 herein, "to read as follows" and added §§ 9271.30—9271.33, codified as §§ 41-729—41-732. The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699.  
Sec. 41-701. - Bristol Street. 
On both sides, fifty (50) feet from construction center line, between Sunflower Avenue and Warner Avenue and between Santiago Creek and the Garden Grove Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.2; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69; Ord. No. NS-2097, § 3, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2137, § 5, 7-1-91) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the editor's note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-701.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2137, § 6, adopted July 1, 1991, repealed former § 41-701.5, which pertained to future right-of-way lines along Bristol Street and derived from Ord. No. NS-2097, § 4, adopted Nov. 19, 1990.  
Sec. 41-702. - Broadway. 
(a)  On the west side, thirty-eight (38) feet from survey center line, between First Street and Walnut Street. 
(b)  On the east side, forty-two (42) feet from survey center line, between First Street and Walnut Street. 
(c)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Walnut Street and Main Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.3; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-703. - Chestnut Avenue. 
(a)  On the north, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between the Pacific Electric Railroad and the Southern Pacific Railroad. 
(b)  On the south side, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Pacific Electric Railroad and the Southern Pacific Railroad. 
(c)  On both sides, between the Southern Pacific Railroad and Grand Avenue, forty (40) feet from construction center line as shown on public works department's file 1-5-8 drawing. 
(d)  On the north side, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between Grand Avenue and the Newport Freeway. 
(e)  On the south side, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between Grand Avenue and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.4; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-704. - Cypress Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between Warner Avenue and Chestnut Avenue. 
(b)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Chestnut Avenue and First Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.5; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-705. - Edinger Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between a point approximately 200 feet east of Euclid Street and the survey center line of Newhope Street. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from the survey center line, between the Santa Ana River Bridge and a point approximately 479 feet west of the center line of Fairview Street. 
(c)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from construction center line, between a point 479 feet west of the center line of Fairview Street and a point 211 feet east of the center line of Gordon Place (reference diagrams 21-35 on file in department of public works). 
(d)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between a point 211 feet east of the center line of Gordon Place and Raitt Street. 
(e)  On the north side, forty-four (44) feet from survey center line, between Raitt Street and Bristol Street. 
(f)  On the south side, fifty-six (56) feet from survey center line, between Raitt Street and Bristol Street. 
(g)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between Maple Street and Standard Avenue. 
(h)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between Lyon Street and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.6; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-706. - Eighth Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Fairview Street and Bristol Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.7; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment not following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-707. - Euclid Street. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the south city limits and Hazard Avenue. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Hazard Avenue and Seventeenth Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.8; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-708. - Fairhaven Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Glassell Avenue and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.9; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-709. - Fairview Street. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Sunflower Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between MacArthur Boulevard and First Street. 
(c)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between First Street and the north city limits. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.10; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-710. - Fifth Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.11; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-711. - First Street—Bolsa Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, sixty (60) feet from survey center line, between the west city limits and Harbor Boulevard. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Harbor Boulevard and the Santa Ana River Bridge. 
(c)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana River Bridge and Townsend Street. 
(d)  On the north side, seventy (70) feet from survey center line, between Townsend Street and Main Street. 
(e)  On the north side, between Main Street and Bush Street, beginning at a point on the survey center line of Main Street sixty-five (65) feet north of the survey center line of First Street and extending easterly to a point on the survey center line of Bush Street, seventy-one (71) feet north of the survey center line of First Street. 
(f)  On the north side, seventy-one (71) feet from survey center line, between Bush Street and Spurgeon Street. 
(g)  On the north side, between Spurgeon Street and French Street, beginning at a point on the survey center line of Spurgeon Street, seventy-one (71) feet north of the survey center line of First Street and extending easterly to a point on the survey center line of French Street, sixty-five (65) feet north of the survey center line of First Street. 
(h)  On the north side, sixty-five (65) feet, from survey center line, between French Street and Standard Avenue. 
(i)  On both sides, forty-five (45) feet from survey center line, between Standard Avenue and Minnie Street. 
(j)  On the north side, thirty-three (33) feet from the center line, between Minnie Street and McClay Street. 
(k)  On the south side, fifty-seven (57) feet from survey center line, between Minnie Street and McClay Street. 
(l)  On the north side, thirty-three (33) feet from survey center line, between McClay Street and the Santa Ana Freeway. 
(m)  On the south side, sixty-seven (67) feet from survey center line, between McClay Street and the Santa Ana Freeway. 
(n)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana Freeway and Tustin Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.12; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-712. - Flower Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Sunflower Avenue and Pine Street. 
(b)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Seventeenth Street and Memory Lane. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.13; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-713. - Fourth Street. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Raitt Street and Van Ness Avenue. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana Freeway and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.14; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-714. - Grand Avenue. 
(a)  Between Warner Avenue and McFadden Avenue on both sides, fifty (50) feet from the survey center line. 
(b)  Between McFadden Avenue and Chestnut on both sides, fifty (50) feet from the Master Plan center line as shown on public works department's file 1-1-5 drawing. 
(c)  Between Chestnut Avenue and First Street on both sides, fifty (50) feet from the survey center line as shown on public works department's file 1-4-8 drawing. 
(d)  Between First Street and Fourth Street on both sides, fifty (50) feet from the Master Plan center line as shown on public works department's file 1-85-5 drawing. 
(e)  Between Fourth Street and the Garden Grove Freeway, on both sides, fifty (50) feet from the survey center line. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.15; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-942, § 1, 11-18-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-715. - Harbor Boulevard. 
(a)  On both sides, sixty (60) feet from survey center line, from Sunflower Avenue to Seventeenth Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.16; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-716. - Hazard Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between the west city limits and Harbor Boulevard. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.17; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-717. - MacArthur Boulevard. 
(a)  On both sides, sixty (60) feet from survey center line, between Main Street and Red Hill Avenue. 
(b)  On the north side, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana River and Harbor Boulevard. 
(c)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Harbor Boulevard and Greenville Street. 
(d)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between the west line of Tract No. 4951 and Main Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.18; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-718. - Main Street. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between the Newport Freeway and a point 2,501.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(b)  On the west side, beginning at a point fifty-two (52) feet from and at right angles to survey center line of Main Street and 2,501.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue to a point sixty (60) feet from and at right angles to survey center line of Main Street and 2,181.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(c)  On the east side, beginning at a point fifty-two (52) feet from and at right angles to survey center line of Main Street and 2,501.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue to a point forty-four (44) feet from and at right angles to survey center line of Main Street and 2,181.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(d)  On the west side, sixty (60) feet from survey center line, between a point 2,181.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue and the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(e)  On the east side, forty-four (44) feet from survey center line, between a point 2,181.75 feet south of the center line of Warner Avenue and the center line of Warner Avenue. 
(f)  On both sides, thirty-six (36) feet from survey center line, between Warner Avenue and First Street. 
(g)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between First Street and Sixth Street. 
(h)  On both sides, forty-four (44) feet from survey center line, between Sixth Street and Seventeenth Street. 
(i)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana Freeway and Seventeenth Street. 
(j)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana Freeway and the north city limits. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.19 ; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-719. - McFadden Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between the west city limits and Fairview Street. 
(b)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between a point 211 feet east of the center line of Clara Street and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.20; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-720. - Memory Lane. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana River and Flower Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.21; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-721. - Newhope Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Edinger Avenue and Seventeenth Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.22; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-722. - Northeast Boulevard—Fruit Street. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between French Street and Santiago Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.23; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-723. - Raitt Street. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Segerstrom Avenue and Willits Street. 
(b)  On both sides, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between Willits Street and Washington Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.24; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-724. - Red Hill Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between MacArthur Boulevard and Warner Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.25; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-725. - Ross Street. 
(a)  On both sides, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between First Street and Fourth Street. 
(b)  On both sides, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between Eighth Street and Seventeenth Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.26; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-726. - Santa Clara Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Glassell Avenue and the Newport Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.27; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69) 
Editor's note— The catchline and text must be read in conjunction with § 41-699. See also the amendment note following § 41-700.  
Sec. 41-727. - Segerstrom Avenue—Dyer Road—Barranca Road. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Raitt Street and Flower Street. 
(b)  On both sides, between Main Street and a point 348 feet east of the center line of Orange Avenue, measured fifty (50) feet north and south of the construction center line of Dyer Road (reference diagram 7-24 dated August 3, 1959, on file in the department of public works). 
(c)  On both sides, between a point 348 feet east of the center line of Orange Avenue and Grand Avenue, measured fifty (50) feet north and south of the survey center line of Dyer Road. 
(d)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Grand Avenue and Red Hill Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.28; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1. 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69)  
Sec. 41-728. - Standard Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Warner Avenue and Chestnut Avenue. 
(b)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from construction center line as defined in Specific Plan for Street Alignment No. 56, between Chestnut Avenue and Santiago Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.29; Ord. No. NS-923, § 1, 7-1-68; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69; Ord. No. NS-2264, § 1, 10-16-95)  
Sec. 41-729. - Sunflower Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Harbor Boulevard and Fairview Street. 
(b)  On the north side, sixty (60) feet from survey center line, between Bear Street and Bristol Street. 
(c)  On the north side, forty (40) feet from survey center line, between Bristol Street and Main Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.30; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69)  
Sec. 41-730. - Tustin Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between First Street and Seventeenth Street. 
(b)  On both sides, fifty-two (52) feet from survey center line, between Santa Clara Avenue and the north city limits. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.31; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69)  
Sec. 41-731. - Warner Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, fifty (50) feet from survey center line, between the Santa Ana River and Red Hill Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.32; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69)  
Sec. 41-732. - Washington Avenue. 
(a)  On both sides, thirty (30) feet from survey center line, between Cascade Street and the Santa Ana Freeway. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.33; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69)  
Sec. 41-733. - Specific plans for street alignment; establishment, scope. 
The following specific plans for street alignment are hereby established and reestablished with survey center lines and/or construction center lines and with right-of-way lines, between which lines no person shall erect, move in or structurally alter any building or structure; excepting however, nothing herein is intended to prohibit the construction or erection of a hedge, masonry wall or fence, provided said hedge, masonry wall or fence meets with the provisions of the district within which it is located and all other provisions of this Code. Parking spaces located in the area between a street and its future right-of-way line as established by a specific plan for street alignment shall not be included in the determination of whether the uses served by those parking spaces have sufficient parking spaces under the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.60; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69; Ord. No. NS-2137, § 7, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-734. - Specific Plan for Street Alignment No. 15. 
Flower Street, between Sixth Street and Civic Center Drive West. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.61; Ord. No. NS-954, § 1, 2-3-69; Ord. No. NS-1009, § 1, 4-20-70; Ord. No. NS-1266, § 2, 8-4-75; Ord. No. NS-1313, § 2, 8-2-76)  
Sec. 41-734.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1313, § 3, enacted Aug. 2, 1976, repealed § 41-734.1, relative to the Specific Plan for Street Alignment No. 15 (Revised). Said section was derived from Ord. No. NS-1266, § 3, adopted Aug. 4, 1975.  
Sec. 41-734.2. - Specific Plan for Street Alignment No. 15A. 
Flower Street from Pine Street to Sixth Street. 
(Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 8-4-75)  
Sec. 41-734.3. - Specific Plan for Street Alignment No. 15B. 
Flower Street, between Civic Center Drive West and Seventeenth Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1313, § 4, 8-2-76)  
Sec. 41-735. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 35. 
Ross Street, between First Street and Sixth Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.62; Ord. No. NS-963, § 1, 4-21-69)  
Sec. 41-736. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 22. 
Grand Avenue, between Chestnut Avenue and First Street. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.63; Ord. No. NS-970, § 1, 6-2-69)  
Sec. 41-737. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 36. 
Bush Street, from a point 200 feet south of Tenth Street, north to Washington Avenue. 
(Code 1952, § 9271.64; Ord. No. NS-979, § 1, 9-2-69)  
Sec. 41-738. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 24. 
Chestnut Avenue from Grand Avenue to a point 1,050 feet west of Grand Avenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-1005, § 1, 3-2-70)  
Sec. 41-739. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 37. 
Ross Street from Civic Center Drive West to a point 530 feet north of Civic Center Drive West. 
(Ord. No. NS-1005, § 1, 3-2-70)  
Sec. 41-740. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 34. 
Main Street from Owens Drive to the north city limits. 
(Ord. No. NS-1004, § 1, 3-16-70)  
Sec. 41-741. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 38. 
Alton Avenue from Main Street to Halladay Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1014, § 5-18-70)  
Sec. 41-742. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 39. 
Sherry Boulevard from Fourth Street to Seventeenth Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1061, § 1, 1-4-71)  
Sec. 41-743. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 40. 
MacArthur Boulevard from Bristol Street to Greenville Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1070, § 1, 3-1-71)  
Sec. 41-744. - Specific plan of Street Alignment No. 42. 
Bristol Street between Martha Lane and Twenty-First Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1087, § 1, 7-19-71)  
Sec. 41-745. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 28. 
Civic Center Drive from Minter Street to Civic Center Drive and Birch Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1164, § 1, 6-4-73)  
Sec. 41-746. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 47. 
Raitt Street between Sunflower Avenue and Alton Avenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-1340, § 2, 1-28-77)  
Sec. 41-747. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 46. 
Bear Street between MacArthur Boulevard and Segerstrom Avenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-1371, § 2, 6-20-77)  
Sec. 41-748. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 49. 
College Avenue from Seventeenth Street to a point 354.16 feet north. 
(Ord. No. NS-1410, § 3, 4 -3-78)  
Sec. 41-749. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2651, § 2, adopted May 3, 2004, repealed § 41-749 in its entirety, which pertained to the specific plan for street alignment no. 50, and derived from Ord. No. NS-1827, § 2, adopted February 18, 1986.  
Sec. 41-749.1. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 54. 
Cabrillo Park Drive between First Street and Fourth Street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1895, § 2, 4-20-87)  
Sec. 41-749.2. - Specific plan for Street Alignment No. 55. 
Bristol Street between Warner Avenue and Santiago Creek. 
(Ord. No. NS-2137, § 8, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 41-750. - Effect of article on chapter. 
The provisions of this article are declared to be not in conflict with any provisions of this chapter (the districting ordinances or zoning ordinances of the city) and it is the declared intention of the council that any amendment or reenactment of any district or the zoning ordinance, shall not be construed as an amendment of the provisions of this article and where the terms of this article differ from the requirements of the district classification or other parts of this chapter, that provision which is more restrictive shall prevail. 
(Code 1952, § 9273; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-751. - Initiation procedures; variances may be granted. 
Proceedings to establish a setback or future right-of-way line may be initiated by the city council or planning commission or by a citizen's petition filed with the planning department. If proceedings are initiated by the city council, a statement of the proposed setback or future right-of-way line shall be referred to the planning commission and no ordinance shall be adopted thereon nor on a citizen's petition until the recommendation of the planning commission has been filed with the city council or a period of forty (40) days has elapsed from the time of such reference to or the filing with the planning department. A variance may be granted from the requirement of any setback or future right-of-way line established by the procedure provided for the granting of other variances set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1952, § 9274; Ord, No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-752. - Method of adoption of setback lines or future right-of-way lines. 
Setback and future right-of-way lines shall be established in the manner prescribed by section 27-36 through section 27-38 of this Code. 
(Code 1952, § 9275; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-753. - Authorization of signs in future right-of-way area. 
The planning director may authorize the construction of a sign or marquee projecting from a structure considered a nonconforming building due to its encroachment into a future right-of-way area, or a structure considered a conforming building enclosing a conforming use but a sign or marquee when so constructed projects into said future right-of-way area. 
The planning director may further authorize the erection of a sign in a future right-of-way area provided the applicant enters into an agreement with the city council stipulating that said sign will be removed at the applicant's expense at the time the street is widened; or, to any other provisions deemed necessary by the city council. 
Said authorization shall not permit a sign which does not meet with the sign regulations for the district in which located, nor shall such authorization preclude the requirements established by the building or engineering departments relative to structural specifications, encroachment into state-owned right-of-way or any other regulation set forth in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1952, § 9276; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-754—41-764. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 41-765. - Approval of building permits. 
Each application for a building permit shall be referred to the planning department whereupon such application shall be approved or disapproved as to conformance with the provisions of this chapter. No building permit shall be issued until such application has been approved by the planning department. However, the issuance of a building permit under this chapter or any other provisions of this Code shall not be deemed or construed to permit or authorize any violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance or law of the city. 
(Code 1952, § 9280; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-766. - Interpretation of chapter. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort and general welfare. 
(Code 1952, § 9281; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-767. - Enforcing officers. 
It shall be the duty of the director of building safety and housing to enforce any portion of this chapter relative to building construction, and it shall be the duty of the director of planning to enforce all other provisions of this chapter. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the director of building safety and housing or director of planning, any, authorized assistants, or any official or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall legalize, authorize, waive or excuse the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall said employees issue any license or permit for any use, building or purpose which would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or of any other ordinance in force. Any permit so issued shall be null and void. 
(Code 1952, § 9282; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Secs. 41-768—41-778. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 41-779. - Repeal and enactment. 
This chapter shall, for the purpose of convenience, be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of 1960," and that certain ordinance known as the "Zoning Ordinance of 1939," as amended, is hereby repealed, subject however, to the exception that all provisions of this chapter shall be construed as continuations of the provisions thereof, and not as a new enactment, and the same shall be considered as having been continuously in effect since the adoption of said Zoning Ordinance of 1939, just as the Zoning Ordinance of 1939 was a continuation of that certain Ordinance No. 809. The effective date of this chapter shall be construed to be the effective date of said Zoning Ordinance of 1939 insofar as the provisions hereof are a continuation of the provisions of said Zoning Ordinance of 1939, and no use which was being conducted in violation of the Zoning Ordinance of 1939 shall become a valid nonconforming use by reason of the reenactment of the provisions of said ordinance. All other ordinances of the city in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Any uses being conducted under variances granted under said Zoning Ordinance of 1939 shall be considered as nonconforming uses if located in a district where such use is not permitted herein. 
(Code 1952, § 9290; Ord. No. NS-455, § 1, 6-20-60)  
Sec. 41-780. - Consistency with the county hazardous waste management plan. 
All applicable zoning, conditional use permit, and variance decisions shall be consistent with the portions of the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2172, § 2, 8-17-92)  
Sec. 41-781. - Requirement of landscape strip as part of street widening. 
(a)  Whenever city acquires a portion of parcel along street frontage for a street widening or other public works project, the city shall also acquire an interest in the real property sufficient to allow a landscape-only strip behind the sidewalk that is of a width that conforms to the then current city standard for the parcel. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize exceptions to this section on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2478, § 3, 10-1-01)  
Secs. 41-782—41-799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MOBILE HOME PARKS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, enacted May 4, 1970, amended Ch. 41 by adding Art. X, §§ 41-800—1-813. The text must be read in conjunction with the article heading and catchlines. 
 
Sec. 41-800. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this part is to establish standards for the development of mobile home parks and to evaluate such parks as a type of multiple-family residential development; and to provide for the establishment of said development in areas throughout the city that will ensure their compatibility with other permitted uses in the district. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-801. - Minimum park site area. 
There shall be a maximum of ten (10) units per acre. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-802. - Minimum individual mobile home site. 
The minimum individual mobile home site shall not be less than two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet net; the average total of mobile home sites shall be not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet net. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-803. - Structure height. 
There shall be a maximum structure height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-804. - Yard regulations. 
All mobile homes and all structures shall maintain a minimum yard area of fifteen (15) feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of any public street and a minimum yard area of five (5) feet from any adjoining property line. A ten (10) foot space between mobile homes must be maintained. A three (3) foot yard shall be maintained between mobile home site line and any mobile home or structure. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. NS-1232, § 1, 10-7-74)  
Sec. 41-805. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided on the individual site for each mobile home lot in the development. 
(1)  Each parking space shall be a minimum size of nine (9) by twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  On-site parking may be developed in tandem. 
(b)  There shall be provided for visitors and guests a minimum of one (1) parking space for every four (4) mobile home sites in the development. 
(1)  Each parking space shall be a minimum size of nine (9) by twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  No mobile home site shall be further than two hundred (200) feet from guest parking. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be subject to the requirements specified in sections 41-614 and 41-615 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-806. - Trash collection depots. 
Areas for trash disposal must be provided at convenient locations throughout the park, generally within three hundred (300) feet of each mobile home lot. Each trash site should be screened on three sides by a six (6) foot opaque screen or wall so as to be readily accessible but screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-807. - Underground utility lines. 
Utility lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-808. - Open space. 
A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of common open space, available to all residents, shall be provided for each mobile home site. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-809. - Storage. 
An adequate common storage area for recreational vehicles and boats, available to all residents, shall be provided for each mobile home site. Storage area shall be screened from view by a six (6) foot opaque screen or wall. 
(Ord. No. NS-1908, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-810. - Interior streets and circulation. 
A twenty-eight (28) foot minimum width in a pattern to provide easy access and movement of passenger and trailer vehicles shall be provided. Generally, long cul-de-sacs, four-way intersections, and other than ninety (90) degree angle intersections should be avoided. 
Streets shall be paved with two (2) inches of asphalt concrete over four (4) inches of aggregate base material or an equivalent. Streets shall have a crown in the center and shall have concrete rolled curbs and gutters on both sides of the street. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-811. - Signs. 
Two (2) single face or one (1) double face identification signs (designating park name and address only), not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area for each face, may be maintained at the main point of entry to the development. One (1) additional twenty (20) square foot single face identification sign (park name and address only) shall be permitted along any other public street right-of-way upon which the park has frontage, providing such street frontage exceeds three hundred thirty (330) feet. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-812. - Walls and screens. 
A six (6) foot wall or screen shall surround the entire mobile home park and shall consist of one or any combination of the following types: 
(a)  Walls. A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile, or similar type of solid masonry material with a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
(b)  Screens. A wrought iron, open weave, or mesh type fence shall be combined with plant materials to form an opaque screen. 
(c)  Planting. Plant materials, when used as a screen, shall consist of compact evergreen plants. Said plant materials shall be of a kind, or used in such a manner, so as to provide opaque screening. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70)  
Sec. 41-813. - Landscaping. 
(a)  A landscape plan shall be submitted to the planning department for approval. Said landscaping plan shall consist of the size, type and location of all trees, shrubs, and ground cover areas in the mobile home park site and shall include one (1) tree per mobile home site and shall conforms to the requirements of this section and to standards for landscaping approved by the city council. 
(b)  A system of irrigation or sprinkling of landscaping shall be indicated on the plan. All landscaping shall be permanently maintained. 
(c)  Vehicular parking may not be located within any required landscaped area. 
(d)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved landscaping plan by the owner(s) and manager of the development. 
(e)  Procedures for the approval and amendment of landscaping plans shall be established by the planning division. 
(f)  All planting areas must be designed with an automatic irrigation system. Modifications shall be allowed for dry climate landscapes. Pop-up sprinklers shall be used in all areas other than installations against foundations for the sake of public safety. Drip, bubbler, or other low gallonage systems may be used in buffer areas and narrow strips. Sleeving must be called out wherever irrigation pipes are installed under hardscape. 
(g)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance with article XVI of this chapter, pertaining to water conservation. 
(Ord. No. NS-1008, § 1, 5-4-70; Ord. No. 2801, § 12, 12-23-09)  
Secs. 41-814—41-849. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ON-PREMISE SIGNS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 1, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed former Div. 1, general provisions relative to on-premise signs, §§ 41-850—41-852, and enacted similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 41-850, 41-851. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984, and Ord. No. NS-1927, § 5, adopted Sept. 8, 1987. 
 
Sec. 41-850. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a system for the control of the size, location, type and number of signs located on private property in the City of Santa Ana according to reasonable and nondiscriminatory standards. Such regulation is deemed necessary to enhance the quality of the visual environment, thereby promoting commerce, improving community identity, conserving property values, improving traffic safety, and promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the people. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 1, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-851. - Scope. 
(a)  This article applies to all signs and advertising displays in all zoning districts except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  This article does not apply to signs and advertising displays of the following types and descriptions: 
(1)  Any billboard or other off-premise commercial advertising sign regulated by Article XII of this chapter. 
(2)  Any sign located in the public right-of-way and installed or maintained by the public works agency of the city or by any other public entity having the legal authority to maintain the sign. 
(3)  Any sign located within a building or enclosed area and designed to be viewed primarily by persons inside of such building or enclosed area. 
(4)  Any sign on a vehicle or other mobile unit, unless such vehicle or mobile unit is parked or stationed near a business activity advertised or identified by the sign and for the primary purpose of attracting public attention to such business activity. 
(5)  Any temporary sign taped or otherwise affixed to a window in such a manner as to be easily removed, provided that the total area of such sign in any one (1) window does not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the area of each window. 
(6)  In commercial or manufacturing zones, nonfreestanding incidental sign area not exceeding two (2) square feet in size per elevation and attached flush to a door, wall or window containing information on hours of operation, deliveries, credit cards accepted, or similar information. 
(7)  The changing of copy on an approved changeable copy sign, provided the copy identifies the business or service provided. 
(c)  Noncommercial signs are exempted from compliance with all sections of this article except section 41-860. 
(d)  Signs in the downtown district are exempted from compliance with sections 41-861 through 41-872 of this article. 
(e)  Signs in the Commercial South Main district shall comply with the provisions of article III, division 21 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2420, § 3, 4-3-00)  
Secs. 41-852—41-859. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SIGN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed former Div. 2 of this article, §§ 41-860—41-876, relative to on-premise signs definitions, and enacted new provisions as set out in §§ 41-860—41-872. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984, and Ord. No. NS-1986, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 19, 1988. 
 
Sec. 41-860. - General regulations. 
a)  No sign is permitted that: 
1.  Is dangerous or confusing to motorists on the public right-of-way, including any sign which by its color, wording, design, location or illumination resembles or conflicts with any official traffic-control device or which impedes the safe and efficient flow of traffic. 
2.  Is in a condition which presents a danger of injury to the public. 
3.  Incorporates mechanical movement or in any way gives the illusion of motion, moving parts, rotation or any flashing, moving or intermittent lighting, other than a sign providing a time-and-temperature or similar public service display, except as approved by a Regional Planned Sign Program pursuant to section 41-885 of this chapter. 
4.  Is on a vehicle, except as excluded from the scope of this article by section 41-851 
5.  Impedes free ingress and egress from any door, window or exitway required by building or fire regulations. 
6.  Emits sound, smoke, visible particles or odors, except that speakers on drive-through facilities shall be permitted. 
7.  Is attached to or maintained upon any public utility pole or structure, or tree. 
b)  No person, except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty or a private person in giving a legal notice, shall paste, post, paint, nail or tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind upon any property without the written consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee thereof. 
c)  All signs, other than temporary signs, and their supporting structures shall: 
1.  Be constructed of metal, wood, plastic, foam, paint and/or comparable weather-resistant material. 
2.  Be kept in good repair and maintained in safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. 
3.  Be so enclosed as to provide against their infestation by birds and vermin, and shall be structurally safe. 
d)  Logos or identification symbols shall be considered signs and shall conform to all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2861, § 3, 5-6-14)  
Sec. 41-861. - Additional regulations. 
No sign is permitted that: 
1.  Is an A-frame, sandwich board or other portable, temporary advertising display. 
2.  Is temporary or special event flags, banners, festoons, flag canopies or other displays, except as permitted by a special event sign permit. 
3.  Is a sculptured, molded or otherwise fabricated representational object used for the purpose of visually conveying business identification or product advertising, except as approved by a planned sign program. 
4.  Is an aerial or balloon type of sign, except as approved by a Regional Planned Sign Program pursuant to section 41-885 of this chapter. 
5.  Conflicts with standards established by resolution of the city council pertaining to the colors and materials of signs adopted for the purpose of promoting signage which is visually attractive and harmonious with its surroundings. 
6.  Duplicates or repeats copy on the same sign. 
7.  Is a graphic of paint or other material on a building for the purpose of amplifying or directing attention to a sign, unless approved by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2379, § 1, 1-4-99; Ord. No. NS-2861, § 4, 5-6-14)  
Sec. 41-862. - Freestanding signs. 
No permit shall be issued for a freestanding sign which does not comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Number. 
(1)  The number of freestanding signs permittable on an integrated development site shall be as follows: 
Total Street Frontage 
(feet) 	Number 
    0—  299 	1 
  300—  599 	2 
  600—  899 	3 
  900—1,199 	4 
1,200 or more 	5 
 
(2)  No more than one (1) freestanding sign advertising or identifying the same business activity shall be permitted on each street on which the integrated development site has frontage. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  No freestanding sign shall be permitted on any site which does not have street frontage. 
(2)  A freestanding sign shall be located only in a landscaped planter, with such planter not less than four (4) feet in any direction from the edge of the planter to the sign. The planning manager may reduce the amount of required landscaping for freestanding signs on sites with legal nonconforming landscaped setbacks. No sign shall obstruct or remove any required landscape materials. 
(3)  No freestanding sign shall be placed closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line. 
(4)  No freestanding sign for a commercial use shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of land used, zoned, or designated on the general plan for residential purposes on the same street frontage as the proposed sign. 
(5)  No freestanding sign shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet from another freestanding sign on the same site. 
(6)  No freestanding sign shall be located in the triangular area(s) measured fifteen (15) feet by fifteen (15) feet where a driveway enters onto a street, or in any other area which may obstruct the vision of motorists so as to create a safety hazard. Additionally, all signs are subject to sections 36-45 to 36-47 of this Code regarding obstructions to vision at corner intersections. 
(c)  Height and area. 
(1)  Properties with less than one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage shall be subject to the following requirements: 
Total Street Frontage 
(feet) 	Size 
 0— 60  	20 square feet maximum, not to exceed 5 feet in height. 
61—119 	30 square feet maximum, not to exceed 6 feet in height. 
 
(2)  Freestanding signs with more than one hundred twenty (120) feet of street frontage shall not exceed seven (7) feet in overall height from curb level unless otherwise stated in this section. The overall height plus the overall width shall not exceed sixteen (16) linear feet, and the sign face area shall not exceed forty-five (45) square feet. 
(3)  Developments over fifteen (15) acres and with at least seven hundred fifty (750) feet of street frontage shall have no more than one (1) freestanding sign not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in overall height and ten (10) feet in overall width; the sign face area shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet. Such sign shall not be located on any secondary frontage. 
(4)  A sign may be permitted to a height not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet and an area not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The sign is located on a site which is located within three hundred (300) feet of the point where a freeway exit centerline intersects with a city street; 
b.  The sign is oriented toward viewing by freeway traffic; 
c.  The sign is limited in content to the identification of the business name of a restaurant, a service station or a lodging establishment. 
(d)  Design. 
(1)  All signs shall be architecturally compatible with the development on which they are located. 
(2)  The copy area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the sign face. 
(3)  Freestanding signs shall be for the shopping center or development name and/or the major tenants thereon, not to exceed a total of eight (8) items of information. 
(4)  No sign shall use mirrors reflecting a direct light source or utilize flashing, blinking or sequenced lights. No sign shall utilize unshielded incandescent, fluorescent or other lighting, except neon. 
(5)  The project address shall be located on the monument sign base. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2279, § 1, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 41-863. - Wall signs and canopy signs. 
No permit shall be issued for a wall sign or canopy sign which does not comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Number. No more than one (1) wall or canopy sign shall be permitted for each primary elevation of a leasable tenant space. In addition, no more than one (1) sign shall be permitted on more than two (2) secondary elevations which face a public street or on-site parking area. (As used herein, street shall include freeways, but exclude alleys and service ways.) 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  Sign area on the primary elevation shall not exceed: 
a.  Ten (10) per cent of the business elevation; or 
b.  Forty (40) per cent of the signable area; or 
c.  Two hundred (200) square feet; 
whichever is smaller. 
(2)  Sign area on permitted secondary elevations, as permitted above in subsection (b)(1) shall not exceed: 
a.  Five (5) per cent of the business elevation area; or 
b.  Twenty (20) per cent of the signable area or 
c.  Fifty (50) square feet, 
whichever is smaller. 
(3)  Sign copy area shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the sign area for existing cabinet signs. 
(c)  Length. The horizontal dimension of any wall or canopy sign shall not exceed seventy-five per cent of the horizontal dimension of the building elevation of the activity identified by the sign, measured on the side of the building on which the sign is located. 
(d)  Location. 
(1)  No wall or canopy sign shall be placed higher than the ground floor of the building or twenty (20) feet, whichever is less, except that second floor retail or office spaces with access separate from the use(s) on the ground floor are permitted a sign no higher than the second floor. Buildings over two (2) stories in height are subject to the requirements of major building identification signs. 
(2)  No sign shall be placed on a building elevation which is within fifty (50) feet of and faces a residential zone or use. 
(3)  No sign shall project above the parapet,canopy fascia, or wall to which it is attached, nor above the roofline if attached to the roof. 
(4)  All wall or canopy signs shall be consistently centered above the business entrance or an architecturally consistent area of the elevation. 
(e)  Design. 
(1)  All signs on an individual business or within an integrated development site shall be consistent in sign shape, type and materials. 
(2)  All individual letter signs shall be installed to appear flush-mounted with no exposed raceways containing electrical transformers or components. 
(3)  All signs shall be for business identification only containing the recognized trade name of the business and no more than five (5) words describing products, services or brands, and shall not include slogans, phrases, promotions or duplication of copy. 
(4)  No sign shall use mirrors reflecting a direct light source or utilize flashing, blinking or sequenced lights. 
(5)  Where more than one (1) sign is permitted to a business, all signs shall be consistent in design, style, shape, color, illumination, and text. 
(6)  Individual channel letters made of foam core with a density of fourteen (14) pounds or greater shall be permitted. 
(7)  Internally illuminated cabinet wall signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-864. - Projecting signs. 
No permit shall be issued for any projecting sign which does not comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Number. A projecting sign shall only be permitted for a business activity having more than fifty (50) feet of street frontage, and only which such business activity would otherwise be entitled under this division. No more than one (1) projecting sign shall be allowed for any leasable tenant space. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  No part of any projecting sign shall be located lower than eight (8) feet above ground level. 
(2)  No projecting sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of another projecting sign on the same site. 
(3)  No projecting sign shall be located higher than the ground level of occupancy of the building. 
(c)  Structure. 
(1)  A projecting sign shall be perpendicular to the building wall to which it is affixed. 
(2)  No face of any projecting sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area. 
(3)  A projecting sign shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in thickness. 
(4)  No face shall project more than four (4) feet from the wall to which it is attached. 
(5)  No face shall exceed seven (7) feet in vertical dimension. 
(d)  Design. 
(1)  Sign copy area shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the sign face. 
(2)  The design of any projecting sign shall be architecturally compatible within the building on which it is located. 
(3)  No projecting sign shall be wholly or partially illuminated by unshielded lighting of any type, including exposed fluorescent or incandescent bulbs, except exposed neon. No sign shall use mirrors reflecting a direct light source or utilize flashing, blinking or sequenced lights. 
(4)  Projecting signs shall be for identification of the business(es) or use(s) located on the site subject to the following: 
a.  The sign shall have no more than five (5) words describing products, services or brands available on the premises where the sign is located in addition to the business identification. 
b.  The sign shall not advertise or display the name, brand name or manufacturer's name of any product, article or service, unless these names are included in the name identifying the business. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-865. - Marquee signs. 
No permit shall be issued for a marquee sign which does not comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Location. No more than one (1) sign shall be permitted on each side of a marquee, and any such sign shall be in lieu of wall, canopy or projecting signs to which such business would otherwise be entitled under this division. 
(b)  Area. 
(1)  The area of all signs located on a marquee shall not exceed two (2) square feet of total area per lineal foot of business frontage or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is smaller. 
(2)  Sign copy area shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the sign face or, where there is no sign face, forty (40) per cent of the signable area up to the allowable sign area. 
(c)  Dimensions. 
(1)  The horizontal dimension shall not exceed seventy-five (75) per cent of the side of the marquee where such sign is located. 
(2)  The vertical dimension shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  Design. Design of marquee signs shall be for identification of the business or use located on the site and may include a changeable copy sign. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-866. - Signs located under canopies or marquees. 
No permit shall be issued for any sign to be located under a canopy or marquee which does not comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The sign shall contain only identification of the business name of the activity occupying the portion of the building to which it is affixed. 
(b)  No more than one (1) sign shall be located at each entrance into the business activity identified by the sign. 
(c)  A minimum clearance above grade of eight (8) feet over walkways and twelve (12) feet over driveways shall be maintained. 
(d)  The area of the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
(e)  The letters on the sign shall not exceed eight (8) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-867. - Major building identification signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a permit may be issued for a wall sign for buildings over two (2) stories per this section which provides long-distance identification, or signage for the primary tenant in such a building, provided that the following standards are met: 
(a)  Number. No more than two (2) such signs shall be installed on the building. 
(b)  Area. The sign area of such a sign shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the signable area to which it is attached, nor shall it exceed an area equal to two (2) square feet multiplied by the number of lineal feet in the horizontal dimension of the building face to which it is attached, measured at the height of the proposed sign location. 
(c)  Length. The horizontal dimension of such sign shall not exceed forty (40) per cent of the horizontal dimension of the building elevation to which it is attached, measured at the height of the proposed sign location. 
(d)  Location. Such sign be located at the top story of the building or between the top story and the top of the building parapet or eaveline. Only one (1) sign shall be permitted per building elevation. 
(e)  Design. 
(1)  Letter height. The height of the letters used in such sign shall not exceed the following maximums, depending on the number of stories in the building: 
Number of Stories 	Height 
(inches) 
2 	24 
3 	30 
4 	36 
5 	42 
6 	48 
7 	54 
8—10 	60 
11—14 	72 
15 or more 	84 
 
A logo may be used on such sign if the logo height does not exceed the maximum permitted letter height for the sign and if its horizontal dimension is not more than twice its maximum vertical dimension. 
(2)  Structure. Such sign shall be composed solely of individual channel letters or logo. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-867.5. - Major building tenant signage. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, permits may be is used for tenant identification wall signs on the ground floor of any building over two (2) stories in height, provided that the total sign area for all such tenant signs located on any one side of the building shall not exceed the lesser of the following: (a) one (1) square foot of total sign area per linear foot of the width of that side of the building at the level of the signage, or (b) one hundred (100) square feet of total sign area. Such signs may identify any tenants in the building and shall be in addition to any signs permitted on the building pursuant to section 41-867. Except as otherwise provided in this section, such signs shall comply with the requirements of section 41-863 for wall signs. 
(Ord. No. NS-2279, § 2, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 41-868. - Residential development identification signs. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for any sign providing identification of a residential development having five (5) or more dwelling units, unless the following standards are met: 
(1)  No more than one (1) such sign may be installed for each street frontage of the development. 
(2)  The sign shall not contain exposed unshielded illumination. 
(3)  The sign face area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
(4)  The height of the sign shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
(5)  The width of the sign shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
(b)  In addition, directory type signs for multiple-unit developments of five (5) units or more, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area or four (4) feet in any dimension and six (6) feet in height, shall be permitted provided such sign is located within an interior court and adjacent to an internal walkway. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-869. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-870. - Real estate signs. 
(a)  Residential units. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of one (1) or more dwellings units are prohibited, except that no more than one (1) sign may be permitted on the site of such unit(s) without the necessity of obtaining a permit, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(2)  The sign area shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(4)  No other sign advertising the sale or lease of one (1) or more dwelling units shall be installed on the same site. 
(5)  A sign for the rental or lease of a unit shall correspond to an actual vacancy and shall not be permitted on fully occupied sites. The sign shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the sale or lease of the property. 
(b)  Nonresidential units. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, signs advertising the sale or lease of one (1) or more nonresidential units are prohibited, except that no more than one (1) sign may be installed per street frontage of such property without the necessity of obtaining a permit, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(2)  The sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(4)  No more than one (1) sign advertising the sale or lease of units of real property shall be installed on the same street frontage of the same site. 
(5)  A sign for the rental or lease of a unit shall correspond to an actual vacancy and shall not be permitted on fully occupied sites. The sign shall be removed with fourteen (14) days of the rental or lease of the unit(s). 
(6)  Placement of such sign shall correspond directly with the space available and shall not be located at unrelated businesses. 
(c)  New developments. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a sign advertising the first-time sale or lease of units of real estate within a site which is being or has been newly developed or redeveloped may be installed on such site pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this article for a one-year period, provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(2)  The sign area shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
(4)  No other sign advertising the sale or lease of units of real estate shall be installed on the same site. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the above, the sign shall be removed within fifteen (15) days of full occupancy of the site. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-871. - Special event signs or displays. 
No person shall install or maintain or allow to be installed or maintained on property occupied by such person any special event sign or display, except in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  The special event sign or display shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a permit issued by the zoning administrator, who may approve, approve with conditions, or deny such permit. 
(2)  The special event sign or display shall not be maintained for more than fourteen (14) successive days, except that grand opening signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Further, sign permits for grand openings shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the certificate of occupancy of the business is issued. 
(3)  No more than four (4) special event sign permits, including grand opening signs, shall be issued for each business with a valid certificate of occupancy during each calendar year. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (2) and (3), special event sign permits for signs announcing that a retail, office or professional business is "open during construction" (or similar words), which are granted for sites which take vehicular access from a public street on which a street widening or other public works project is underway shall be permitted for the period during which the street widening or other public works project directly impairs vehicular access to the site. The executive director of the public works agency or designee shall notify such permit holders not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the end of the project or phase of project in order to allow permit holders sufficient time to remove the sign or display. One (1) special event banner sign under the terms of this subsection shall be permitted for each affected building. The special event banner sign shall be located facing the street on which the project is underway, where feasible. 
(5)  Such special event sign or display shall include no more than banners and parking lot light pole flag displays and shall not include flag canopies, aerial signs or freestanding signs. 
(6)  The special event banner sign shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area and shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 2, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2379, § 2, 1-4-99; Ord. No. NS-2444, § 2, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-872. - Other signs. 
(a)  Directional signs. Directional signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and, if freestanding, a height of four (4) feet shall be allowed. Such directional sign shall contain only that information necessary for on-site circulation, parking and site information without any advertising. 
(b)  Menu boards. Menu boards on the interior driveways of drive-through facilities shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height and sixty (60) square feet in area. Speakers shall face away from residential property. No more than two (2) menu boards per drive-through shall be permitted. 
(c)  Window signs. No permanent sign affixed to or incorporated into an exterior window shall exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of each window area. 
(d)  Awning signs. No sign affixed to or incorporated into an awning shall exceed ten (10) per cent of the awning elevation. 
(e)  Construction signs. One (1) unlighted construction sign is permitted per street frontage per job site and shall not exceed six (6) square feet in any residential zone or thirty-two (32) square feet in all other zones, and shall contain no more than the name of the project and the names and addresses of the contractors, architects, engineers, landscape architect, financing company or developer. Such sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days of building permit final approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. 
(f)  Service station signs. Signs for service stations shall comply with the provisions of this article for freestanding and wall signage and shall include signs required by law, but shall not exceed the minimums set by law subject to sign placement requirements and review as set forth in this part. In addition, the following signage is permitted: 
(1)  Island canopies. One (1) sign per street frontage shall be permitted. Canopy signage shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. Canopy sign copy shall be limited to business name and logo only. Signage may be internally illuminated. 
(2)  Spandrel signs or canopy support signs. The signs shall not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the spandrel area. The spandrel sign copy shall be limited to business name and logo only. Spandrel signage may be internally illuminated. 
(3)  Pump or dispenser signs. Pump or dispenser signs shall be limited to business or fuel identification, operational instructions, and state required information. 
(4)  Convenience signs. Signage designated to assist customers, such as "Please Pull to Forward Pumps" or "Please Pay Cashier Before Pumping Gas" shall be architecturally integrated with the structure to which it is being applied and not exceed four (4) square feet in sign area. 
(g)  Signs over public right-of-way. No sign shall extend over the public right-of-way, except signs on a marquee, canopy or awning which shall project no closer than two (2) feet from a curb. 
(h)  Exterior telephones. 
(1)  To maintain an image of professionalism, side panels on pay phones must relate solely to phone identification and/or the business name or logo of the pay phone company provider. No advertising of products, services or special events are allowed. Side panels must be composed of materials which allow for cleaning and removal of graffiti without deterioration of color or surface appearance of the enclosure. Service providers will be responsible for keeping side panels clean and free of graffiti. All enclosures at a location must be of the same type with side panels of the same color. All enclosures must be U.L. listed and all light fixtures operational if units are wired for lighting. Vandalized enclosures/side panels requiring repairs must be replaced within one (1) business day of notification to the service provider. 
(2)  Signage indicating the location of a pay phone may not be placed on the site or extend above the phone cabinet unless deemed necessary due to public safety concerns as determined by the chief of police. In such instances, said signage is limited to the international telephone symbol. 
(3)  Phone identification attached to a building or structure is not permitted. 
(4)  Phones may not be used to advertise on- or off-site business activities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2374, § 5, 12-7-98)  
Secs. 41-873—41-879. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLANNED SIGN PROGRAMS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed former Div. 3, §§ 41-880—41-886, relative to penal provision pertaining to on-premise signs, and enacted similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 41-880—41-884. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984. 
 
Sec. 41-880. - General requirements. 
(a)  A planned sign program shall be adopted for multitenant development and shall include criteria for freestanding, wall and directional signs, as applicable, for each individual development. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any sign in or for a multitenant development, except pursuant to an approved planned sign program in accordance with this article. 
(c)  A planned sign program for existing multitenant developments that do not have an approved planned sign program shall be adopted prior to the issuance of any additional sign permits in such development. Such planned sign program shall follow the implied sign program or predominant pattern of sign type and configuration in use in the existing development. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-881. - Application. 
Application for a planned sign program shall be filed by, or with written consent of, the property owner. An application shall be filed and reviewed in the same manner as an application for a sign permit pursuant to Division 4. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-882. - Standards of approval. 
(a)  A planned sign program shall satisfy the following standards: 
(1)  All of the signs are consistent with the purpose, spirit and intent, as well as the specific minimum standards, of this article. 
(2)  All of the signs are harmonious and visually related to each other through the incorporation of common design elements. 
(3)  The signs are architecturally integrated with the buildings to which they are appurtenant. 
(4)  The signs do not adversely affect nearby land uses or obscure the view of other signs which conform to this article. 
(b)  A planned sign program as submitted by an applicant may be approved subject to conditions designed to bring it into compliance with the purpose, spirit and intent of this article. No conditions unrelated to signage shall be imposed. However, approval may be more restrictive than Division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-883. - Procedures. 
Applications for planned sign programs shall be decided in the same manner as sign permits subject to the right of appeal by any aggrieved applicant to the planning commission. No public hearing shall be required, but the zoning administrator or the planning commission may send such notices of the pending action and receive such comment to and by surrounding property owners and occupants or other interested persons as they deem appropriate. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-884. - Amendments. 
(a)  An application for an amendment to an approved planned sign program may be made at any time, subject to the same limitations, requirements and procedures as apply to an original application, except that tenants whose signs are addressed by the amendment application need the property owner's consent to file such application. Sign program amendment review shall consider existing signs prior to approval or denial of program change. 
(b)  The change of copy on a sign, or the substitution of one (1) sign for another, shall not require an amendment to a planned sign program if the change or substitution is limited in effect to changing the identification of a business activity only, and the new or altered sign conforms in all other respects to the approved planned sign program. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 3, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-885. - Regional planned sign program. 
a)  Definitions: 
1.  Regional commercial center - A large commercial complex containing a variety of stores, restaurants and other businesses housed in a series of connected and/or adjacent buildings within an integrated campus that shares common areas and parking facilities, and which fronts onto one or more freeways. Said center must be located on a site of no less than fifteen (15) acres. 
2.  Regional automobile dealership - An automobile dealership licensed by the state that sells new or used automobiles or other motor vehicles in conjunction with new automobiles to the general public on an integrated site which fronts onto one or more freeways or is on a site which is located within three hundred (300) feet of the point where a freeway exit centerline intersects with a city street. 
3.  Regional attraction - A large cultural or educational establishment such as a museum or zoo, or other establishment that blends education, entertainment, and/or amusement, and which fronts onto one or more freeways. Said attraction must be located on a site of no less than five (5) acres. 
b)  Eligibility for a regional planned sign program: 
1.  The sign program is proposed for a site that is a regional commercial center, regional automobile dealership, or regional attraction. 
2.  The site does not abut property zoned or used for residential uses. 
c)  Signage and other on-premise advertising must meet the provisions of the sign code meant to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents and workers in the immediate vicinity; signage shall be limited to only advertising on-site business activities. All signage must comply with the provisions of sections 41-860 and 41-861 of this chapter except as noted within those sections pursuant to approval of a regional planned sign program described in this section. 
d)  The provisions of this section shall be applied in conjunction with chapter 41, article XI, "On-Premise Signs" of this Code, provided however, in the event of a conflict between the provisions within this section and the remainder of the City of Santa Ana Sign Ordinance as outlined in chapter 41, article XI, "On-Premise Signs," the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
e)  Electronic message displays may be permitted in regional planned sign programs subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The display(s) shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Be oriented in a way that: 
i.  Minimizes visual and light-emitting intrusion onto properties zoned or used for residential purposes; and, 
ii.  Maximizes visibility from adjacent or nearby freeway corridors. 
B.  Produce a maximum 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light levels. 
C.  Include a means of ensuring additional flexibility in reducing light levels upon request by the city. 
D.  Provide a means of limiting excessive light or glare. 
E.  Have automatic diming capabilities. 
2.  The sign copy shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Where screen transitions are used, such transitions shall not give the appearance of moving text or images, and should use smooth effects, such as fades, rather than abrupt transitions. The sign copy shall not use flashing, intermittent or moving lights or produce the optical illusion of movement. 
B.  Each sign copy shall be displayed for a minimum of eight (8) seconds. 
3.  No electronic message display shall be located on a ground sign within fifty (50) feet of a traffic signal or sign, or placed in a location that would not maintain safe conditions for motorists, pedestrians, or cyclists as determined by the public works agency. 
4.  The property owner shall comply with Santa Ana Municipal Code section 41-638.2, establishing standards for graffiti abatement. 
5.  The property owner shall provide the city and the public a designated phone number and email address for emergencies or complaints that will be accessible 24 hours a day, seven days per week. 
6.  In addition to their on-premise advertising and identification purposes, the signs must make available a minimum amount of display time to be used for public service announcements or warning signs as requested and provided by the city of Santa Ana. Such minimum time will be established as a condition of approval for the regional planned sign program. 
7.  The sign shall comply with any and all federal, state and local laws, regulations and permitting requirements. 
f)  A regional planned sign program may be submitted by an applicant representing or owning the project site or may be required for a development project when the Planning Director or his or her designee determines that such a sign program is necessary because of special project characteristics. 
g)  Applications for regional planned sign programs shall be accompanied by photo simulations of all proposed signage showing daytime and nighttime conditions in addition to standard forms, exhibits, and other materials requested by staff as required for a complete submittal. 
h)  Every application under this chapter for a regional planned sign program or appeal to the city council shall be accompanied by a filing fee. No application shall be accepted for filing without the required fee, except that all governmental agencies are exempted from the fee requirement. The city council shall from time to time by resolution adopt a schedule of fees to be charged, a copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the planning department. 
i)  An application to permit a regional planned sign program must be approved by the Planning Commission and be reviewed subject to compliance with the following sections of the Santa Ana Municipal Code: 
1.  41-633, requiring forms, descriptions, notification of surrounding property owners, and signature(s) from recorded property owner(s), as applicable; 
2.  41-635 through 41-637, scheduling for public hearing, providing notice of hearing, and continuances; 
3.  41-642, reviewing the decision of the planning commission by the city council; 
4.  41-645 and 41-646, processing appeals; 
5.  41-647 and 41-647.5, utilizing such permits and violations of such permits; 
6.  41-649, modifying such permits; and 
7.  41-651, revoking of such permits. 
j)  In granting or denying a regional planned sign program, the planning commission shall make the following findings of fact and may impose conditions, restrictions or limitations as the commission may determine to be necessary to meet the general purpose and intent of this chapter and to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare are being maintained. Findings shall be made and conditions may be imposed to confirm that: 
1.  The scale and intensity of the proposed signage is consistent and harmonious with surrounding land uses and does not create conditions that could contribute to visual or physical blight, intrusion, or similar incompatibilities. 
2.  The location of the proposed signage will not contribute towards a hazardous environment for pedestrians, cyclists, or motorists on city streets or freeways. 
3.  The proposed signage is compatible with the scale, intensity, and site development characteristics on which it is proposed. Scale, intensity, and site development characteristics may be determined by: 
A.  Height of existing or proposed buildings on-site; 
B.  Quantity of freestanding buildings, facades, and street frontages; 
C.  Scale of buildings as they relate to pedestrian and vehicular access, surrounding land uses, and transportation corridors; 
D.  Visibility from streets, highways, pedestrian areas, rail corridors, bikeways, other transportation routes, parks, and other public spaces; 
E.  Architecture, color(s), material(s), illumination, and other site characteristics; and nature of business activities conducted on-site; and, 
F.  Visibility from any property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
k)  Appeals from decisions of the planning commission, extensions, time limits, and modifications to such regional planned sign programs must be conducted in a manner in accordance with chapter 41, article v, division 1 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2861, § 5, 5-6-14)  
Secs. 41-886—41-889. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SIGN PERMITS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed former Div. 4, §§ 41-890—41-893, of this article, relative to sign permits for on-premise signs, and enacted similar new provisions in lieu thereof as Div. 4, §§ 41-890—41-894. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984. 
 
Sec. 41-890. - Applications. 
Applications for sign permits shall be filed by, or with the written consent of, the property owner on forms required by the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  A pictorial representation of, and other information about, the proposed sign, disclosing overall dimensions, dimensions of letters and figures, colors, materials, copy, and illumination or movement characteristics, if any. 
(2)  A plan of the site on which the proposed sign is to be located showing the location of all existing or proposed signs subject to this article, buildings, parking areas and vehicular accessways. 
(3)  A description of the type and dimensions of all other existing or proposed signs on the site which are subject to this article, relating each to the location shown on the site plan. 
(4)  Such other information as the zoning administrator deems appropriate to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-891. - Powers and duties for zoning administrator. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall determine whether the proposed sign or sign program is in compliance with this chapter, the provisions of this code and, in addition, where such property is located within a redevelopment project area, shall consider the provisions of the applicable redevelopment plan and any applicable development agreement approved by the city or the Santa Ana Redevelopment Agency. In addition, the zoning administrator shall determine whether or not the purposes and objectives of this chapter have been met and, in that regard, may impose conditions more restrictive than this article to assure that the purposes and objectives of this chapter will be realized. Consideration may be given to site plans, landscaping, general design and development, setback, relationship of such factors to existing development in immediate or surrounding areas, as well as proposed future development in surrounding or immediate areas as indicated on the general plan or any specific plan of the city and any applicable redevelopment plan. Interior design of buildings shall not be considered except as related to the foregoing; nor shall conditions be imposed to require signs obviously incongruous with the property or surrounding areas. 
(b)  The zoning administrator, in compliance with the foregoing, may approve, conditionally approve subject to modifications, or disapprove any application for a sign permit to relocate, erect, alter or expand any sign or sign structure subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Such approval does not constitute a special privilege nor available to others in the same circumstances. 
(2)  Such approval is in substantial compliance with the general plan and with any applicable redevelopment or specific plan of the city and any applicable development agreement approved by the city or the Santa Ana Redevelopment Agency. 
(3)  The nature, condition and development of adjacent uses, buildings and structures have been considered, and no approval shall be granted where such approval will adversely affect or be materially detrimental to such adjacent uses, buildings or structures. 
(4)  The sign placement, scale, shape, illumination, size, colors, letter styles, or other design aspect are architecturally appropriate and compatible in relation to the development on and adjacent to the site of the proposed sign. Site development, landscaping, construction, color and material of exteriors, other signs, exterior lighting, uses, occupancy, density, and the entire development plan shall be considered prior to sign approval. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-892. - Determination by zoning administrator. 
If the decision of the zoning administrator should be to approve the sign plans as submitted with only insignificant or minor changes, a permit shall be issued. Otherwise, the zoning administrator shall make no decision until notice to the applicant, giving fourteen (14) days to appear and present evidence on his/her behalf, is made and given. Zoning administrator hearings shall not require notice to anyone other than the applicant. The decision of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive and effective five (5) city business days after giving of notice thereof, unless within such five (5) city business days an appeal in writing is filed with the secretary of the planning commission by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-893. - Hearing before the planning commission. 
All appeals shall be heard by the planning commission at a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the notice of such appeal, and on at least ten (10) days prior written notice to the applicant and appellant and any person requesting notice of the time and place of such hearing. No other notice of such hearing is required. Such notice of hearing may be waived by any person entitled thereto. The planning commission, in making its determination, shall consider the record before the zoning administrator and such additional evidence deemed relevant and received by it at such hearing. The planning commission, in making such determination, shall be governed by the terms and provisions of this article, and its decision shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-894. - Removal of temporary signs. 
In any case where a permit is issued for a sign or advertising display to be installed for a limited time only, the zoning administrator may require, as a condition of approval of the permit, that the applicant post a cash deposit, in amount of the estimated cost of removal of the sign but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) refundable upon removal of the sign, and an agreement to permit the city to enter upon the site and remove and dispose of the sign in the event such sign is not removed when required to be removed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 4, 3-18-91)  
DIVISION 5. - ILLEGAL AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed former Div. 5, §§ 41-895—41-899, of this article, relative to planned sign programs for on-premise signs, and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof as Div. 5, §§ 41-895—41-900. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984. 
 
Sec. 41-895. - Permit requirement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall place, paint, erect, move, reconstruct, alter or display any sign structure or allow the same to be done on property occupied or controlled by such person, except in accordance with a permit issued for such sign pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-896. - Maintenance of signs. 
No person shall allow any sign located on property owned, occupied or controlled by such person to remain in a condition of disrepair for a period of more than thirty (30) days. For purposes of this article, a sign shall be deemed to be in a condition of disrepair if it is in need of replacement of defective or missing parts, has a broken or damaged sign face, or is in need of repainting or cleaning in order to be brought into a reasonably sightly and legible condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-897. - Nuisance abatement. 
Any sign installed, altered or maintained in violation of any provision of this article constitutes a public nuisance and is subject to abatement pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-898. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign may be maintained subject to the same restrictions as apply to nonconforming uses and buildings pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign which is relocated on the same site to accommodate a street widening or other public works project shall retain its status as a nonconforming sign, provided the relocated sign is substantially the same as the sign existing prior to the relocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-899. - Loss of nonconforming sign status. 
Subject to section 41-898(b), a nonconforming sign becomes an illegal sign and must be removed, altered or changed to comply with all provisions of this article when: 
(1)  The sign is structurally altered or expanded. 
(2)  The sign has ceased, for a period of ninety (90) days or more, to identify or represent any occupant or activity actually located and operating on the site of the sign. For a multitenant nonconforming freestanding sign, the discontinued business sign shall be blanked out, and when fifty (50) per cent or more of the entire sign is blanked out, then the sign shall be removed or shall comply with the provisions of this part. 
(3)  There is damage or destruction to the sign to the extent of more than fifty (50) per cent of the value of the sign. 
(4)  The sign face or copy is changed, except that a sheet metal cabinet sign in conformance with an implied or explicit sign program may continue subject to all other provisions of this article. 
(5)  The sign is located on a site on which the building exteriors are undergoing remodeling, renovation or rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Sec. 41-900. - Prohibition of illegal signs. 
No person shall install, construct or maintain an illegal sign. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 5, 3-18-91)  
Secs. 41-901—41-999. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2116, § 6, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, repealed Div. 6, §§ 41-1000—41-1010, relative to sign standards and regulations for on-premise signs, and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof as Div. 6, § 41-1000. Formerly, such provisions derived from Ord. No. NS-1721, § 1, adopted Apr. 2, 1984; Ord. No. NS-1860, § 13, adopted Sept. 15, 1986; and Ord. No. NS-1986, § 4, adopted Dec. 19, 1988. 
 
Sec. 41-1000. - General. 
The words and phrases used in this article shall be construed as defined in this division, unless the context clearly required otherwise. Unless specifically defined in this article, the definitions set forth in other provisions of this Code shall likewise apply to this article. 
(1)  Aerial sign: A free floating balloon, kite, or similar object not directly secured to property within the city. 
(2)  Alter: To change the copy, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction or supporting structure of a sign, not including ordinary maintenance. 
(3)  Area of a sign: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits of writing, representation, logo, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame, background area, structural trim, or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. The supports or uprights on which any such sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign area. The area of signs with two (2) faces shall be considered to be the area of the largest face. The area of signs with three (3) or more faces shall be considered to be the area of the largest face or one-half (½) the area of all of the faces, whichever is less. 
(4)  Awning sign: A sign affixed to or imprinted on a temporary shelter composed of nonrigid material on a supporting framework, affixed to the exterior wall of a building. 
(5)  Business activity: An enterprise offering goods, services, or other consideration to the public, in legal occupancy of a site or of a specific portion of a site and under separate and distinct management from any other enterprise located on the same site. 
(6)  Business frontage: The horizontal dimension of a building or individual business elevation measured at ground level. 
(7)  Canopy sign: A sign affixed to any permanent architectural projection extending over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
(8)  Changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof which copy is changed manually or electrically, such as readerboards and electronic message boards, without altering the face or surface. 
(9)  Construction sign: A sign at the site of a construction project which identifies the project and/or the persons or firms involved in it. 
(10)  Directional sign: A sign erected for the purpose of facilitating or controlling the efficient and safe movement of pedestrians or vehicles on private property and containing only directional information and no advertising. 
(11)  Elevation: The visible vertical plane of the side of a building from ground level to the roof line. 
(12)  Elevation, primary: The side of a building directly abutting either a street or a parking area. A business owner may choose which elevation is considered the primary elevation, except that in a multitenant building the elevation which is contiguous to other businesses shall be the primary elevation. 
(13)  Elevation, secondary: Any elevation of a building not determined to be a primary elevation. 
(14)  Flag canopy: A line of flags, or a series of lines of flags, suspended above a site. 
(15)  Freestanding sign: A sign standing directly on the ground that is independent from any building or other structure. 
(16)  Frontage: The length of a property line along the street that forms its boundary. 
(17)  Frontage, primary: A frontage which is either abutting a major arterial or is longer than other frontages on lots having two (2) or more frontages. 
(18)  Frontage, secondary: On a lot with frontage on two (2) or more streets, all frontages except that frontage designated as the primary frontage. 
(19)  Gross leasable space: A single leasable space regardless of number of tenants or leases within the space. 
(20)  Height of sign: The overall height of the sign above the top of the curb grade. 
(21)  Illegal sign: A sign which does not conform to the requirements and standards of this article and which is not a nonconforming sign as hereinbelow defined. 
(22)  Implied sign program: The predominant pattern of signs within a commercial center which does not have an adopted sign program. 
(23)  Incidental sign: A sign conveying information that includes, but is not limited to, hours of operation, delivery information, credit cards accepted, and open/closed signs. 
(24)  Integrated development site: Any commercial site, regardless of the number of lots or individual tenants, that is developed with common parking,layout, architecture or design features. 
(25)  Item of information: A word, figure, logo, abbreviation, or other symbolic representation. 
(26)  Logo: A design of letters or symbols used as a trademark or for identification in lieu of, or in conjunction with, other signs. 
(27)  Lot line: A line that separates two (2) lots. 
(28)  Marquee sign: A sign affixed to a permanent projection extending from the building or beyond the wall of the building. 
(29)  Monument sign: A freestanding low profile sign with the sign width greater than the sign height and designed with a solid base and background. 
(30)  Multitenant development: A development consisting of three (3) or more leasable spaces. 
(31)  Noncommercial sign: A sign which is not any of the following: 
a.  A sign which is designed to promote the sale, lease, or exchange of goods, services, or property. 
b.  A sign which is designed to identify or attract attention to any place which sells, leases, or exchanges goods, services, or property. 
c.  A sign which is designed to identify or attract attention to any church or other place of worship, club, nonprofit facility, governmental office or facility, or other such place where a person, group of persons or organization is engaged in any activity involving interaction with the general public or a significant portion thereof, whether for income purposes or not. 
d.  A directional sign. 
e.  A construction sign. 
(32)  Nonconforming sign: Any sign which at one time conformed to all applicable requirements and standards of this chapter, including all applicable permit requirements, but which subsequently ceased to so conform due to changes in such requirements and standards. 
(33)  Painted sign: A sign painted directly on a building or on material which is then attached to a building. 
(34)  Parapet: A protective wall or barrier projecting above any canopy, balcony, or roof. 
(35)  Permanent sign: A sign constructed of weather-resistant material and intended for permanent use. 
(36)  Projecting sign: A sign attached to a building with the face not parallel to the vertical surface of the building. 
(37)  Raceway: A conduit to house electrical wires for signs and used to support and/or affix signage on a wall. 
(38)  Real estate sign: A temporary sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of land and/or buildings. 
(39)  Roof line: The uppermost edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, excluding mechanical equipment screens, whichever is highest. Where a building has several roof levels, the roof line shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on which the sign is located. 
(40)  Roof sign: A sign which has a point of attachment to the roof of a building. Architectural projections, including mechanical equipment screens, above any parapet or roof line whose sole function is a background for signs shall be considered a sign structure. A sign on such an architectural projection shall be considered a roof sign. 
(41)  Sign: Letters, figures, symbols, trademarks, or logos, with or without illumination, intended to identify any place, subject, person, firm, business, product, article, or merchandise. A sign includes all parts, materials, frames, and backgrounds. 
(42)  Signable area: The area of the largest rectangular portion of a face of a building to which a sign is affixed or proposed to be affixed, which can be included within parallel, vertical and horizontal lines uninterrupted by significant architectural features of the building. 
(43)  Site: A unit of land, together with all improvements thereon, determined as follows: 
a.  A unit of land which may be conveyed separately from any and all adjacent land without the requirement of approval of a tentative map pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and Chapter 34 of this Code. 
b.  Two (2) or more buildings or business activities that are or will be related to each other physically or architecturally, such as by sharing off-street parking facilities, so as to form an integrated development, such as a shopping center, industrial park or office complex. 
(44)  Special event sign or display: Signs or advertising displays or combination thereof which advertise or attract public attention to a special one-time event, the opening of a building or business activity, the sale or goods or services at discounted or otherwise specially advantageous prices, or similar event; but excluding signs pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of real estate. 
(45)  Temporary sign: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
(46)  Under-canopy sign: A sign that is suspended below a canopy or marquee perpendicular to the nearest elevation. 
(47)  Unshielded lighting: An external illumination source which is exposed to view. 
(48)  Wall sign: A sign which is attached parallel to or painted on a wall, including parapet or canopy fascia, or a building. 
(49)  Width of sign: The total horizontal dimension of a sign, including all frames or structures. 
(50)  Window sign: A sign that is attached to or is intended to be seen in, on, or through a window and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
(Ord. No. NS-2116, § 6, 3-18-91)  
Secs. 41-1001—41-1019. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2803, § 17, adopted June 21, 2010, repealed the former division 7, §§ 41-1020—41-1040 in its entirety, which pertained to downtown district signs, and derived from Ord. No. NS-2117, § 1, adopted March 18, 1991, and Ord. No. NS-2449, §§ 1, 3—9, 11, adopted October 16, 2000. 
 
Secs. 41-1020—41-1099. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGNS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 41-1100. - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  Excessive commercial advertising signage within the city creates an unsightly appearance and has a blighting influence which is detrimental to the economic base of the city and to property values within the city. 
(2)  Excessive distracting signage increases the hazards to motorists and pedestrians on the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Commercial signs which identify or advertise goods, services or businesses which are sold or provided on the premises on which the sign is located serve a public purpose in assisting the public to locate desired goods, services or businesses and are a necessary incidental use of business property, whereas off-premise commercial advertising is a business in itself which does not serve that public interest. Therefore, off-premise commercial advertising signs may be legitimately and reasonably subjected to different and more restrictive regulations than on-premise commercial advertising signs. 
(4)  Billboards are installed and maintained primarily for the purpose of carrying commercial advertisements and may be legitimately and reasonably regulated as off-premise commercial advertising signs unless devoted exclusively to carrying noncommercial advertisements. 
(5)  Commercial advertising signs are not compatible with areas devoted primarily to residential uses. 
(6)  The city has adopted a general plan, five (5) redevelopment plans, and statements of goals and objectives which demonstrate a serious and comprehensive effort to promote the economic development of its commercial and industrial areas. A major part of this effort is concerned with the removal, limitation, or mitigation of those factors which contribute to an unattractive environment in the commercial and industrial areas, one of which is the presence of off-premise commercial advertising signs. Areas having special importance to the economic development of the city can be generally identified by reference to the general plan and the redevelopment plans. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1101. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place to live, work, trade, do business and visit; protect the city from the blighting influence of excessive off-premise commercial advertising signage; and thereby preserve and enhance the economic base of the city and safeguard property values within the city. 
(2)  To restrict off-premise commercial advertising signs so as to avoid increasing the hazards to motorists and pedestrians caused by excessive distracting signage. 
(3)  To precisely identify areas where the installation of additional off-premise commercial advertising signs should be prohibited due to the importance of such areas to the environmental and economic development goals and objectives of the city. 
(4)  To promote the relocation of existing off-premise commercial advertising signs to sites having less adverse effect on the city's goals and objectives, in accordance with Section 5412 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. 
(5)  To preclude off-premise commercial advertising signs in the residential areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1102. - Establishment of "critical development areas" and "improvement areas". 
There are hereby established within the city certain areas designated and delineated as "critical development areas" or as "improvement areas" on that certain map adopted by ordinance of the city council and incorporated herein by reference. The boundaries of the areas thus established may be altered only by ordinance of the city council after the proposed alteration has been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
The "critical development areas" shall be designated and delineated as those areas of the city deemed to have paramount importance to the future economic growth and stability of the city. 
The "improvement areas" shall be designated and delineated as those areas which are characterized by a heavy concentration of off-premise commercial advertising signs and which have a secondary importance to the future economic growth and stability of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1103. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following respective meanings: 
(a)  Outdoor advertising sign means a sign, display, or device affixed to the ground or attached to or painted or posted on to any part of a building or similar permanent structure used for the display of an advertisement to the general public when viewed from outside of a building or similar enclosed area. 
(b)  Commercial advertisement means any advertisement which has, as its primary purpose, the promotion of the sale of goods or services by a commercial business or enterprise to the public generally or any significant part thereof. 
(c)  Noncommercial advertisement means any advertisement other than a commercial advertisement. 
(d)  On-premise advertisement means any commercial advertisement which pertains solely to goods or services which are produced or offered for sale on the premises where the advertisement is displayed. 
(e)  Off-premise advertisement means any commercial advertisement other than an on-premise advertisement. 
(f)  Off-premise commercial advertising sign means any outdoor advertising sign which is not used exclusively for on-premise advertisements and/or noncommercial advertisements. 
(g)  Construct, when used with reference to a sign, means to install, erect or place on the ground or on a building or structure or to affix, paint, or post on or to a building or structure. 
(h)  Relocate, when used with reference to a sign, means to move a sign from one location to another or to remove a sign from one location and construct a similar sign at another location. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1104. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-1105. - Application to existing signs. 
Any off-premise commercial advertising sign which was constructed in conformance with the requirements of this chapter as they existed at the time of such construction, but which is not in conformance with the requirements of this article, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use for purposes of this chapter, and may be maintained subject to the restrictions and limitations imposed on nonconforming uses by this chapter. Such signs may be compelled to be removed through amortization subject to the requirements and limitations imposed by Sections 5412 through 5412.4 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, the provisions of which, as they may from time to time be amended, are incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1106. - Fees. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for any or all of the administrative processes established by this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1107. - Commercial and noncommercial messages. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the use of any sign authorized by this article for any noncommercial message. No permit required for any sign under this Article shall be granted, conditioned, or denied based on the content of the message displayed by such sign, whether such message is commercial or noncommercial in nature. 
(Ord. No. NS-1927, § 6, 9-8-87)  
Secs. 41-1108—41-1109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 41-1110. - Permit requirement. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained without a permit for such sign issued in accordance with Division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1111. - Exclusion from residential areas. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed in or relocated into any of the following use districts, including any of the following use districts combined with a PD, PRD, SD, or other suffix designation: 
A1 	(General Agricultural); 
RE 	(Residential Estate); 
R1 	(Single-Family Residence); 
R2 	(Multiple-Family Residence); 
R3 	(Medium-Density Multiple-Family Residence); 
R3H 	(High-Density Multiple-Family Residence); 
R4 	(Suburban Apartment); 
P 	(Professional); 
CD 	(Civic Development). 
 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1112. - Exclusion from critical development areas and improvement areas. 
Except as provided in section 41-1130, no off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained in any critical development area or in any improvement area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1113. - Other location restrictions. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained: 
(a)  Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a freeway right-of-way; 
(b)  Within eight hundred (800) feet of a previously constructed off-premise commercial advertising sign, measured at a radius; or 
(c)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any parcel of real property which is zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-1927, § 1, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 41-1114. - Size restrictions. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained unless it complies with the following restrictions: 
(a)  The signs, including all extensions, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, measured from curbline or grade, whichever is lower. As used "curbline" means the elevation of the edge of the street nearest the sign, and "grade" means the elevation of the ground where the sign is located. 
(b)  The sign face, excluding all extensions, shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84;.Ord. No. NS-1927, § 2, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 41-1115. - Visual and maintenance standards. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained unless it complies with the following requirements: 
(a)  The sign structure shall be architecturally treated so as to screen the frame, poles, support structures and lighting from public view. The color and materials of this architectural treatment shall be in conformance with the architectural plan approved pursuant to Division 3 of this article. All screening materials, including painting, shall match and be compatible with buildings on the same site as the sign, and shall include, without limitation, wood, aluminum, fiberglass or similar treatments. The painting and screening materials are subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(b)  The sign shall be continuously maintained in an attractive, clean, and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84; Ord. No. NS-1927, § 3, 9-8-87)  
Sec. 41-1116. - Design restrictions. 
No off-premise commercial advertising sign shall be constructed, relocated or maintained unless it complies with the following restrictions: 
(a)  No part of the sign shall project over any building or the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The total area of extensions or temporary additions of the base rectangular sign face shall not exceed fifteen (15) per cent of the area of the base rectangular sign face. 
(c)  The sign shall not be illuminated by either exterior or interior lighting. 
(d)  The sign shall not incorporate any mechanical movement or any flashing, moving, or intermittent lighting. 
(Ord. No. NS-1927, § 4, 9-8-87)  
Secs. 41-1117—41-1119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 41-1120. - Applications. 
Applications for permits for off-premise commercial advertising signs shall be filed with the zoning administrator, on such forms as may be provided by him, and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  A pictorial representation of the proposed sign, disclosing overall dimensions. 
(2)  A plan of the site on which the proposed sign is to be located, disclosing the location of the sign in relation to other improvements on the site. 
(3)  A description of the proposed architectural treatment of the sign structure, disclosing proposed colors and materials. 
(4)  Such other information as the zoning administrator deems appropriate to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1121. - Determination by zoning administrator. 
The zoning administrator shall review each application for a permit filed under section 41-1120 and shall make a decision thereof within twenty-one (21) calendar days after filing, except that such time limit shall be extended as necessary to allow for the consideration of a relocation agreement pursuant to Division 4 of this article whenever a request for such an agreement has been made by the applicant. If the proposed sign complies with this article and all other requirements of the law, and if the colors and materials of the architectural treatment required by section 41-1115 are reasonably attractive and suitable for the purpose of providing the required screening, the permit shall be issued based upon application as submitted. If the proposed sign can be brought into such compliance by modifications in the proposal, the permit shall be issued subject to conditions requiring such modifications. Otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1122. - Review by the planning commission. 
If the applicant is aggrieved by any determination of the zoning administrator with respect to the architectural treatment required for the sign, he may request review of that issue by the planning commission. In such event, the applicant shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard on that issue by the planning commission. A report of the decision of the planning commission shall be prepared by the zoning administrator and forwarded to the city council. If the city council desires to review the decision of the planning commission it may, after first giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity to be heard, itself make the final decision of the issue. Otherwise, the decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Secs. 41-1123—41-1129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RELOCATION AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 41-1130. - Relocation agreements generally. 
An off-premise commercial advertising sign may be relocated within or into an improvement area provided an agreement for such relocation between the sign owner and the city is approved by the city council. The city council may approve such a relocation agreement if the sign will, upon its relocation comply with the requirements of this article, and if, in the opinion of the city council, the relocation will, on balance, promote the purposes of this article. The relocation agreement shall contain such terms and conditions pertaining to the relocation and future maintenance of the sign as are consistent with this article and mutually agreeable to the parties thereto. The sign owner shall be given an opportunity to address the city council prior to any action being taken by the city council on the relocation agreement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1131. - Requests for consideration of relocation agreements. 
The owner of any off-premise commercial advertising may request an agreement for the relocation of the sign by submitting such request to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, as a condition to responding to the request, may require such information from the sign owner as is reasonably necessary to determine whether the sign will or can be made to conform to the requirements of this article at the location to which it is proposed to be relocated. If the zoning administrator determines such compliance is not possible, he shall so notify the sign owner and need not take any further action on the request. If the zoning administrator determines such compliance is possible, he shall cooperate with the sign owner in the preparation of a mutually agreeable draft relocation agreement. In the event of disagreement between the sign owner and the zoning administrator concerning the proposed terms and conditions of the relocation agreement, the sign owner shall be entitled to have his own draft of the proposed relocation agreement submitted to the city council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Sec. 41-1132. - Review by the planning commission. 
Prior to submission of a proposed relocation agreement to the city council, it shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The sign owner shall be given a reasonable opportunity to address the planning commission prior to any action being taken by the planning commission on the relocation agreement. 
(Ord. No. NS-1722, § 1, 4-16-84)  
Secs. 41-1133—41-1199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - HOMELESS SHELTERS 
 
Sec. 41-1200. - Homeless shelters—Zones. 
An emergency shelter for homeless or multiservice center for homeless shall be a permitted use on any parcel within the M1 (light industrial) or M2 (heavy industrial) or industrial specific development (SD) zones. Each facility shall comply with all of the required development and operational standards of the zone in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 8, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 41-1201. - Same—Standards. 
Where permitted, any emergency shelter for homeless or multiservice center for homeless shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Occupancy. A maximum of thirty (30) beds or persons may be served nightly, with associated support service not open to the public. One (1) multiservice center may be permitted in the City of Santa Ana, allowing a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) beds or persons may be served nightly and maximum of two hundred (200) beds. Any emergency shelter for homeless with greater than thirty (30) beds, but less than one hundred fifty (150) beds, shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit consistent with Article V of this chapter. 
(2)  Separation criteria. Said uses are to be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential use or residentially zoned property, park, child care center, or kindergarten through 12th grade curriculum school, as measured from the closest property line. An exception to this separation requirement may be granted if significant physical features act as barriers from said sensitive uses; such as a freeway, railroad right of way, or like features. In addition, at least 300 feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter for homeless or multiservice center for homeless, as measured from the closest property line. Said uses shall be located within ½-mile of a transit stop. 
(3)  Parking. One (1) vehicle parking space shall be provided per five (5) beds. A covered and secured area for bicycle parking shall be provided for use by staff and clients, commensurate with demonstrated need, but no less than a minimum of eight (8) bike parking spaces. 
(4)  Waiting and intake area. A client waiting and intake area shall be provided and contain a minimum of ten (10) square feet per bed provided at the facility. The client waiting and intake area shall be screened from the public right of way by a solid wall of at least six (6) feet in height, and shall be sufficient in size to accommodate all persons waiting to enter the facility. 
(5)  Support services. Emergency shelters shall allocate sufficient areas on site, outside of any required landscape areas, to provide the following minimal support services: 
a.  Food preparation and dining areas. 
b.  Laundry facilities. 
c.  Restrooms and showers 
d.  Areas to secure and store client belongings. 
e.  Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities and/or open space 
f.  A private area for providing referral services to assist shelter clients in entering programs aimed at obtaining permanent shelter and income. Referral services refers to the initial assessment of a homeless client to identify the areas in which assistance is needed, and connecting clients with appropriate off-site programs and services depending on their need. 
Multiservice center or emergency shelters for homeless with capacity for one hundred fifty (150) or more beds shall provide a kitchen and essential services to meet the needs and development of homeless clients to facilitate homeless persons to obtain transitional and permanent housing solutions. 
(6)  Hours of operation. A multiservice center for homeless with a capacity of one hundred fifty (150) beds shall be open twenty-four (24) hours a day. Emergency shelters for homeless providing less than one hundred fifty (150) beds are not required to be open twenty-four (24) hours a day. Clients for multiservice centers or emergency shelters for homeless shall have a specified check out time as detailed in the management and operation plan, but may remain on the premises to utilize onsite services offered. 
(7)  Length of stay. The length of stay of an individual client shall not exceed six (6) months within a twelve (12) month period; days of stay need not be consecutive. 
(8)  Management and operation plan. The applicant or operator shall submit a management and operation plan for the emergency shelter and/or multi-service center for review and approval by the planning manager in consultation with the chief of police at the time the project is proposed, prior to issuance of permits. If site plan review applies, then the management and operational plan should be submitted and reviewed concurrently with those applications. The plan shall remain active throughout the life of the facility, with any changes subject to review and approval by City planning manager in consultation with the chief of police. The plan shall be based on "best practices" and include, but not be limited to, a security plan, procedures, list of services, staff training, "good neighbor" communication plan, client transport and active transportation plan, ratio of staff to clients, client eligibility and intake and check out process, detailed hours of operation, ongoing outreach plan to Santa Ana homeless population, and participation in data collection for the Orange County region's homeless management information services. The City may inspect the facility at any time for compliance with the facility's operational plan and other applicable laws and standards. 
(9)  Restrooms. The number of toilet and showers shall comply with applicable building codes and plumbing codes. 
(10)  Trash enclosure and loading zone. Each facility shall have a trash enclosure and loading zone as provided in Section 41-623 of this chapter. 
(11)  Staff/security. A twenty-four (24) hour emergency contact person shall be designated. Staff and/or security shall be on the premises at all times for multiservice centers or homeless shelters open twenty-four (24) hours a day, as detailed and approved in the management and operation plan. 
(12)  Applicable laws. The facility shall comply with all other laws, rules and regulations that apply, including building and fire codes and shall be subject to City inspections prior to operational plan approval. In addition, the facility is to be consistent with City airport land use environs element policies, particularly as it relates to protecting sensitive uses from airport related noise levels. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 9, 9-3-13)  
Sec. 41-1202. - Transitional and supportive housing—Zones. 
Transitional housing and supportive housing shall be considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2848, § 10, 9-3-13)  
Secs. 41-1203—41-1249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RECYCLING FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 41-1250. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Recyclable material. Recyclable material is reusable material, including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  Recycling facility. A recycling facility is a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities include collection facilities and processing facilities. 
(c)  Collection facility. A collection facility is a center for the acceptance, by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in section 41-1253. Collection facilities may include the following: 
(1)  A reverse vending machine; an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one (1) or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reversing vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three (3) container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. 
(2)  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than five hundred (500) square feet, including the following: 
A mobile recycling unit; A mobile recycling unit means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the department of motor vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet; is designed to accept more than one (1) container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
Kiosk type units, which may include permanent structures; 
Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials; 
(3)  Large collection facilities which occupy an area of more than five hundred (500) square feet and may include permanent structures. 
(d)  Processing facility. A processing facility is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following: 
(1)  A light processing facility occupies an area of under forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two (2) outboard truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to quality as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
(2)  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. 2333, § 3, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1251. - Permits required. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the placement, construction, or operation of any small collection facility which is not located on property within a commercial zoning district and designated as a convenience zone where such uses are permitted by this section and which has not been issued either a land use certificate or a conditional use permit as required by this section and has produced documentation verifying certification by the State of California Department of Conservation. Applicants must also provide written proof of possession of State of California Workman's Compensation coverage and be in possession of a current Weighmaster's License. 
(b)  Small collection facilities may be permitted on any property which is zoned and used for commercial and designated as a convenience zone or on property within an industrial zoning district. Heavy processing facilities are permitted only in the M1 and M2 zoning districts with the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(c)  A land use certificate shall be issued for any small collection facility which complies with the applicable standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 4, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1252. - Standards for reverse vending machines. 
Each reverse vending machine: 
(1)  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use which is in compliance with all applicable zoning, building and fire code requirements; 
(2)  Shall be located in the interior of the building, within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian circulation; 
(3)  Shall occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height; 
(4)  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material; 
(5)  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative; 
(6)  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four (4) square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions; 
(7)  Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
(8)  Shall have operating hours which are at least the operating hours of the host use. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 5, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1253. - Standards for small collection facilities. 
Only one (1) small collection facility may occupy a convenience zone at any time; and, each small collection facility: 
(1)  Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use which is in a convenience zone and not host to another operating small collection facility and is in compliance with all applicable zoning, building and fire code requirements; 
(2)  Shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet; 
(3)  Shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
(4)  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may not be accepted at these locations; 
(5)  Shall use no power-driven processing equipment; 
(6)  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
(7)  Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers where attendant is not present; 
(8)  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day; 
(9)  Shall not exceed noise levels of sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA; and 
(10)  Shall provide access to water/hose bib within fifty (50) feet. 
(11)  Recycling facilities may not locate within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use and shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(12)  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. 
(13)  Signs may be provided as follows: 
a.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of twenty (20) per cent per side or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is larger, in addition to informational signs required in subsection (b)(3) hereinabove; in the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container. 
b.  Signs must be consistent with the character of existing signage inclusive of color. 
c.  Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the zoning administrator if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
d.  The zoning administrator may authorize increases in the number and size of signs upon findings that it is compatible with adjacent businesses. 
e.  All sites must be in conformance with the provisions of Article XI of this chapter. 
(14)  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by this chapter for any concurrent use. 
(15)  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One (1) space will be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
(16)  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
(17)  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation; 
b.  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site; or 
c.  A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed as follows: 
Number of Available Parking Spaces 	Maximum 
Reduction 
0—25 	0 
26—35 	2 
36—49 	3 
50—99 	4 
100 or more 	5 
 
(18)  The facility shall be integrated into the existing site so as to not be obtrusive and will provide aesthetic applications that are compatible with the existing architecture. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 6, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1254. - Standards for large collection facilities. 
Large collection facilities shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The facility shall not abut a property zoned or used for residential purpose. 
(2)  The facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way either by operating in an enclosed building, or by operating: 
a.  Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height with landscaping; 
b.  At least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property zoned or used for residential use; and 
c.  In compliance with applicable noise standards. 
(3)  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
(4)  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire department. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing. 
(5)  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
(6)  Space will be provided on site for six (6) vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the adjoining administrator determines that allowing overflow traffic above six (6) vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
(7)  One (1) parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements for other vehicles will be as provided for in this chapter. 
(8)  Noise levels shall not exceed fifty-five (55) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA. 
(9)  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(10)  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. Containers shall be at least ten (10) feet from any building; 
(11)  Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; the facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
(12)  The facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the zoning administrator, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
(13)  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved through a conditional use permit process or at the discretion of the zoning administrator if noise and other conditions are met. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 7, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1255. - Processing facilities. 
Processing facilities are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  The facility shall not abut a property zoned or used for residential purpose. 
(2)  In a commercial zone, a light processing facility shall operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage of vehicles or equipment used on site.: 
(3)  Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. 
(4)  A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet and shall have no more than an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
(5)  A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 2520.11 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(6)  Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
(7)  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire department. No storage excluding truck trailers and overseas containers will be visible above the height of the fencing. 
(8)  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
(9)  Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of ten (10) customers except where the zoning administrator determines that allowing over-flow traffic above six (6) vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
(10)  One (1) parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by this chapter. 
(11)  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA. 
(12)  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned or used for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open. 
(13)  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
(14)  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
(15)  Sign requirements shall be those provided by this chapter. In addition, the facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. 
(16)  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level shall be detectable on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. NS-2333, § 8, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 41-1256. - Relationship to other zoning provisions. 
(a)  To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of this article and other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(b)  Provisions of this chapter requiring that activities be conducted within an enclosed building do not apply to recycling facilities except as specified in this article. 
(c)  Any recycling facility which is a "development project" within the meaning of section 41-668(a) of this chapter must comply with the development project plan approval process set forth in sections 41-668 through 41-674 of this chapter in addition to compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-1946, § 1, 1-19-88)  
Secs. 41-1257—41-1299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - OFF-STREET PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 41-1300. - Location of required off-street parking. 
Parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or site or on a lot or site contiguous thereto. Any property used for required parking shall be under the same ownership as the uses served or shall be restricted in such a manner as to prevent the severance of the parking facilities and use by sale, trade, lease or any other conveyance. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1301. - Prohibition against display of vehicles, trailers, vessels and other personal property for sale. 
(a)  No person shall park or place a vehicle, trailer, or vessel or other personal property upon a public or private street, parking lot or any public or private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle, trailer, vessel or other personal property thereon for sale, hire or rental, or for other advertising purposes, unless said property is properly zoned by the city for such purpose and the vendor is duly licensed to transact such business at that location. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not prohibit any person from parking or placing a vehicle or vessel or other personal property on private residential property belonging to or occupied by the owner of such vehicle, vessel or other personal property, for the purpose of displaying the same for sale, hire or rental. 
(c)  "Vehicle" as used in this section shall mean a "vehicle" as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
(d)  "Vessel" as used in this section shall mean a "vessel" as defined in Section 9840(a) of the California Vehicle Code, as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
(e)  The parking or placing of any vehicle or vessel or other personal property with a sign or other advertising device thereon or proximate thereto, indicating such vehicle or vessel or other personal property is for sale, hire or rental, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vehicle, vessel or other personal property was parked or placed for the purpose displaying same for sale, hire or rental, or other advertising. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable in the same manner as provided in section 36-27 of this Code, as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 1, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1302. - Prohibition against use of required parking spaces for other purposes. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of any parking space or area designed for the parking of vehicles, and necessary to provide parking spaces in full or partial satisfaction of the off-street parking requirements of this chapter, for any purpose which obstructs or prevents the use of such parking space or area for the parking of vehicles on a regular basis. 
(b)  The use of a required parking space for the storage of any automobile for more than seventy-two (72) hours, or for the storage of equipment, shall be deemed to be an obstruction or activity which prevents the use of such parking space for the parking of vehicles on a regular basis within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Subsection (b) does not apply to the parking of a vehicle at a residence provided the vehicle is operational and the parking of the vehicle does not conflict with access and parking of other vehicles. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 2, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1303. - Dimension of parking area and access. 
(a)  Parking stalls shall not be less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches wide and eighteen (18) feet long, except as noted in subsections 41-1320(c) and (d). Where double-striping is required, the width of stalls shall be measured from lines midway between each pair of stripes. Structural, mechanical, utility or similar appurtenances are only permitted adjacent to required stall areas if the required width of the stall is increased at least six (6) inches and if the appurtenance is not located so as to interfere with safe and free parking movement or car door opening or of visibility. No appurtenance shall be permitted in the area in front of a parked car unless located in its entirety at least four (4) feet above surface level. Parking lot lights and tree wells, however, may encroach no greater than eighteen (18) inches into a front corner of a parking stall. 
(b)  Aisles to and from parking stalls shall not be less than: 
(1)  Thirteen (13) feet wide for one-way aisles with 30-degree parking. 
(2)  Fifteen (15) feet wide for one-way aisles with 45-degree parking. 
(3)  Eighteen (18) feet wide for one-way aisles with 60-degree parking. 
(4)  Twenty-three (23) feet wide for 90-degree parking. 
(c)  Circulation within a parking area must be such that: 
(1)  A car entering the parking area need not enter a street to reach another aisle except on a street with a standard industrial street cross section. 
(2)  A car need not enter a street backwards. This provision shall not apply to off-street parking required in sections 41-1320 and 41-1321, or prohibit the backing of motor vehicles into a street which has a standard industrial street cross-section regardless of the use on the lot abutting said industrial street. 
(3)  All parking stalls and garages shall be accessible and usable. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 3, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 29, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-1304. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Bumper guards, curbs or other suitable barriers shall be provided to protect public streets and sidewalks, to prevent parking in areas where no parking is permitted, to prevent parked vehicles from extending beyond the parking area boundary line or intruding into any pedestrian walkway, and to prevent vehicles from contacting any wall, fence or landscaped area. 
(b)  When the parking area abuts residentially zoned property, property used for residential purposes, or sensitive land uses, a minimum six-foot high masonry wall shall be erected along such property lines, except that such wall shall not exceed four (4) feet in height along any required front yard of the adjacent property. 
(c)  Lights used to illuminate the parking area shall be reflected away from any residence or sensitive land use. 
(d)  All required stalls shall be clearly outlined with double-striping on the surface of the lot. 
(e)  The parking area and driveways shall be paved with asphaltic or concrete surfacing. 
(f)  All parking areas shall be accessible to vehicles via driveways and aisles of the size specified herein. 
(g)  Cart corrals shall be provided throughout parking lots for uses that rely on shopping carts for normal business operations. 
(h)  Sensitive land uses as used in this section are those adjacent land uses such as child care facilities, parks, schools, churches, convalescent homes, and hospitals that will be potentially impacted by the proposed parking lot and ancillary parking activities. 
(i)  All parking areas required by this chapter are to be maintained in a safe, clean and repaired state with no potholes, solid paving, and legible striping. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 4, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 23, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-1305. - Loading space requirements. 
Every building involving the receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise incidental to carrying on such activity shall be provided with at least one (1) space for standing, loading and unloading of vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of on-site travel aisles, streets and alleys. Such space shall be provided at a size sufficient to accommodate the largest delivery vehicle likely for the building and in no case be less than ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. Loading zones shall be provided at a rate of one (1) for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or outdoor storage area. A fourteen-foot minimum height clearance shall be maintained. Loading zones shall not interfere with or be used for off-street parking purposes. Loading zones shall be clearly designated and labeled, and may not be located adjacent to property used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 5, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1306. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  Number. A portion of the required off-street parking spaces required for any use by this chapter shall be designed for physically handicapped persons in accordance with state law and the following standards: 
Total Number of 
Parking Spaces 	Number of Spaces 
for Handicapped 
Persons 
1—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 
76—100 	4 
101—150 	5 
151—200 	6 
201—300 	7 
301—400 	8 
401—500 	9 
501—1,000 	2% of total 
Over 1,000 	20 plus 1 for each 100 
spaces provided 
over 1,000 
 
(b)  Design, designation, and location. Handicapped persons' parking spaces shall, at a minimum, comply with the requirements of the California Building Code, Division 11, Site Accessibility. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2176, § 5, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 6, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1307. - Motorcycle spaces. 
Any site which has five hundred (500) or more parking spaces shall provide, for the first five hundred (500) spaces and one (1) for each two hundred fifty (250) spaces thereafter, a seventeen-foot by eighteen-foot motorcycle parking area, bordered by bumper guards or concrete curb to preclude automobile access to such area. Motorcycle spaces are to be clearly designated and located near the main entrance of the primary structures on-site. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 7, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1307.1. - Bicycle parking spaces. 
All development projects (as defined by section 41-668) shall provide short term bicycle parking on-site as follows: 
a.  Retail and service commercial development shall provide bicycle parking at a rate of five (5) per cent of the required automobile parking, but not less than four (4) bicycle spaces. 
b.  Office, industrial and manufacturing development of greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) gross square feet shall provide a minimum of two (2) bicycle parking spaces. 
c.  Multifamily residences of five (5) or more units shall provide a minimum of four (4) bicycle spaces. 
d.  Key activity locations and public gathering uses including but not limited to theaters, recreation facilities, libraries, churches/temples, and schools shall provide a minimum of four (4) bicycle parking spaces or eight (8) bicycle parking spaces if more than fifty (50) parking spaces are required. 
e.  If a use conducted in a building or on a site is not clearly defined as it relates to the application of this requirement, determination shall be at the discretion of the planning manager as to the appropriate bicycle parking requirement as listed in subsections a through d above. Such determination may be appealed to the planning commission and city council. 
f.  To the extent practicable, the design, site planning, compatibility and lot design for on-site, short term bicycle parking shall be consistent with the city's bicycle support facilities guidelines. In those situations where said guidelines cannot be applied due to site constraints or aesthetic considerations, in order to promote the objectives of said guidelines and the health, safety and general welfare of the city, the planning director or designee may in writing authorize use of a portion of the required landscape setback, or the conversion of one required vehicular parking space for on-site, short term bicycle parking. 
(Ord. No. NS-2787, § 4, 6-8-09; Ord. No. NS-2803, § 18, 6-21-10)  
Sec. 41-1308. - Prohibition against separate charge for parking on multiple-family residential property. 
(a)  No owner or agent of any owner of multiple-family residential property shall impose any charge on any resident for the privilege of parking in the off-street parking spaces on such property which is separate and distinct from the rent charged to such resident for such resident's dwelling unit. 
(b)  Any owner or agent of an owner of residential property who is not in compliance with subsection (a) of this section on November 19, 1990, shall have sixty (60) days from and after such date to discontinue such noncompliance. Thereafter any such noncompliance shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1309. - Interpretation of standards. 
In interpreting the parking standards set forth in this article, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  Wherever required off-street parking is based upon gross floor area, the number of required spaces shall be determined by applying the appropriate mathematical ratio. If the product is not a whole number, the number of required spaces shall be the next lower natural number if the decimal fraction is less than five-tenths (0.5) or the next higher natural number if the decimal fraction is five-tenths (0.5) or more. Wherever required off-street parking is based upon some other factor, the number of required spaces shall be determined by the same arithmetical process. 
(2)  Wherever two (2) or more uses identified in this article exist on the same site or within the same building: 
a.  The number of parking spaces required for each use shall be determined separately. 
b.  Except as provided in sections 41-1390 and 41-1391, ancillary activities or uses within a single tenant space not exceeding fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area shall be calculated at the parking ratio of the primary use. 
(3)  Wherever a particular use of property can be classified under more than one (1) section of this article which sets minimum parking space requirements, the section which contains the more specific use description shall apply. If two (2) or more equally specific sections apply, the section imposing the higher standard shall apply. 
(4)  Wherever required parking is based upon the number of seats in an area, eighteen (18) inches of bench space shall be deemed the equivalent of one (1) seat. 
(5)  Reduction in parking due to disabilities upgrade may be granted. When required solely as a need to upgrade existing parking facilities to comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR), California Access Code, Title 24, may be reduced at the discretion of the planning manager. 
(6)  Additions of floor area up to twenty-five (25) percent of a designated historic resource on the Santa Ana Register of Historic Properties shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. Additional parking shall be provided only for the floor area being added which exceeds a twenty-five (25) percent increase. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 8, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2404, § 2, 9-20-99; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 11, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1309.1. - Change of use, exceptions. 
Upon the change of use of an existing building, lot, or a portion of a building or lot, additional parking and loading spaces shall be provided for the new use as required by this chapter over and above the number of parking and loading spaces required by this chapter for the prior use only, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Change of use in a historic district or registered historic property. Any change of use permitted in a historic resource shall not be required to provide additional parking to that legally required prior to the change of use. 
(2)  Change of use in a space under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. The occupancy of any tenant space of less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in all zones, may be interchanged among the below land uses without the need to provide additional parking beyond that currently provided on-site or in covenanted off-site spaces. The prior use must have been established with a valid business license and certificate of occupancy. Required parking shall be determined by the last occupancy that did not use this subsection in a space under two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in all zones. Parking will be determined by section 41-1300. 
• Professional and administrative offices 
• Service uses 
• Medical and dental offices 
• Restaurants/eating establishments 
• Retail and service activities 
• Live/work spaces 
• Banks and financial institutions 
• Gymnasiums and studios operated for commercial or public purposes 
( Ord. No. NS-2923, § 12, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1310. - In-lieu parking fee districts. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, establish one (1) or more in-lieu parking fee districts whereby property owners within any such district may receive a credit toward the number of off-street parking spaces otherwise required by this article by the payment of an in-lieu parking fee to be used by the city for the future provision of public parking facilities serving the district. 
(b)  Eligibility for the reception of an off-street parking credit shall be limited to: (1) the use and occupancy of existing buildings which lack sufficient parking spaces on site to satisfy the requirements of this article and which no longer have such status as a nonconforming use or nonconforming building which would allow them to be used and occupied without the provision of such parking; and (2) the intensification of use in an existing building. Such eligibility shall not extend to new building construction, nor to additions to existing buildings or the reconstruction of existing buildings even if such reconstruction does not increase existing or previous occupant load. 
(c)  Any resolution of the city council establishing an in-lieu parking fee district shall set forth the fee to be charged for each parking space for which an off-street parking credit shall be granted to an owner of eligible property within the district. Such resolution may also set forth such provisions as the council may determine appropriate for payment of the fee in installments over a period of years. The responsibility for such installment payments shall run with the ownership of the property. 
(d)  All revenues received by the city from the payment of in-lieu parking fees from owners of property within an in-lieu parking district shall be maintained in an account separate and apart from other city funds. Moneys in such account may be expended solely for the purpose of providing additional public parking in the district. 
(e)  No owner of property within an in-lieu parking fee district may receive any off-street parking credit pursuant to this section except pursuant to a parking plan approved for that property by the executive director of the community development agency of the city or his or her designated representative. The parking plan shall specify the number of parking spaces required to be provided on the property and the number of parking spaces for which off-street parking credits are granted. 
(f)  A parking plan may be revoked by the executive director of the community development agency of the city or his or her designated representative for failure by the owner of that property to pay installment payments on the in-lieu parking fee due for that property, and shall be reinstated upon the payment of all installments due. During such time as a parking plan is revoked: (1) the property shall not be credited with off-street parking credits for purposes of determining its compliance with the off-street parking requirements of this chapter; and (2) no further certificates of occupancy shall be issued for the property under the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2309, § 1, 12-2-96; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 9, 12-15-97)  
Secs. 41-1311—41-1319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 41-1320. - Single-family dwellings. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for single-family dwellings are as follows: 
(1)  Four (4) off-street parking spaces for up to five (5) bedrooms; 
(2)  Five (5) off-street parking spaces for up to six (6) bedrooms; 
(3)  Six (6) off-street parking spaces for up to seven (7) bedrooms; 
(4)  Seven (7) off-street parking spaces for up to eight (8) bedrooms; 
(5)  Eight (8) off-street parking spaces for nine (9) or more bedrooms. 
(b)  Of the spaces required by subsection (a), no less than one-half (½) of the off-street parking spaces shall be in an enclosed garage. The remaining spaces may be tandem spaces in a driveway. 
(c)  Each parking stall in a one-car garage shall not be less than twelve (12) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. 
(d)  Each parking stall in a two-car garage or larger shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. 
(Ord. No. NS-2087, § 1, 10-1-90; Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2710, § 30, 5-1-06)  
Sec. 41-1321. - Two-family and three-family dwellings. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for each dwelling unit in a two-family or three-family dwelling are as follows: three (3) spaces plus one (1) additional space for each bedroom in excess of two (2) bedrooms. 
(b)  Of the spaces required by subsection (a), two (2) spaces shall be in an enclosed garage. The remaining spaces may be tandem spaces in a driveway, provided such driveway spaces may not obstruct access to parking spaces serving any other unit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2087, § 1, 10-1-90; Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1322. - Multiple-family dwellings. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for each dwelling unit in multiple-family dwellings are as follows: one (1) space in a garage or carport. 
(b)  Each multiple-family dwelling site shall provide off-street parking spaces, in addition to the minimum requirements of subsection (a) of this section, in an amount not less than the number of bedrooms on the site. Such spaces may be open or covered and may be assigned to particular units or not so assigned. Bachelor units shall be considered as one-bedroom units. 
(c)  In addition to the minimum requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, each multiple-family dwelling site shall provide guest parking, identified as such, in an amount of spaces not less than twenty-five (25) per cent of the minimum required spaces under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, but in no case less than three (3) spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2087, § 1, 10-1-90; Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 10, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1323. - Care homes. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for care homes are as follows: one (1) space for each three (3) beds. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1324. - Lodging houses. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for lodging houses are as follows: one (1) space for each guest room or one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sleeping area, whichever is greater, plus two (2) enclosed spaces for use by the operator of the lodging house and two (2) guest spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1325. - Senior citizen establishments. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for senior citizen establishments, pertaining to spaces reserved for residents who are sixty-two (62) years of age or older, are as follows: one (1) space for each one-bedroom dwelling unit; one and one-half (1.5) spaces for each two-bedroom dwelling unit. 
(b)  Of the spaces required by subsection (a), at least one (1) space per unit shall be in a garage or under a carport. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, senior citizen establishments shall provide guest parking spaces, identified as such, in an amount not less than fifteen (15) per cent of the minimum number of spaces required under subsection (a) of this section. Such guest parking spaces shall be open and outside of any secured area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1326. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for bed and breakfast establishments are as follows: one (1) space for each guest room, plus two (2) enclosed spaces for the operator of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1327. - Fraternity and sorority houses and dormitories. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for fraternity and sorority houses and dormitories are as follows: one (1) space for each two (2) beds or one (1) space for each eighty (80) square feet of sleeping area, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1328. - Trailer and mobile home parks. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for trailer or mobile home parks are as follows: two (2) spaces for each trailer unit. 
(b)  Of the spaces required by subsection (a), at least one (1) space for each unit shall be covered. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 11, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1329. - Caretaker quarters. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for caretaker quarters are as follows: two (2) spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Secs. 41-1330—41-1339. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 41-1340. - Retail stores and service uses. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for retail and service uses not otherwise specified in this division are as follows: five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1341. - Restaurants, cafes, etc. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for restaurants, cafes and other eating establishments are as follows: eight (8) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area and open-air dining area except that an open-air dining area no greater than twenty-five (25) per cent of the gross floor area of the restaurant, or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is smaller, is exempt from a parking requirement. 
(b)  Each drive-through eating establishment shall have vehicular stacking lanes of at least eighty (80) feet from the pick-up window to the order point, and eighty (80) feet from the order point to the end of the drive-through lane. Such stacking lanes shall be located so that they do not serve as entries to parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 12, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 13, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1342. - Offices, business and professional. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for business and professional offices, including psychologists, are as follows: three (3) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 13, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1343. - Open retail. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for plant nurseries (except for those in conjunction with a home improvement store), vehicle sales and other primarily open-air retail uses are as follows: two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of display and storage area, plus four (4) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of office area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 14, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1344. - Hotels and motels. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for hotels and motels are as follows: one (1) space for each guest room, plus one (1) space for each ten (10) rooms, plus two (2) spaces for a manager's unit, if provided. 
(b)  Except for facilities limited to the exclusive use of guests, parking shall be provided for restaurants, banquet facilities and other retail services or recreational uses included in a hotel or motel building or grounds in accordance with the requirements of this article for such uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 15, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1345. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-1346. - Medical, dental, psychiatric and chiropractic offices and clinics. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for medical, dental, psychiatric, and chiropractic offices and clinics are as follows: five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 16, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 14, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1347. - Automobile repair and automobile servicing. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for automobile repair and automobile servicing facilities are as follows: Five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Vehicle repair bays in automobile repair and automobile servicing facilities shall not be counted as parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2099, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. NS-2118, § 15, 3-18-91; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 17, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1348. - Banks and financial institutions. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for banks and other financial institutions are as follows: four (4) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus two (2) spaces for each walk-up automatic teller machine. 
(b)  Each drive-in service window in a bank or other financial institution shall have a vehicular stacking lane of at least one hundred twenty (120) feet in length. Such stacking lane shall be located so that it does not serve as an entryway to parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 18, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1349. - Furniture and appliance stores. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for furniture and appliance stores are as follows: two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1350. - Laundromats. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for laundromats are as follows: six (6) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1351. - Hospitals and other medical care facilities. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for hospitals and other medical care facilities [are as follows]: two (2) spaces for each patient bed. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1352. - Union halls. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for union halls are as follows: three (3) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of office area, plus one (1) space for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of assembly floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 19, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1353. - Bulk merchandise stores. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for bulk merchandise stores are as follows: eight (8) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1354. - Lumberyards. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for lumberyards are as follows: five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of building space, plus two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of outdoor sales or storage area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1355. - Car washes. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for self-service car washes are as follows: two (2) spaces per washing bay. In addition, an area for vehicles of at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet is to be provided adjacent to each air, water, vacuum and telephone facility. 
(b)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for automatic car washes are as follows: two (2) spaces. Automatic car washes shall also have a vehicular stacking lane at least sixty (60) feet long at the entrance. An area for vehicles of at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet shall also be provided adjacent to each air, water, vacuum and telephone facility. 
(c)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for full-service car washes are as follows: five (5) spaces. Full-service car washes shall also provide the following: 
(1)  A drying area equal to at least twenty (20) parking spaces. 
(2)  A vehicular approach lane at least one hundred twenty (120) feet in length. 
(3)  An area for vehicles of at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet adjacent to each air, water, vacuum and telephone facility. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 20, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1356. - Indoor swap meets. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for indoor swap meets are as follows: ten (10) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1357. - Service stations. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for service stations which are limited to the dispensing of motor fuel are as follows: two (2) spaces. 
(b)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for service stations having repair and/or retail facilities are as follows: one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  No additional spaces are needed for an automatic (drive-through) car wash, however, a sixty-foot stacking lane is required. Other types of car washes require parking as specified in this article. 
(d)  Service stations shall also provide an area for vehicles of at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet adjacent to each air, water, vacuum and telephone facility. 
(e)  Vehicle repair bays in service stations shall not be counted as parking spaces. 
(f)  Fifty (50) per cent of fuel island vehicle parking area may be counted toward not more than one-half (½) of the number of any parking spaces required due to floor area used for retail purposes (auto repair excluded). 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 21, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1358. - Motorcycle repair. 
The minimum off-street parking requirement for motorcycle, ATV, motor scooter, moped, small engine and similar repair shops are as follows: one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2340, § 22, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1359. - Banquet facilities. 
Banquet facilities, as a freestanding use, shall be parked at the rate of one (1) parking stall per twenty-eight (28) s.f. of activity/assembly area. 
Whenever the parking requirement for a banquet facility as an ancillary use exceeds the parking requirement for the primary use, the banquet facility shall be parked at the rate of one (1) parking stall per twenty-eight (28) s.f. of activity/assembly area. Provided however, banquet facilities ancillary to a restaurant or eating establishment shall be parked at the restaurant rate of ten (10) parking stalls per one thousand (1,000) s.f. of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2340, § 23, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 24, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-1360. - Car rental agencies. 
The minimum off-street parking required for car rental agencies is one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) space for each rental vehicle stored on-site. 
(Ord. No. NS-2340, § 24, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1361. - Superstores. 
The minimum off-street parking required for superstores is one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2734, § 8, 2-5-07)  
Secs. 41-1362—41-1369. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL USES AND INDOOR SPORT FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 41-1370. - Golf driving ranges. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for golf driving ranges are as follows: one (1) space per driving tee. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 25, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1371. - Golf courses, bowling alleys and batting cages. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for golf courses, including miniature golf courses, bowling alleys and batting cages are as follows: three (3) spaces per hole, alley or cage. 
(b)  In addition, off-street parking for restaurants and other retail, service or recreational uses appurtenant to a golf course, bowling alley or batting cage shall be provided at a rate of seventy-five (75) per cent of the requirements of this article for such uses. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 26, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1372. - Theaters and auditoriums. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for movie theaters, stage theaters and auditoriums are as follows: one (1) space for each three (3) fixed seats, plus one (1) space for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of assembly area. 
(b)  Theaters and auditoriums shall also provide a passenger loading/unloading zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1373. - Stadiums, skating rinks, gymnasiums, sports arenas, convention facilities, etc. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for stadiums, skating rinks, gymnasiums, sports arenas, meeting and convention facilities, and similar places of public assembly are as follows: one (1) space for each four (4) fixed seats, plus one (1) space for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of assembly area. 
(b)  Stadiums, skating rinks, gymnasiums, sports arenas, meeting and convention facilities and similar places of public assembly shall also provide a passenger loading/unloading zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1374. - Bingo parlors, pool halls and game arcades. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for bingo parlors, pool halls and game arcades are as follows: one (1) space for each four (4) seats in a bingo parlor, plus one (1) space for each video game, plus two (2) spaces for each pool table or other gaming device. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1375. - Exercise gyms, spas, health clubs, etc. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for exercise gyms, spas, health clubs and similar facilities are as follows: one (1) space for each one hundred eighty (180) square feet of floor area devoted to physical activity other than racquetball or handball (exclusive of locker rooms, shower facilities, utility rooms and ancillary public areas). 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 15, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1375.5. - Martial arts, gymnastics, and dance studios. 
The minimum off-street parking requirement for martial arts, gymnastics, and dance studios where no food or beverage service is provided is as follows: one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2340, § 27, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1376. - Lodges, clubs and dance halls. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for lodges without sleeping quarters, clubs and dance halls are as follows: one (1) space for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of assembly area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1377. - Carnivals. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for carnivals are as follows: three (3) spaces for each booth or ride. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1378. - Circuses. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for circuses are as follows: one (1) space for each four (4) seats. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1379. - Dance clubs, cabarets, night clubs and bars. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for dance clubs, cabarets, night clubs and bars are as follows: one (1) space for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of assembly area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2100, § 2, 12-10-90)  
Sec. 41-1380. - Unspecified entertainment or recreation uses or indoor sport facilities. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirement for any entertainment or recreation use or indoor sport facility which cannot reasonably be considered within the scope of any other section within this division are as follows: two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, but in no case shall the parking be less than twenty (20) spaces. 
(b)  The planning director shall determine which entertainment or recreation uses or indoor sport facilities are reasonably within another section of this division or are subject to the parking requirements of this section. Such determination may be appealed to the planning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2776, § 8, 9-2-08)  
Secs. 41-1381—41-1389. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INDUSTRIAL USES 
 
Sec. 41-1390. - Manufacturing facilities. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for manufacturing uses are as follows: two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of production area. 
(b)  Office space exceeding thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area of a manufacturing facility must meet the off-street parking requirements for office use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 28, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1391. - Warehouses distribution, wholesale, data centers and commercial storage uses. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for warehouses distribution, wholesale, data centers and commercial storage uses are as follows: One (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Office space exceeding thirty (30) per cent of the gross floor area of the warehouse or wholesale use must meet the off-street parking requirements for office use. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "distribution" means a facility which dispenses, divides, and/or deals goods or materials on a regular basis, other than sales at retail. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2275, § 23, 12-18-95; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 29, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2494, § 11, 4-15-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2494, § 11, adopted April 15, 2002, changed the title of § 41-1391 from "Warehouses and distribution and wholesale uses" to "Warehouses distribution, wholesale, data centers and commercial storage uses." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 41-1392. - Bulk storage yards and wholesale lumberyards. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for bulk storage yards and wholesale lumberyards are as follows: one (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1393. - Salvage yards, wrecking yards and impound yards. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for salvage yards, wrecking yards and impound yards are as follows: four (4) spaces for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1394. - Mini-warehouses. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for mini-warehouses are as follows: 
(1)  For the first nine hundred (900) storage units: one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) units. 
(2)  For storage units in excess of nine hundred (900): one (1) space for each three hundred (300) units. 
(b)  The spaces required by subsection (a) of this section shall be located outside of any secured storage unit area. 
(c)  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for any on-site management unit on a mini-warehouse site. 
(d)  Vehicular aisles on mini-warehouse sites shall be at least thirty (30) feet wide. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1395. - Wholesale machinery and office equipment establishments. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for wholesale machinery and office equipment establishments are as follows: two (2) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1396. - Passenger transportation services. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for passenger transportation services are as follows: two (2) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area and one (1) parking space for every two (2) fleet vehicles stored and intended for operation in connection with said use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2340, § 30, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2470, § 8, 5-21-01)  
Sec. 41-1397. - Freight, bus and truck terminals. 
The minimum off-street parking requirement for freight, bus and truck terminals is as follows: two (2) parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of building area, and one (1) parking space for every two fleet vehicles stored and intended for operation in connection with said use. 
(Ord. No. NS-2470, § 9, 5-21-01)  
Secs. 41-1398, 41-1399. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - EDUCATIONAL USES 
 
Sec. 41-1400. - Elementary schools and junior high schools. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for elementary schools and junior high schools are as follows: one and one-half (1½) spaces for each classroom, plus one (1) space for each three hundred thirty-three (333) square feet of office floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 31, 12-15-97)  
Sec. 41-1401. - High schools. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for high schools are as follows: one (1) space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of classroom floor area, plus one (1) space for each three hundred thirty-three (333) square feet of office floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1402. - Colleges, trade schools, business schools and adult education facilities. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for colleges, trade schools, business schools and adult education facilities are as follows: one (1) space for each forty (40) square feet of classroom floor area, plus one (1) space for each three hundred thirty-three (333) square feet of office floor area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1403. - Museums, art galleries, amusement attractions and libraries. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for museums, art galleries, amusement attractions and libraries are as follows: one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area open to the public including assembly or conference facilities, and food facilities for the exclusive use of on-site patrons. Administrative office space is to be parked at one (1) space per three hundred thirty-three (333) feet of floor area. Restaurants open to the public are to be parked as provided for in this article. 
(b)  Museums and libraries shall also provide one (1) bus parking stall for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of public area and one (1) space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area open to the public thereafter. 
(c)  Museums, art galleries and libraries shall also provide a passenger loading/unloading zone. 
(d)  Theaters in conjunction with such facilities shall be parked per the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2299, § 2, 9-3-96; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 32, 12-15-97)  
Secs. 41-1404—41-1409. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MISCELLANEOUS USES 
 
Sec. 41-1410. - Mortuaries and funeral homes. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for mortuaries and funeral homes are as follows: one (1) space for each four (4) fixed seats, plus one (1) space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area in any seating area without fixed seats, plus one (1) space for each business vehicle. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1411. - Churches, chapels and religious meeting halls. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for churches, chapels and religious meeting halls are as follows: one (1) space for each three (3) fixed seats, plus one (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area in seating areas without fixed seats. 
(b)  For purpose of this section, "seating areas" shall include congregation seating, prayer and cry rooms, pastor and choir areas, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2923, § 16, 9-16-17 )  
Sec. 41-1412. - Child care facilities. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for child care facilities are as follows: one (1) space for each eight (8) individuals, plus one (1) space for each supervisor or teacher. 
(b)  Child care facilities providing care or instruction to ten (10) or more individuals at any one (1) time shall also provide a passenger loading/unloading zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. NS-2176, § 6, 9-21-92; Ord. No. NS-2340, § 33, 12-15-97; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 24, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-1412.5. - Adult day care facilities. 
(a)  Adult day care facilities shall be parked at the rate of one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of activity or assembly area, plus one (1) space for each supervisor or teacher. 
(b)  Whenever the parking requirement for an adult day care facility, as an ancillary use, exceeds the parking requirement for the primary use, the adult day care facility shall be parked at the rate of one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of activity or assembly area, plus one (1) space for each supervisor or teacher. 
(c)  Adult day care facilities providing care or instruction to ten (10) or more adults at any one (1) time shall also provide a passenger loading/unloading zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2446, § 25, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-1413. - Public utility substations and communication facilities. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for public utility substations and communication facilities are as follows: one (1) combination parking space and loading/unloading zone. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 41-1414. - Rectories, priories, convents and other residential accessory church uses. 
The minimum off-street parking requirements for rectories, priories, convents and other residential accessory church uses are as follows: one (1) garage space per bedroom, plus spaces for guest parking equal to twenty-five (25) per cent of the total required for nonguest parking. 
(Ord. No. NS-2176, § 7, 9-21-92)  
Secs. 41-1415—41-1419. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-1420. - Unspecified uses. 
(a)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for any use conducted in a building which cannot reasonably be considered as within the scope of any other section of this article setting minimum parking space requirements are as follows: five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  The minimum off-street parking requirements for any use conducted outside of a building which cannot reasonably be considered as within the scope of any other section of this article shall be determined by the planning director. Such determination may be appealed to the planning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. NS-2091, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Secs. 41-1421—41-1499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, adopted February 2, 2016 , amended art. XVI, §§ 41-1500—41—1504, in its entirety. Former art. XVI pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2801, § 14, adopted December 23, 2009. 
 
Sec. 41-1500. - Purpose. 
(a)  The state legislature has found that: 
(1)  The waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands. 
(2)  The continuation of California's economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses. 
(3)  It is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource. 
(4)  Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development. 
(5)  Landscape design, installation, maintenance, and management can and should be water efficient. 
(6)  Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served, and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use of water. 
( Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, 2-2-16 )  
Sec. 41-1501. - Applicability. 
(a)  Beginning March 2, 2016, and consistent with Executive Order No. (B-29-15) this article shall apply to the following landscape projects: 
(1)  New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or development review. 
(2)  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or development review. 
(3)  New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this ordinance or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in the Guidelines for Implementation of the City of Santa Ana Water Efficient Landscape ("Guidelines") Appendix A as amended from time to time. 
(4)  New or rehabilitated projects using recycled water or rain water captured on site, any lot or parcels within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with the recycled water or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of the Guidelines. 
(b)  This Article does not apply to: 
(1)  Registered local, state, or federal historical sites or other sites exempted by applicable federal or state law. 
(2)  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
(3)  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
(4)  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
( Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, 2-2-16 )  
Sec. 41-1502. - Implementation procedures. 
(a)  Prior to installation, a Landscape Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Article. Any Landscape Documentation Package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines . 
(b)  The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Article and the Guidelines . 
(1)  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. 
(2)  Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the City under procedures determined by the City. 
(3)  Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a Landscape Installation Certification of Completion in conjunction with a Certificate Occupancy , Permit Final or Notice of Completion process, as provided in the Guidelines . 
( Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, 2-2-16 )  
Sec. 41-1503. - Landscape water use standards. 
(a)  For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to section 41-1501(a) of this Code, the Estimated Applied Water Use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the City; as provided in the Guidelines . 
(b)  Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the city. 
( Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, 2-2-16 )  
Sec. 41-1504. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are applicable to this article: 
" Aggregate Landscape Areas " pertains to production home neighborhoods, common interest developments, or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project, but will eventually be individually owned or maintained . 
"City" means the City of Santa Ana, a charter city and municipal corporation, or its authorized designee. 
" Ecological restoration project " means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
" Estimated Applied Water Use " or " EAWU " means the annual total amount of water estimated to keep plants in a healthy state. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors , and the irrigation efficiency within each hydrozone . 
" Evapotranspiration adjustment factor " or " ETAF " means a factor of 0.7, that when applied to reference evapotranspiration , adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency , two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. For purposes of the ETAF, the average irrigation efficiency is 0.71, therefore, the ET adjustment factor is (0.7)=(0.5/0.71). ETAF for a Special Landscape Area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
" Guidelines " refers to the guidelines for Implementation of this Article, as adopted by the City, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Article. The Guidelines are consistent with the regional Orange County Model Ordinance and Guidelines. 
" Landscaped area " means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Applied Water Use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes , and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
" Landscape Documentation Package " means the package of documents that a project applicant is required to submit pursuant to section 2.1 of the Guidelines . 
" Landscape Installation Certificate of Completion " means the certificate included as exhibit E of the Guidelines that must be submitted to the City pursuant to section 2.7(C) thereof. 
" Landscape project " means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of " landscaped area ," meeting the requirements under Section 41-1501 of this Code. 
" Maximum Applied Water Allowance " or " MAWA " means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in section 2.2 of the Guidelines . It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration , the ETAF , and the size of the landscaped area. The Estimated Applied Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance . 
" Mined-land reclamation projects " means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
" New construction " means, for the purposes of this Article, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
" Permit " means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape . 
" Rehabilitated landscape " means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or development review and meets the applicability criteria of the Guidelines where the modified landscape area is greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
" Synthetic Turf " means an acceptable no mow ground cover made of synthetic, non-living material which meets the criteria standards set forth in the City's Design and Development Standards . 
" Turf " means a ground cover surface of mowed grass or synthetic turf which meets or exceeds the standards set forth in the Guidelines. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, Buffalo grass, Mexican Feather grass, Muhly grass, and Sedge grass are warm-season grasses. 
" Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance " means Ordinance No. NS-2891, adopted by the City Council on January 19, 2016 (first reading), and codified in the Municipal Code in Chapter 41 Sections 1500—1504. 
( Ord. No. NS-2891, § 2, 2-2-16 )  
Secs. 41-1505—41-1599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI.I - DENSITY BONUS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2485, adopted December 17, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as article XVI, §§ 41-1600—41-1607. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the direction of the city, said provisions have been redesignated as article XVI.I, §§ 41-1600—41-1607. 
 
Sec. 41-1600. - Purpose of density bonus for affordable housing. 
The purpose of this article is to implement the mandatory provisions of California Government Code sections 65915 through 65918, as it may be amended from time to time (the "state density bonus law"), and to provide increased residential densities to developers who guarantee that a portion of their residential development will be available to low income, very low-income, or senior (also known as "qualified") households. The state density bonus law requires cities to adopt code provisions to specify the method by which the city will consider requests from housing developers seeking a density bonus for affordable or senior housing. The regulations are intended to materially assist the housing industry in providing adequate and affordable shelter for all economic segments of the community and to provide a balance of housing opportunities for low income, very low-income, and senior households throughout the city. It is intended that the affordable housing density bonus and any additional development incentive be available for use in all residential developments. It is intended that this article be interpreted in a manner that accommodates the provisions of the state density bonus law, and that, unless otherwise indicated, definitions found in the state density bonus law shall apply to this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 41-1601. - When density bonus for affordable housing regulations applies. 
(a)  This article applies to any residential development of five or more dwelling units where an applicant proposes density beyond that permitted by the applicable designation of the general plan land use element in exchange for a portion of the total dwelling units in the development being reserved for low or very low-income households or for senior citizens or qualified residents through a written agreement. 
(b)  An applicant proposing development as provided in section 41-1601(a) shall be granted a density bonus as provided in sections 41-1602 and 41-1603 and may be granted an additional development incentive as provided in section 41-1604. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 41-1602. - Density bonus for affordable housing agreement. 
(a)  An applicant shall be granted a density bonus for any residential development for which an agreement is entered into by the applicant and the city as provided in this section. 
(b)  An applicant seeking the grant of a density bonus shall, prior to submitting to the city an application for the proposed development project, submit a detailed, written preliminary proposal to the city's housing manager. Pursuant to section 65915(e) of the state density bonus law, if the applicant proposes a waiver or modification of the city's development standards, the applicant shall include sufficient, detailed information in its proposal to meet its burden to show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
(1)  The city's housing manager shall within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the housing developer in writing of the procedures under which the city will comply with this article as provided for in section 65915(d) of the state density bonus law. 
(2)  If the proposed density bonus agreement includes deviation from any applicable city development standard, then a noticed public hearing shall be held as provided in section 41-1607. 
(c)  The density bonus agreement shall include the following provisions: 
(1)  At least twenty (20) per cent of the pre-bonus units in the development will be affordable, including an allowance for utilities, to low-income households at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) per cent of sixty (60) per cent of area median income, as adjusted for assumed household size; or 
(2)  At least ten (10) per cent of the pre-bonus units in the development will be affordable, including an allowance for utilities, to very low-income households at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) per cent of fifty (50) per cent of the area median income, as adjusted for assumed household size; or 
(3)  At least fifty (50) per cent of the total units will be available to senior citizens or qualifying residents as defined under California Civil Code section 51.3. 
(4)  The affordable units will remain available and affordable as provided in this section for a period of at least thirty (30) years if an additional development incentive is granted to the applicant as provided in section 41-1604 or ten (10) years if an additional development incentive is not granted. If an applicant does not request an additional development incentive, the applicant shall submit a pro forma analysis for the housing manager to document project feasibility. 
(5)  The affordable units shall be designated units which are comparable in bedroom mix and amenities to the market-rate units in the development and are dispersed throughout the development. 
(6)  Provisions shall be made in the density bonus agreement for certification of eligible tenants and purchasers, annual certification of property owner compliance, and payment of a monitoring fee, as set from time to time by resolution, for monitoring of affordable unit requirements. 
(d)  The developer shall, after reaching agreement with the housing manager on a proposed density bonus agreement, submit the same to the city council for its approval or rejection pursuant to section 421 of the city's charter. If the proposed density bonus agreement includes a proposal for a deviation pursuant to section 41-1606 of the Code, then the city council shall consider the matter only if, after compliance with section 41-1607, the planning commission, or city council on appeal, approves the deviation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Secs. 41-1603. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-1604. - Density bonus provisions. 
A residential development proposal requesting a density bonus for affordable housing is subject to the following: 
(a)  The development shall be permitted a density bonus of the amount of units requested by the applicant, up to a total project dwelling unit count of one hundred twenty-five (125) per cent of the units permitted by the density regulations of the applicable designation of the general plan land use element. 
(b)  If the development is located in two (2) or more land use designations, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development shall be the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the land use designation. Within the development, the permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed without regard to the zone or land use designation boundaries. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 41-1605. - Additional development incentive for affordable housing. 
In accordance with the provisions of section 65915 of the state density bonus law, the city may grant a development incentive in addition to the twenty-five (25) per cent density bonus. The additional development incentive may consist of any incentive recognized by the state density bonus law. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 41-1606. - Deviation to allow for additional development incentive. 
Section 69515(e) of the state density bonus law provides that the city shall establish procedures for waiving or modifying development and zoning standards that would otherwise inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on specific sites. Pursuant to this provision, an applicant may request a deviation from the applicable development regulations on a site specific basis, as an additional development incentive for affordable housing, provided that an approval is obtained pursuant to section 41-1607. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Sec. 41-1607. - Deviations from density bonus and affordable housing provisions. 
(a)  A deviation from the provisions of either section 41-1604 or section 41-1605, by waiver or modification of development or zoning standards as specified in section 65915(h) of the state density bonus law, may be requested at the time of application for development project plan approval pursuant to section 41-668 et seq. and after agreement between the developer and the housing manager of the terms of a proposed density bonus agreement, and shall be granted only if, following a noticed public hearing, the planning commission approves or conditionally approves the application upon making the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed development will materially assist in accomplishing the goal of providing affordable housing opportunities in economically balanced communities throughout the city. 
(2)  The development will not be inconsistent with the purpose of the underlying zone or applicable designation in the general plan land use element. 
(3)  The deviation is necessary to make it economically feasible for the applicant to utilize a density bonus authorized for the development pursuant to section 41-1603. 
(b)  The decision of the planning commission on an application for deviation from may be appealed to or placed before the city council pursuant to section 41-645 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2485, § 3, 12-17-01)  
Secs. 41-1608—1649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI.II. - ADAPTIVE REUSE 
 
Sec. 41-1650. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this adaptive reuse article is to provide alternative building and fire standards for the conversion of eligible buildings, or portions thereof, in project incentive areas from nonresidential uses to dwelling units, guest rooms or joint living and work quarters. The alternative building standards are designed to provide a reasonable level of safety to the building occupants and are in conformance with the provisions of Section 17958.11 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 3, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 41-1651. - Definitions. 
(a)  Adaptive reuse project - Any change of use from nonresidential use to dwelling units, guest rooms or joint living and work quarters in all or any portion of any eligible building. 
(b)  Eligible building - Any building within a project incentive area that was constructed in accordance with building and zoning codes in effect prior to July 1, 1974, or which has been determined to be a historically significant building. 
(c)  Historically significant building - Any building that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the California Register of Historical Resources, or the City of Santa Ana Register of Historical Properties, or is eligible for such listing based on the criteria of each respective listing process. 
(d)  Nonresidential use - Any use other than dwelling units, guest rooms or joint living and work quarters. 
(e)  Project Incentive Area - An area of the city eligible for an adaptive reuse project. These areas include properties located in the midtown specific plan zoning district (SP-3); the transit zoning code district (SD-84); the North Main Street Corridor on both sides of Main Street from Seventeenth Street to the northernmost Main Place Drive; and, the East First Street Corridor on both sides of First Street from Grand Avenue to Elk Lane. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 4, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 41-1652. - Applicability. 
The change of use of an existing, economically obsolete building into a new, more productive use such as apartments, condominiums or live/work units is permitted subject to compliance with the following standards: 
a)  Eligibility. Projects must meet the following criteria to be an eligible adaptive reuse project: 
1.  Project site shall be located in one of the project incentive areas, as defined in section 41-1651(e). 
2.  The building must be an eligible building, as defined in section 41-1651(b). 
b)  Development standards. Adaptive reuse projects shall, at a minimum, be in compliance with the following development standards: 
1.  The residential units shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet in size. 
2.  The ground floor of a multi-level building with three (3) stories or more containing street frontage shall be used as commercial/retail space. 
3.  Common area spaces for the building, such as lobbies and recreation rooms, when located on the ground floor, may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the ground floor square footage. 
4.  Open space shall be provided at a rate of ten (10) percent of the building square footage, and may be public or private and shall be disbursed throughout the building. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the open space shall be in the form of a community/recreation room(s). The remaining open space may consist of private balconies (fifty (50) square feet minimum), pool and spa areas, and public courtyards. Public courtyards shall include seating areas, enhanced landscaping, barbeque areas and other amenities as determined by the planning division. 
5.  Historically significant buildings shall comply with chapter 30 of this Santa Ana Municipal Code, façade easements and any other related historic guidelines, including the Secretary of the Interior Standards for any necessary exterior modifications. 
c)  Project incentives. Adaptive reuse projects that comply with the development standards are eligible for the following project incentives: 
1.  The project can exceed the maximum general plan density for the site provided the adaptive reuse project is in compliance with the development standards. 
2.  Existing building setbacks may remain and shall be considered legal nonconforming, but no further encroachments shall be permitted into any nonconforming setback. 
3.  The height of the structure, if it exceeds the maximum height of the zoning district, may remain and shall be considered legal nonconforming, and any rooftop construction shall be included within the height exemption. 
4.  A new loading zone shall not be required if the existing building does not have an existing loading zone. 
5.  New parking spaces shall not be required for any converted use within the building, but any new square footage that includes any new units shall require additional parking at a minimum rate of two (2) spaces per unit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 5, 12-2-14; Ord. No. NS-2881, § 3, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1653. - Zoning. 
Residential uses shall be allowed in the project incentive areas irrespective of the underlying zoning as part of an approved adaptive reuse project. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 6, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 41-1654. - Alternative building standards for adaptive reuse projects. 
(a)  The alternative building regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be applicable in project incentive areas. The alternative building regulations need not impose the same requirements as regulations adopted pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17922, but in permitting repairs, alterations, and additions necessary to accommodate adaptive reuse projects, the alternative building regulations shall impose such requirements as will, in the determination of the building official, protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Alternate material, design, or method of construction. The property owner must submit an application for an alternate material, design, or method of construction in accordance with chapter 8 of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Upon receipt of such application, the building official shall have the authority to review and grant approval when the proposed design is found satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of current building codes in effect, and that the material, method or work offered is justified by current accepted performance based engineering and analysis in assessing quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. 
(c)  The building official shall review adaptive reuse project proposals on a case-by-case basis, and may require pre-submittal meetings at his or her discretion. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the reduction of the seismic or fire and life safety elements of an eligible building where such elements provide a greater level of protection than the minimum requirements established by this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 7, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 41-1655. - Alternative fire standards for adaptive reuse projects. 
(a)  Subject to the approval of OCFA, the use or occupancy of an eligible building shall be allowed to be changed as part of an adaptive reuse project, and the eligible building is allowed to be occupied for purposes in other groups without conforming to all of the requirements of the California Fire Code (and the California Building Code when applicable) for those groups, provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than the existing use. The provisions of the California Fire Code (and the California Building Code when applicable) are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by the California Fire Code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. 
(b)  Alternative materials and methods (AM&M). The property owner must submit an AM&M application for any Adaptive Reuse Project to the Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA). OCFA is authorized to approve an AM&M for construction where OCFA finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the California Fire Code , and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent of that prescribed in the California Fire Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(c)  Fire life safety (FLS) report. A feasibility study or FLS report is required to be provided by the property owner to assist OCFA to identify the status of subject adaptive reuse project. The FLS report is intended to identify the eligible building's existing features and evaluate it against the current code requirements. OCFA will review the FLS report and evaluate the proposal for final recommendations. 
(d)  OCFA shall review adaptive reuse project proposals on a case-by-case basis, and may require pre-submittal meetings at its discretion. 
(e)  Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the California Fire Code, OCFA shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided OCFA shall first find that special individual reasons make the strict letter of the California Fire Code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the California Fire Code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 8, 12-2-14)  
Sec. 41-1656. - Alternate public works agency standards for adaptive reuse projects. 
(a)  The public works agency may adopt alternate standards for projects within project incentive areas. The public works agency need not impose the same requirements as regulations permitting repairs, alterations, and additions necessary to accommodate adaptive reuse projects, but shall impose such requirements as will, in the determination of the executive director, protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  The executive director shall review adaptive reuse project proposals on a case-by-case basis, and may require pre-submittal meetings at his or her discretion. 
(Ord. No. NS-2874, § 9, 12-2-14)  
Secs. 41-1657—1699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 41-1700. - Specific purposes. 
In addition to the general purposes listed in section 41-1, the specific purposes of this article are to: 
(a)  Establish a procedure which places strict limits on processing time and eliminates any possibility for the exercise of unfettered discretion in reviewing applications for establishing adult entertainment businesses. 
(b)  Ensure orderly and thorough city review of applications for certain adult entertainment businesses including but not limited to adult business uses. 
(c)  Establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce possible adverse secondary effects that adult entertainment businesses may have upon the residents of the city and preserve the integrity of existing commercial areas of the city and of residential areas which are in close proximity to such commercial areas. 
(d)  To protect the rights conferred by the United States Constitution to adult entertainment businesses in a manner that ensures the continued and orderly development of property within the city and diminishes those undesirable negative secondary effects that recognized studies have shown to be associated with the development and operation of adult entertainment businesses. 
(e)  To allow a process whereby the unusual site development features or operating characteristics of uses which must comply with this article may be conditioned through an individual review, in order to be compatible with the surrounding uses of property, while preserving the applicant's rights to objective standards and prompt administrative and judicial review. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373, § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in sections 41-1701.1—41-1701.11, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases. The words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.1. - Day care. 
The term "day care" as used in this article shall mean only those day care facilities that are licensed by the State of California. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.2. - Establishment of an adult entertainment business. 
As used herein, to "establish" an adult entertainment business shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any adult entertainment business defined herein; 
(3)  The addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any such adult entertainment business. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41.1701.3. - Residential zone. 
As used herein, "residential zone" shall mean those areas of the city, or surrounding jurisdictions, which are designated as residential pursuant to the land use element of the jurisdiction's general plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41.1701.4. - Specified anatomical areas. 
As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(3)  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (1) or (2) above. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.5. - Specified sexual activities. 
As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.6. - Adult entertainment businesses. 
As used in this article, the term "adult entertainment businesses" means any one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade. The term "adult arcade" as used in this chapter, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions [that] regularly feature, but in no event more than twenty (20) per cent of the number of which, are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. The term "adult bookstore" as used in this chapter, is an establishment that regularly features, but in no event has more than twenty (20) per cent of its stock in trade in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret. The term "adult cabaret" as used in this chapter, means a cabaret, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features live performances by persons who appear semi-nude. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel. The term "adult hotel/motel" as used in this chapter, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that regularly feature, but in no event more than twenty (20) per cent of the number of which, are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour period. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater. The term "adult motion picture theater" as used in this chapter, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and regularly feature, but in no event more than twenty (20) per cent of the number of which, are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult theater. The term "adult theater" as used in this chapter, means a legitimate theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar establishment primarily devoted to theatrical performances which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(7)  Modeling studio. The term "modeling studio" as used in this chapter, means a business which meets the definition of a figure modeling studio pursuant to article IV of chapter 12 of this Code or which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display "specified anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. "Modeling studio" does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. "Modeling studio" further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available "specified sexual activities." 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.7. - Religious institution. 
The term "religious institution" as used in this article, is a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.8. - Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. 
As used in this article, the term "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films which are "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal.App.3d 151 (1981). 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.9. - Regularly features. 
The term "regularly features" with respect to an adult entertainment business means a regular and substantial course of conduct. For purposes of an adult theater or adult cabaret the fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty-day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty-day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one- hundred-eighty-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.10. - School. 
The term "school" as used in this article shall mean any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1701.11. - Semi-nude. 
The term "semi-nude" as used in this article shall mean a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1702. - Permitted zones and locations for adult entertainment businesses. 
(a)  No adult entertainment business may be located within the city, except in one (1) of the following zoning districts: C2, C3, C4, CR, M1 and M2. 
(b)  No adult entertainment business may be located within the city unless it meets the following distance criteria: 
(1)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) [feet from] any other existing adult entertainment business. 
(2)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing public premises as defined in the Business and Professions Code selling liquor or beer for consumption on the premises as its primary business. 
(3)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing public dance halls as defined in section 11-1. 
(4)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing massage establishment as defined in section 22-1. 
(5)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing peep show establishment as defined in section 12-22. 
(6)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing residential zone, park, day care, child care facility, religious institution or school. 
(7)  The proposed adult entertainment business is more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the right-of-way line of any freeway or street designated as an arterial in the current circulation element of the general plan. This distance shall be measured along a straight line from the right of way line, as shown on the city's official map, to the parcel line of the proposed adult entertainment business, without regard to intervening structures. 
(8)  The distances set forth in subsections (1) through (6), above, shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the proposed adult entertainment business to the property lines of the parcel so zoned or used, without regard to intervening structures. 
(9)  Any waiver of the provisions of this subsection shall be pursuant to the provisions of division 1 of article V of this chapter; provided, however, that any such application shall be reviewed and determined as provided in section 41-1705 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98; Ord. No. NS-2446, § 26, 9-18-00)  
Sec. 41-1703. - Adult entertainment business land use permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No adult entertainment business may be operated or established within the city by right; all persons wishing to operate or establish an adult entertainment business within the city must apply for and obtain a ministerial adult entertainment business land use permit under this article. The city's development project plan approval process, set forth at section 41-668 et seq. of this Code, shall not apply to applications solely for the issuance of an adult entertainment business land use permit under this article. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring to operate or establish an adult entertainment business within the city shall file with the planning and building agency an adult entertainment business land use permit application on a standard application form supplied by the planning and building agency. 
(c)  Existing adult entertainment businesses. The city council declares that all adult entertainment businesses legally established as of the effective date of Ordinance No. NS-2373 shall not be deemed to be nonconforming to chapter 41, as amended, for failure to seek and obtain an adult entertainment business land use permit for a period of one (1) year. The city council further declares that all legally established adult entertainment businesses, as that term is defined in this article, shall be deemed to be conforming for the use or uses specified in any conditional use permit or live entertainment permit issued to the use. For the purposes of this article the adult entertainment businesses located at the following addresses shall be deemed to be legally established: 213 North Harbor Boulevard, 225 North Harbor Boulevard, 1109 North Harbor Boulevard, 2721 West Edinger Avenue, and 2701 East Edinger Avenue. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1704. - Permit—Contents of application. 
(a)  Initiation. The permit process shall be initiated by the filing of a complete application with the executive director. The executive director shall determine the completeness of the application within thirty (30) calendar days of its submittal. 
(b)  Contents. The city council, by resolution, shall set forth the contents required for such applications for an adult entertainment business land use permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1705. - Same—Decision to grant or deny. 
(a)  Action on application. The planning manager or designee shall act as the decision-maker on the application and shall ministerially grant or deny an application for an adult entertainment business land use permit. 
(b)  Investigation. Upon the filing of a completed application, the decision-maker shall cause to be made an appropriate investigation, including consultation with other city agencies and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation is not grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. 
(c)  Notice and hearing. 
(1)  An application for an adult entertainment business land use permit shall be mailed and noticed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing as follows: 
i.  By mail, to the property owner and the project applicant, if different; 
ii.  By mail to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the site boundaries, as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll; and 
iii.  By posting along public streets within three hundred (300) feet of the site boundaries. 
(2)  The decision-maker shall conduct the public hearing as prescribed in section 3-4 of this Code. In reaching a decision on an application, the decision-maker shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. 
(d)  Time for hearing. After the investigation has been completed the decision-maker shall conduct a noticed public hearing, as prescribed by this section, on the application for an adult entertainment business land use permit. 
(e)  Action on application. The decision-maker shall render a decision on the application for an adult entertainment business land use permit within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application. The decision shall be made no later than the same day as the final hearing on the application, and if not in writing, a written decision shall be prepared within three (3) business days of the decision. As provided in subsection 1-19(d) of this Code, the written decision shall state that the time within which judicial review of the decision must be sought is governed by Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. The failure of the decision-maker to render such a decision within this time frame shall be deemed to constitute a denial. 
(f)  Final decision. The decision-maker's written decision shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant, and shall be final. 
(g)  Court proceedings. All challenges to the decision-maker's action shall be governed by the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5, except that the city shall prepare and certify the administrative record of proceedings, should it be requested by the petitioner, within thirty (30) days of the request. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1706. - Same—Approval criteria. 
(a)  Findings. The decision-maker shall ministerially approve an application for an adult entertainment business land use permit subject to its compliance with this article, where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed use complies with the applicable development and design requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is to be located and with the applicable standards of this article. 
(2)  The proposed use will provide and maintain wastewater to establish and maintain an unrestricted flow in sanitary sewers during average and peak conditions as established by the city's approved sewer master plan, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  The proposed use will provide and maintain solid waste services to establish and maintain a level of service consistent with the city's approved source reduction and recycling element. 
(4)  The proposed use is located in a zoning district in which an adult entertainment business is permitted pursuant to subsection 41-1702(a). 
(5)  The adult entertainment business meets the distance criteria of subsection 41-1702(b), which shall be measured as of the date of the completed application. 
(6)  The proposed use does not involve an applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners of an applicant, if a corporation or partnership, that have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four (4) years to a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense. 
(7)  The applicant has not submitted false or misleading information on the application. 
(8)  The applicant has not had an application for an adult entertainment business land use permit denied or revoked in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of the current application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1707. - Same—Period of validity. 
Any adult entertainment business land use permit approved pursuant to this article shall become null and void unless the proposed use is established within one (1) year of the date from the approval. The permit holder may apply for a single one-year extension of the permit, provided that such application is filed prior to the expiration of the permit. Any application for an extension shall be reviewed by the same procedure as the original permit application. For purposes of this section, a proposed use shall be deemed to be established if a building permit for the project has been issued and construction diligently pursued; or, a certificate of occupancy has been issued; or, a complete application for an extension has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1708. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  Findings. Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city on the basis of any of the following: 
(1)  The business or use has been conducted in a manner which violates the provisions of this article, the permit itself, fails to conform to the plans, specifications or procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the fire marshal. 
(2)  The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county, and state licenses and permits. 
(3)  The permit is being used to conduct an use different from that for which it was issued. 
(4)  The permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully. 
(5)  Due to changes in on-site conditions, the adult entertainment business lacks sufficient on-site parking area for employees and the public under the standards set forth in the city's parking ordinance, except for an existing use that is legal and nonconforming with respect to parking. 
(6)  The permitted business creates sound levels which violate the noise control ordinance of the city. 
(7)  That the use for which the approval was granted has been discontinued, ceased to exist or has been suspended for a continuous period of six (6) months or more. 
(b)  Notice of hearing. The grantor of the permit shall notice and conduct a public hearing, as prescribed in this Code, on the proposed permit revocation. 
(c)  Hearing. The planning manager or designee shall conduct the revocation hearing and hear testimony regarding the proposed revocation from any interested party. The hearing body shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  Notice. Written notice of hearing on the proposed permit revocation, together with written notification of the specific grounds of complaint against the permittee, shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the permittee at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(e)  Decision. The grantor shall revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add conditions to, the permittee's adult entertainment business land use permit. 
(f)  Decision and notice. Within ten (10) working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the decision-maker shall render a decision supported by written findings. A copy of the decision and written findings shall be mailed to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was revoked and to any other person who has filed a written request for such notice. 
(g)  Time for decision. The decision-maker shall make its decision within thirty (30) days of the public hearing. 
(h)  Appeal of decision or call for review. If the decision on revocation is made by the planning manager or designee, any interested person may appeal the decision to the planning commission, or the decision may be reviewed by the city council pursuant to a call for review by the council, pursuant to subsection 41-645(c). 
(i)  Effective date. The effective date of a decision to revoke an adult entertainment business land use permit shall be as provided in section 41-645. 
(j)  Renewal. In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this article, another adult entertainment business land use permit shall not be granted to the permittee or on the site of the permit within twelve (12) months after the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1709. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  No person may operate an adult entertainment business without a grant of authority. Every applicant who is granted an adult entertainment business land use permit shall at the same time automatically be issued by the chief of police a grant of authority to operate the adult entertainment business. 
(b)  The grant of authority shall be renewed yearly by the operator, who shall apply for renewal no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the grant. 
(c)  Should any holder of a grant of authority desire to transfer or assign the grant, the proposed new holder shall file a request to transfer the grant of authority no later than thirty (30) days prior to the date the new business operator intends to initiate operations. 
(d)  The chief of police or designee shall renew or transfer a grant of authority no later than fifteen (15) calendar days following the request for renewal or issuance of a transfer providing only that the business operator if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners of the business owner, if a corporation or partnership, has not been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four (4) years to a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense. 
(e)  The chief of police shall make available applications to renew or transfer a grant of authority. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1710. - Grant of authority—Non-transferable. 
(a)  An adult entertainment business land use permit approved pursuant to this article shall be deemed to run with the land. 
(b)  Should a grant of authority be sold, transferred or assigned by the holder or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation or any other party, and any such sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such grant, and such grant shall be thereafter null and void. A grant of authority permit held by an individual in a corporation or partnership is subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. 
(c)  Any change in the nature or composition of the adult entertainment business from one adult entertainment business to another type of adult entertainment business shall also render the grant and the permit null and void. A grant of authority and an adult entertainment business land use permit shall be valid only for the exact location specified in the permit. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1711. - Development and operating standards. 
The following development and operating standards shall be applied to the operation of any adult entertainment business: 
(a)  Hours of operation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any operator or employee of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. of any day. 
(2)  The hours of operation of any adult business which has a license from the state alcohol beverage control board shall be governed by the provisions of its alcohol beverage control permit and not by this section. 
(b)  Exterior lighting requirements. All exterior areas of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of five (5.00) footcandles, minimally maintained as defined in this Code, and evenly distributed at ground level, with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or defuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or affected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. 
(c)  Interior lighting requirements. All interior areas of an adult entertainment business which are accessible by the public shall be illuminated at a minimum of ten (10.00) footcandles, minimally maintained as defined in this Code and evenly distributed at floor areas. 
(d)  Access provision. The operator shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Minors' access. 
(1)  X-rated movies. X-rated movies or video tapes shall be restricted to persons over eighteen (18) years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under eighteen (18) years of age sells, rents, or displays videos that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the motion picture rating industry ("MPAA"), or that have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", such videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall be prohibited, and shall not be visible from outside of the premises. 
(2)  Other adult materials. Access to adult materials shall be restricted to persons over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  Minor on premises unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult entertainment business to allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises or within the confines of any adult entertainment business, either as a patron or employee, if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if liquor is served. 
(f)  On-site manager; security measures. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, or at least twenty-one (21) years of age if the business has a license from ABC, and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. The individual or individuals designated as the on-site manager shall be registered by the owner with the chief of police or designee to receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises. 
The adult entertainment business shall provide state licensed security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all business hours. A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the exterior of the premises between four (4) to six (6) feet from the ground and shall be in addition to the allowable wall sign area pursuant to article XI of this chapter. The sign shall not exceed two (2) feet by three (3) feet and shall at a minimum be one (1) foot by one and one-half (1½) feet and shall be placed in a conspicuous location designated by the chief of police or designee. 
At all times that the business is in operation and thereafter until all patrons, employees and independent contractors have left the premises, at least one (1) security guard shall be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is open. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this article. Any security guard required by this subsection shall be uniformed in such a manner as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. Except as provided by this section, provision of security guards shall be in accordance with chapter 24 of this Code. As specified in section 24-2, every security guard employed shall first be approved by the chief of police or designee, which approval shall be granted no later than thirty (30) days from the date of submission. 
No security guard required by this section shall act in any other capacity, including but not limited to doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person, while acting as a security guard. 
(g)  Sign requirements. All adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in addition to those of article XI of this chapter. Should a conflict exist between the requirements of article XI and this subsection, the more restrictive shall prevail. 
(1)  All exterior signs shall be flat (i.e., not angled to the front wall of the building) wall signs. 
(2)  No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building or any area accessible to public pedestrians. 
(3)  Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. No sign shall be placed in any window. A one-square-foot sign may be placed on the door to state hours of operation and admittance requirements. 
(h)  Operating requirements for live entertainment. The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult entertainment businesses providing live entertainment. No person, association, partnership, or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of an adult entertainment business that involves live entertainment unless each and all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of such use shall allow any person below the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises or within the confines of any adult entertainment business if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one (21) if liquor is served and the facility is not an eating establishment. 
(2)  No person shall dance with or otherwise perform within six (6) feet of a patron while performing for compensation or while on licensed premises. This six-foot separation shall be marked by a railing of at least thirty (30) inches in height or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the entertainer and the patron(s). 
(3)  No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of such use shall allow any performer to dance or otherwise perform within six (6) feet of a patron while performing for compensation or while on licensed premises. This six-foot separation shall be marked by a railing of at least thirty (30) inches in height or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the entertainer and the patron(s). 
(4)  No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall permit or allow at licensed premises any patron to approach within six (6) feet of a nude or semi-nude entertainer or entertainer displaying specified anatomical areas, or permit or allow such an entertainer to approach within six (6) feet of a patron. 
(5)  All employees of an adult entertainment business, other than nude or semi-nude entertainers while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  If patrons wish to tip performers, receptacles shall be at least six (6) feet from the stage or other area used by the performers. Patrons shall not provide tips directly to the performers or place tips in the performers' costumes. 
(7)  When patrons are at the establishment, no patron shall be allowed to directly touch, fondle or caress a performer, as those terms are defined in Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986), nor shall any performer be allowed to directly touch, fondle or caress a patron. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier described in subsection (3), above. 
(8)  The adult entertainment business shall provide dressing rooms for performers which are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers' use and which the performers shall use for changing at all times. Performers may share a dressing room. No owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee shall permit or allow at licensed premises any patron to be present in such dressing rooms. 
(9)  The adult entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use at all times. 
(10)  The adult entertainment business shall provide access for performers between the stage and dressing room which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult entertainment business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other physical barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable or (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between the patrons and performers. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult entertainment business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility. 
(11)  The adult entertainment business shall have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the establishment which lists the titles and prices of all offered entertainment. 
(i)  Adult dancing establishment. An adult dancing establishment or adult cabaret shall have a stage provided for the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by an employee to a person other than another employee consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least one hundred (100) square feet, separated by a distance of at least six (6) feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a three-foot high barrier. No patron shall be permitted within six (6) feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. 
(j)  Theaters and cinemas. A theater or cinema shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  If the theater or cinema contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area; 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entranceway to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area. 
(2)  If an adult theater or adult cinema contains adult booths, each adult booth shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entranceway which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
b.  Have a permanently open entranceway not less than two (2) feet wide and not less than six (6) feet high, not capable of being closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring any person situated in the booth; 
c.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
d.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and 
e.  Have, except for the entranceway, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions. 
(3)  If an adult theater or adult cinema is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, property zoned for residential use, religious assembly, school, public or private, or park or recreation area. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1712. - Applicability to other regulations. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated expressive business uses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning code, other city ordinances and state and federal law. Should a conflict exist between the provisions of this article and the provisions of other articles of chapter 41 of this Code, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 41-1713. - Violations. 
In addition to any other remedies provided by law or set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief, failure to comply with any requirement of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. NS-2373 § 8, 12-7-98)  
Secs. 41-1714—41-1749. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII.I - MASSAGE[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, adopted July 5, 2016 , repealed art. XVII.I, §§ 41-1750—41-1760, in its entirety; and enacted a new art. XVII.I, to read as set out herein. Former art. XVII.I pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2779, § 20, adopted March 16, 2009. 
 
Sec. 41-1750. - Specific purposes. 
(a)  In addition to the general purposes listed in section 41-1, the specific purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Establish a procedure which places strict limits on processing time and creates an orderly process for reviewing applications to conduct massages, in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  Ensure orderly and thorough city review of applications for conducting massages, including, but not limited to, massage establishment(s). 
(3)  Establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce possible adverse secondary effects that businesses conducting massages may have upon the residents of the city and preserve the integrity of existing commercial areas of the city and of residential areas which are in close proximity to such commercial areas. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to a retail or service use that is currently licensed by the State of California Board of Barbering and Cosmetology or an exempt individual as defined in section 22-5 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 41-1751. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter: 
(a)  "California Massage Therapy Council" or "CMTC" means the state-organized, non-profit organization created to regulate the massage industry as set forth in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 4600, as amended). 
(b)  "Employee" includes every owner, partner, operator, manager, supervisor and worker, whether part-time, full-time, or temporary, whether paid or not, who renders services of any nature or is otherwise employed in the operation of a massage establishment. For purposes of this chapter, the term employee shall also include massage technicians who provide massage services as independent contractors to a massage establishment. 
(c)  "Manager" means the owner or operator of the massage establishment, or any person(s) designated by the owner or operator to act as the representative and agent of the owner or operator in managing daily operations. Evidence of management may include, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules, or purchase supplies. 
(d)  "Massage" means any scientific manipulation of soft tissue, or method of applying pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
(e)  "Massage certificate" means a certificate issued by the CMTC pursuant to Section 4604 of the Business and Professions Code (Chapter 10.5 commencing with section 4600, as amended). 
(f)  "Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massage or baths as regular functions. 
(g)  "Massage technician" means any massage practitioner, masseuse, massage therapist or any person who administers or in any way assists in administering any form of massage, bath, or health treatment involving massages or baths as the principal functions to another person for any consideration whatsoever. A massage technician may be an employee or independent contractor. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 41-1752. - Permitted zones and locations. 
No massage establishment may be located within the city unless it meets the following zoning and location criteria: 
(1)  Massage establishments may be permitted on parcels in the C1, C1-MD, C2, C4, C5, or CSM zoning districts. 
(2)  Massage establishments may be permitted on a parcel within any Specific Plan or Specific Development zoning district in which retail service uses are defined and permitted. 
(3)  No massage establishment is permitted in any other zoning district. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 41-1753. - Permits and certificates-contents of application. 
No massage establishment may be operated or established in the city without first obtaining the following: 
(1)  Approved certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  A city issued business license. 
(3)  Approved massage establishment permit issued by the chief of police, as set forth in section 22-2 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 41-1754. - Development and operating standards. 
(a)  The following development and operating standards shall be applied to the operation of any massage establishment: 
(1)  The owner must advise the city, in writing, at the time of the application for a permit of the business hours and, thereafter, of any changes in such hours. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m., must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be advised of these hours. 
(2)  All exterior signs identifying the premises as a massage establishment shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
(3)  Each operator and/or on-duty responsible employee shall display the massage establishment permit in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. 
(4)  The hours of operation must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the outside. 
(5)  The operator and/or on-duty responsible employee must also post, on a daily basis in a conspicuous public place in the lobby, the name of the operator and/or on-duty responsible employee as well as all on-duty massage technicians. 
(6)  "No loitering" signs shall be posted at the front and rear of the business. No outside waiting or seating area is permitted in accordance with section 602 of the Penal Code. 
(7)  Employees shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. There shall be a minimum of one (1) employee managing the massage establishment during all working hours. During each employee's working hours, the employee shall wear a city issued badge identifying the business and the employee's full name. 
(8)  Occupancy shall not exceed that required under the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code, and the maximum occupancy load shall be posted at the main entrance. 
(9)  Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. All windows and entrances must be unobstructed at all times. 
(10)  Lighting levels on the premises within sixty (60) feet of the use and in all required parking areas shall be maintained at a minimum one (1) foot-candle of light. 
(11)  No exterior pay phones shall be permitted. 
(12)  Rear exits are prohibited unless required by either the building code or the fire code. When required, rear exit doors shall be kept in a locked closed position and shall have panic hardware. 
(13)  No person shall be employed or permitted to act as a massage technician who is not in possession of a valid, un-revoked massage certificate and a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city as required in chapter 22 of this Code. 
(14)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any massage upon a member of the general public while on the premises of a school of massage. 
(15)  Residing in a massage establishment is prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to live, reside or dwell inside the massage establishment at any time. No food of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in the establishment. 
(16)  No interior doors may be locked during operating hours. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 41-1755. - Applicability to other regulations. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated expressive business uses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning code, other city ordinances and state and federal law. Should a conflict exist between the provisions of this article and the provisions of other articles of chapter 41 of this Code, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. NS-2903, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
Secs. 41-1756—41-1799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - CONVERSION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 41-1800. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted, pursuant to the city's authority as a charter city and section 66427(d) of the Government Code, to establish requirements and procedures for the evaluation of commercial and industrial condominium conversion projects. Such regulation is necessary to provide for the adequate maintenance of common areas, facilities and amenities, such as buildings, ingress and egress, subjacent support, utilities and the like, in commercial and industrial common area interest development projects in order to support the continuing viability of such common interest projects, avoid conditions of neglect to protect the public from the potential blighting effects of deteriorated or undercapitalized commercial and industrial conversion projects and provide adequate off-street parking. Additionally, such regulation is necessary to the support of a healthy local economy by preserving opportunities for large-scale commercial and industrial uses to avoid the conversion, fragmentation and diminution of large commercial and industrial buildings and lands within the city. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1801. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter: 
A.  "Common interest development" has the meaning given to that term in Civil Code Section 1351(c). 
B.  "Common area" means the entire area within the common interest development except the separate interests therein, and also includes any mutual or reciprocal easement rights appurtenant to the separate interests. 
C.  "Conversion project" means a subdivision which consists of conversion of existing buildings into a common interest development. 
D.  "Unit" means a legal parcel including a common area parcel. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1802. - Special use permit. 
In addition to complying with the requirements of Chapter 34 of this Code, no conversion project for a commercial or industrial common interest development may be issued a tentative map unless it obtains a special use permit in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1803. - General standards for preexisting buildings. 
Buildings which are the subject of a proposed conversion project that are prior to application in violation of Chapter 8 of this Code must be brought into compliance before issuance of a special use permit unless a different time frame is specified in the conditions of approval of said permit Issuance of a positive report pursuant to section 41 1804 b7of this Code shall be deemed to constitute compliance with this section 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1804. - Conversion plan. 
An application for a conversion project for a commercial or industrial common interest development shall be accompanied by a conversion plan which sets forth a comprehensive representation and scheduling of the conversion process including but not limited to the following components: 
(a)  An improvement plan shall be submitted to the city providing for upgrading the complex to the standards then in effect for construction of new buildings with regard to the following matters: 
(1)  Provision of off-street parking spaces (both number of spaces and compliance with other parking standards); 
(2)  Sound transmission; 
(3)  Energy efficiency; 
(4)  Open space; 
(5)  Setbacks; 
(6)  Adopted design guidelines; and 
(7)  Landscaping. 
If the applicant contends that compliance with one or more of such standards is financially or practically infeasible, it shall bear the burden of proof of such claim to the city; and the city shall adopt written findings following a noticed public hearing relating to any such claim as part of its consideration of the application for special use permit. The improvement plan shall also demonstrate that all existing onsite facilities which are to be retained to be brought into reasonably sound and attractive condition. 
(b)  At a minimum, the improvement plan shall include: 
(1)  A site plan showing all existing and proposed structures, including walls and fences, landscaping, irrigation systems and driveways and parking areas. 
(2)  A statement of the current and proposed ownership of the subject property and its current and proposed use. 
(3)  A description of the property, including acreage, number of existing tenant spaces and the proposed units, showing the size of each proposed unit. Each unit shall be physically separated from each other unit by walls, floors, ceilings and the like. 
(4)  A statement of the current and proposed management program, including structural maintenance, landscape maintenance, and parking allocation for each unit. 
(5)  A statement of proposed assessments and fees to be charged to owners of units after conversion. 
(6)  Notice of submission of application for public report which includes the improvement plan and capital reserves. 
(7)  The results of a preliminary inspection requested by the applicant and performed by city's building official or authorized representative, identifying whether the building in its current condition (i.e., presuming no special use permit is sought) is in compliance with Chapter 8 of this Code. Applicant shall be responsible for paying the then current fee assessed by the city for such inspection. 
(8)  Compliance of the water delivery system capable of meeting the city's fire flaw requirements as applicable to new construction and related fire department access per currently adopted fire code. 
(9)  Compliance with the building security regulations set forth in chapter 8, article II, division 3 of this Code as applicable to new buildings. 
(10)  Compliance with section 18-151 et seq. of this Code relating to the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System NPDES and compliance with chapter 8 of this Code as it relates to the Americans with Disabilities Act ADA. 
(11)  A statement that all exterior appurtenances, such as ladders, down spouts, conduits and piping will be removed. 
(12)  Compliance with article XI of chapter 41 of this Code (signs). 
(13)  A current structural pest control inspection report issued by a licensed structural pest control operator, showing the subject premises to be free of evidence of termite, dry-rot, fungi and/or damage therefrom. Such a report shall be deemed current for a period of not more than ninety (90) days following the date of inspection. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1805. - Utility requirements for the approval of special use permit. 
No special use permit shall be approved unless the project complies with the following requirements: 
(a)  Electric power, gas and water services must be separately metered for each unit, unless such separate metering is found to be practically or financially infeasible as set forth in section 41-1804(a). 
(b)  Signal transmitting and receiving equipment, including cables, for individual units shall be screened. 
(c)  Common area utilities must be metered separately from unit utilities. Meters providing such separation may be either municipally owned or, subject to the written approval of the director of public works as to type, owned by the associated owners in common. 
(d)  Compliance with sections 34-82 et seq. and 41-626 of the Code, applying to installation of underground utility service lines, as though it were new construction. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1806. - Processing special use permits. 
An application for a special use permit pursuant to this article shall be considered by the city's planning commission and city council in concurrence with the applicant's tentative map application. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1807. - Findings. 
In addition to the findings required by Chapter 34 of this Code and other provisions of this article, no special use permit may issue for a commercial or industrial common interest development unless and until all of the following additional findings are first made: 
(a)  The proposed common interest development will not adversely impact the economic viability of large-scale commercial and industrial uses in the vicinity of the development, or in the city as a whole; 
(b)  The proposed common interest development includes sufficient provisions for governance, funding and capitalization, and enforcement mechanisms to insure that the common area continues to be adequately and safely maintained and repaired for the life of the common interest development; 
(c)  The proposed common interest development includes sufficient provisions for the retention of such common areas for the use of all owners of separate interests therein; and 
(d)  The proposed common interest development complies with the goals policies and objectives of the city's general plan. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1808. - Completion of improvements. 
All improvements required pursuant to the conditions of an approved special use permit shall be completed prior to issuance of a final map for the project. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 41-1809. - Expiration of special use permit. 
A special use permit shall expire after two (2) years unless a final map for the project is recorded in that time. The executive director of the planning and building agency may in writing extend the permit for not more than one (1) year upon written request by the permit holder made prior to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. NS-2755, § 4, 8-6-07)  
Secs. 41-1810—41-1899. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII.I. - HOUSING OPPORTUNITY ORDINANCE[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, adopted September 1, 2015 , repealed and replaced art. XVIII.I, §§ 41-1900—41-1910, in its entirety. Former art. XVIII.I pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. NS-2825, §§ 2—12, adopted November 28, 2011. 
 
Sec. 41-1900. - Purpose. 
This article establishes standards and procedures to encourage the development of housing that is affordable to a range of households with varying income levels. The purpose of this article is to encourage the development and availability of affordable housing by requiring the inclusion of affordable housing units within new developments or the conversion of rental units to condominium ownership when the number of units exceed the densities permitted under the general plan. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1901. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Adjusted for household size appropriate for the unit means a household of one person in the case of a studio unit, two (2) persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three (3) persons in the case of a two-bedroom unit, four (4) persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five (5) persons in the case of a four-bedroom unit. 
Administrative procedures means those regulations promulgated by the executive director pursuant to section 41-1910 of this article. 
Affordable housing cost means the total housing costs paid by a qualifying household, which shall not exceed the fraction of gross income specified, as follows, in accordance with Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the Health & Safety Code: 
Very low-income households. Thirty (30) percent of the income of a household earning fifty (50) percent of the Orange County median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
Low-income households. Thirty (30) percent of the income of a household earning seventy (70) percent of the Orange County median income for for-sale units, and thirty (30) percent of the income of a household earning sixty (60) percent of the Orange County median income for rental units, adjusted in either case for family size appropriate for the unit. 
In the event of a conflict between the fractions specified in this definition and those found in Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the Health & Safety Code, the fractions specified by state law shall control. 
Developer means any association, corporation, firm, joint venture, partnership, person, or any entity or combination of entities, which seeks city approval for all or part of a residential project. 
Executive director means the executive director of community development for the city. 
Inclusionary housing agreement means a legally binding agreement between the developer and the city, in a form and substance satisfactory to the executive director and the city attorney, and containing those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied, whether through the provision of inclusionary units or through an approved alternative method. 
Inclusionary housing fund means the fund created by the city in which all fees collected in compliance with this article shall be deposited. 
Inclusionary housing plan means the plan submitted by the developer, in a form specified by the executive director, detailing how the provisions of this article will be implemented for the proposed residential project. 
Inclusionary unit means a dwelling unit that will be offered for sale or rent to very low or low income households, at an affordable housing cost, in compliance with this article. 
Low-income households or lower income households means persons and families whose income does not exceed the qualifying limits for lower income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. The limits shall be published in the California Code of Regulations as soon as possible after adoption by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. In the event the federal standards are discontinued, the California Department of Housing and Community Development shall, by regulation, establish income limits for lower income households for all geographic areas of the state at eighty (80) percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually. Lower income households includes very low income households, as defined in the Health & Safety Code, Section 50105, and extremely low income households, as defined in Section 50106. 
Low-income units and very low-income units means inclusionary units restricted to occupancy by low or very low-income households, respectively, at an affordable housing cost. 
Market rate units means dwelling units in a residential project that are not inclusionary units. 
Pipeline project means any project for which an application was submitted and the application was deemed complete prior to August 4, 2015. 
Regulatory agreement means an agreement entered into between the City of Santa Ana or the Santa Ana Community Development Agency and a developer by which the developer covenants to keep certain housing units at an affordable housing cost for a specified period of time. 
Rehabilitated units/rehabilitation means the improvement of a unit in substandard condition to a decent, safe and sanitary level. Units are in substandard condition when, while they may be structurally sound, they do not provide safe and adequate shelter, and in their present condition endanger the health, safety or well-being of the occupants. 
Residential project/project means any of the following: 
A subdivision resulting in the creation of five (5) or more residential lots or residential condominium units; or 
The new construction of a project consisting of five (5) or more multi-family units; or 
The new construction of five (5) or more separate houses or dwelling units; or 
The conversion of five (5) or more existing residential rental units to condominium ownership. 
Target area means that area designated by the city from time to time, on an as-needed basis, as a priority area for rehabilitation due to health and safety concerns. 
Total housing costs the total monthly or annual recurring expenses required of a household to obtain shelter. For a rental unit, total housing costs shall include the monthly rent payment and utilities paid by the tenant (excluding telephone and television). For an ownership unit, total housing costs shall include the mortgage payment (principal and interest), insurance, homeowners' association dues (if applicable), private mortgage insurance (if applicable), taxes, utilities, an allowance for maintenance and any other related assessments. 
Very low income households means persons and families whose incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families as established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. These qualifying limits shall be published by the department in the California Code of Regulations as soon as possible after adoption by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. In the event the federal standards are discontinued, the California Department of Housing and Community Development shall, by regulation, establish income limits for very low income households for all geographic areas of the state at fifty (50) percent of area median income, adjusted for family size and revised annually. Very low income households include extremely low income households, as defined in Health & Safety Code Section 50106. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1902. - Applicability and inclusionary unit requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The requirements of this article shall apply to any new residential project located within the city, including new construction, and condominium conversions which exceed the general plan prescribed densities. 
(b)  Applications. The requirements of this article shall apply to any new residential project proposed in connection with an application to do any of the following: 
(1)  Increase the permitted residential density of the subject property above the density permitted by applicable zoning at the time of the application. The inclusionary requirements shall only apply to the incremental increase in the number of units beyond that which is allowed by the applicable zoning. 
(2)  Increase in the permitted residential density or percentage of residential development allowed due to city initiated zone changes after November 28, 2011. 
(3)  Increase the permitted percentage of residential development allowed for a mixed-use development above the percentage at the time of the application. The inclusionary requirements shall only apply to the incremental increase in the number of units beyond that which is allowed by the applicable zoning. 
(4)  Approval of new projects in an overlay zone site plan permitting residential land uses pursuant to division 28 of this chapter. 
(5)  Convert rental units to condominium ownership. The inclusionary requirements shall only apply to the incremental increase in the number of units beyond that which is allowed by the applicable zoning. 
(c)  Units for sale. If the new residential project consists of units for sale, then a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total number of units in the project shall be sold or rented to low income households. 
(d)  Rental units. If the new residential project consists of rental units, then a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the units shall be rented to low-income households, or ten (10) percent rented to very low-income households. 
(e)  Rounding of quantities in calculations. In calculating the required number of inclusionary units, fractional units shall be rounded-up to the next whole unit. The developer may choose to pay an in-lieu fee set forth in section 41-1904(c) for the fractional units, which shall be calculated based on the number of habitable square feet applicable in each case. 
(f)  Displacement of existing inclusionary units. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any residential project subject to this article that results in the displacement of very low and/or low income household(s) shall be required to provide on-site inclusionary units as required by this article. 
(g)  Compliance with article. All inclusionary units required by this article shall be sold or rented in compliance with this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2885, § 2, 10-6-15 )  
Sec. 41-1903. - Exempt projects. 
The following are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(a)  applications deemed complete. Applications that include a residential project for which a development application has been deemed complete prior to November 28, 2011. 
(b)  Development agreements. A residential project that is the subject of a development agreement under applicable provisions of the California Government Code that expressly provides for an exclusion to this article or provides for a different amount of inclusionary units from that specified by this article, provided the development agreement was adopted on or before November 28, 2011. 
(c)  Project with regulatory agreement. A residential project for which a regulatory agreement has been approved, provided that the regulatory agreement is effective at the time the residential project would otherwise be required to comply with the requirements of this article, and there is no uncured breach of the regulatory agreement before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. This may include a residential project that has obtained a density bonus under article XVI.I of the Santa Ana Municipal Code. Such projects cannot be used to satisfy the inclusionary requirement for another project. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1904. - Options to satisfy inclusionary requirements. 
(a)  On-site units. The primary means of complying with the inclusionary requirements of this article shall be the provision of on-site inclusionary units in accordance with section 41-1901, above. A developer may only satisfy the requirements of this article by means of an alternative to on-site inclusionary units in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this section. 
(b)  Off-site units. 
1.  New units. The developer may satisfy the inclusionary unit requirements for the project, in whole or in part by constructing the required new inclusionary housing at a different location within the city borders at the ratio of one square foot of habitable inclusionary unit space for each required habitable square foot. While the total habitable square footage area of the required new inclusionary units must be the same as the sum-total of the number of habitable square feet for the project as directed by this ordinance, the number of units and bedrooms associated with the off-site units may be approved by the review authority of the city, consistent with the type of affordable housing needed at the time of project review. 
2.  Rehabilitated units outside a designated target area. The developer may satisfy the inclusionary unit requirements for the project, in whole or in part by substantially rehabilitating existing housing units elsewhere within the borders of the city at a rate of one and one-half (1½) habitable square feet per each required habitable square foot of inclusionary units. 
3.  Rehabilitated units within a designated target area. Upon application, the developer may satisfy the inclusionary unit requirements for the project, in whole or in part by substantially rehabilitating existing housing units elsewhere within the borders of the city at a rate of one habitable square foot per each required habitable square foot of affordable inclusionary units. 
(c)  In-lieu fee. 
(1)  Twenty (20) or fewer units. In the case of a Residential Project containing between five (5) and twenty (20) residential lots or residential units, the Developer may elect to satisfy the Inclusionary Unit requirements for the Project, in whole or in part, by payment of a fee in lieu of constructing some or all of the required units. The amount of the fee allowed by this section shall be five dollars per square foot ($5.00/ft. 2 ) of the sum total of the number of habitable square feet within the entire Project, as measured from the exterior walls of the residential units. This calculation does not include exterior hallways, common areas, landscape, open space or exterior stairways. 
(2)  More than 20 units. In the case of a residential project comprised of more than twenty (20) residential lots or residential units, the developer may elect to satisfy the Inclusionary Unit requirements for the Project, in whole or in part, by payment of a fee in lieu of constructing some or all of the required units. The amount of the fee allowed by this section shall be fifteen dollars per square foot ($15.00/ft. 2 ) of the sum total of the number of habitable square feet within the entire Project, as measured from the exterior walls of the residential units. This calculation does not include exterior hallways, common areas, landscape, open space or exterior stairways. 
(3)  Timing of payment. The developer shall pay any in-lieu fees allowed by this section in full before issuance of the first building permit for any portion of the residential project, including any non-residential portions of a mixed-use development. The developer may provide input regarding what project the in lieu fees should be applied towards, but such input shall not be dispositive. The in lieu fees collected by the city are city funds over which the city has complete and absolute discretion. 
(4)  Inclusionary housing fund. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1904.1. - Inclusionary housing development incentives for production of units. 
(a)  In order to make the production of new inclusionary units on-site or off-site or off-site rehabilitated units, certain incentives, standards and concessions shall be allowed and prescribed as set forth herein below. Such concessions shall not be available to those developers that choose to pay an in lieu fee rather than build the units. The developer may opt to take advantage of up to two (2) concessions among the following possible concessions: 
(1)  Parking concession. One on-site parking space for each zero to one bedroom unit; two (2) on-site parking spaces for each two (2) to three (3) bedroom unit; two and one-half (2½) parking spaces for each four (4) or more bedroom unit. 
(2)  Concession on one of the following Zoning Code site development standards: 
(i)  Setback reduction of up to twenty-five (25) percent reduction on subject property; 
(ii)  Height increase of up to twenty (20) additional feet; 
(iii)  Density bonus such that: 
a)  An applicant must select only one housing affordability income level to merit a density bonus. A combination of affordable housing income levels is not permitted to be combined to increase the amount of density bonus. 
b)  For each one percent increase above fifteen (15) percent in the percentage of units affordable to low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half (1½) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
c)  For each one percent increase above ten (10) percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half (2½) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2885, § 2, 10-6-15 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. NS-2885, § 2, adopted October 6, 2015 , amended § 41-1904.1, to read as set out herein. Previously § 41-1904.1 was titled "Inclusionary housing development incentives."  
Sec. 41-1905. - Housing plan and housing agreement. 
(a)  Submittal and execution. The developer shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Inclusionary housing plan. The developer shall submit an inclusionary housing plan in a form specified by the executive director, detailing how the provisions of this article will be implemented for the proposed residential project. The inclusionary housing plan and its supportive documents, plans, and details shall be submitted at the same time as the site plan and application materials for the original project. All inclusionary housing plans shall be subject to the approval of the executive director and subject to appeal processes and procedures set forth in the Santa Ana Municipal Code. 
(2)  Inclusionary housing agreement. The developer shall execute and cause to be recorded an inclusionary housing agreement. The inclusionary housing agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the developer and the city, executed by the city manager, or his or her designee, and in a form and substance satisfactory to the executive director and the city attorney, and containing those provisions necessary to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied, whether through the provision of inclusionary units or through an approved alternative method. 
(b)  Discretionary approvals. No discretionary approval shall be issued for a residential project subject to this article until the developer has submitted an inclusionary housing plan. 
(c)  Issuance of building permit. No building permit shall be issued for a residential project subject to this article unless the executive director has approved the inclusionary housing plan, and any required inclusionary housing agreement has been recorded. 
(d)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a residential project subject to this article unless the approved inclusionary housing plan has been fully implemented. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1906. - Standards. 
(a)  location within project, relationship to non-inclusionary units. All inclusionary units shall be: 
(1)  Reasonably dispersed throughout the residential project; 
(2)  Proportional, in number of bedrooms, gross floor area of habitable space, and location, to the market rate units; 
(3)  Comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of design, materials, finished quality, and appearance; and 
(4)  Permitted the same access to project amenities and recreational facilities, as are market rate units. 
(b)  Timing of construction. All inclusionary units in a residential project shall be constructed concurrent with, or before the construction of the market rate units. If the city approves a phased project, a proportional share of the required inclusionary units shall be provided within each phase of the residential project. 
(c)  Location outside the proposed original project. For projects where the developer proposes to either produce new inclusionary units or rehabilitate existing off-site units to meet the inclusionary affordable housing requirements of this ordinance, the off-site project(s) containing the required inclusionary units shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The sum-total area (in habitable square feet) of all the newly constructed off-site inclusionary units shall be the same number of habitable square feet of inclusionary area as required by this ordinance. For the purpose of the calculation of the number of square feet of required inclusionary housing, the total gross habitable square feet of the housing units of the original market rate project shall be used, as measured from exterior walls to exterior walls of the market units provided as the base for calculation either ten (10) percent for very low income or fifteen (15) percent for low income inclusionary units. The common areas, exterior hallways, stairways, patios, and balconies shall not be calculated in determining the number of required square feet of inclusionary housing production. All new or rehabilitated units must meet all current zoning and general plan standards. 
(2)  While the total number of square feet of inclusionary housing requirement is calculated based on the requirements of this ordinance, the number of units, bedrooms and other amenities on the proposed off-site inclusionary housing location shall be approved by the review authority commensurate with the size and type of units most in demand at the time of submittal of the application. 
(3)  Any off-site affordable inclusionary housing project shall be substantially comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of quality of design, materials and finishes. 
(4)  If tenants are displaced due to rehabilitation of housing to meet the inclusionary unit requirement, the developer shall be responsible for relocation costs as required by state law. 
(5)  No city, housing authority, or public funds, subsidies, or participation of any kind shall be expended on the production or building of any inclusionary housing projects associated with meeting the inclusionary unit requirement. 
(d)  Timing of construction. All inclusionary units in a residential project or proposed off-site new inclusionary units or rehabilitated units shall be constructed concurrent with, or before the construction of the market rate units. If the city approves a phased project, a proportional share of the required inclusionary units shall be provided within each phase of the residential project. 
(e)  Units for sale. 
(1)  Time limit for inclusionary restrictions. A unit for sale shall be restricted to the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for a minimum of fifty-five (55) years. 
(2)  Certification of purchasers. The developer and all subsequent owners of an inclusionary unit offered for sale shall certify, on a form provided by the city, the income of the purchaser and that such owners will live in such inclusionary unit as their primary residence. 
(3)  Resale price control. In order to maintain the availability of inclusionary units required by this article, the resale price of an owner occupied inclusionary unit shall be limited to the lesser of the fair market value of the unit as established by a licensed real estate agent based upon three (3) comparable properties or the restricted resale price. For these purposes, the restricted resale price shall be the applicable affordable housing cost. 
(4)  Inheritance of inclusionary units. Upon the death of an owner of an owner-occupied inclusionary unit, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant or heir (in the case of the death of a sole owner or all owners of the household). 
(5)  Forfeiture. If an inclusionary unit for sale is sold for an amount in excess of the resale price controls required by this section, the buyer and the seller shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the amount in excess of the affordable housing cost at the time of such sale of the inclusionary unit. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the inclusionary housing fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, city may allow the buyer and seller to cure any violation of the resale price controls within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(f)  Rental units. 
(1)  Time limit for inclusionary restrictions. A rental inclusionary unit shall remain restricted to the target income level group at the applicable affordable housing cost for fifty-five (55) years. 
(2)  Certification of renters. The owner of any rental inclusionary unit shall certify, on a form provided by the city, the income of all members of the household above the age of eighteen (18) at the time of the initial rental and annually thereafter. 
(3)  Forfeiture. Any lessor who leases an inclusionary unit in violation of this article shall be required to forfeit to the city all money so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the inclusionary housing fund. 
(g)  execution and recording of documents. The executive director may require the execution and recording of whatever documents are required to ensure enforcement of this section; including but not limited to promissory notes, deeds of trust, resale restrictions, rights of first refusal, options to purchase, and/or other documents, which shall be recorded against all inclusionary units. 
(h)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall sell or rent an inclusionary unit at a price or rent in excess of the maximum amount allowed by any restriction placed on the unit in accordance with this article. 
(2)  No person shall sell or rent an inclusionary unit to a person or persons that do not meet the income restrictions placed on the unit in accordance with this article. 
(3)  No person shall provide false or materially incomplete information to the city or to a seller or lessor of an inclusionary unit to obtain occupancy of housing for which that person is not eligible. 
(i)  Principal residency requirement. 
(1)  The owner or lessee of an inclusionary unit shall reside in the unit for not less than ten (10) out of every twelve (12) months. 
(2)  No owner or lessee of an inclusionary unit shall lease or sublease, as applicable, an inclusionary unit without the prior permission of the executive director. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1907. - Reserved.  
Sec. 41-1908. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violation. Any violation of this article constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Forfeiture of funds. Any individual who sells an inclusionary unit in violation of this article shall be required to forfeit any money in excess of the affordable housing cost at such time. Any individual who rents an inclusionary unit in violation of this article shall be required to forfeit all money so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the inclusionary housing fund. 
(c)  Legal actions. The city may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this article, including actions: 
(1)  To disapprove, revoke, or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or discretionary approval; and 
(2)  For injunctive relief or damages. 
(d)  Recovery of costs. In any action to enforce this article, or an inclusionary housing agreement recorded hereunder, the city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1909. - Inclusionary housing fund. 
(a)  Inclusionary housing fund. There is hereby established a separate fund of the city, to be known as the inclusionary housing fund. All monies collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. Additional monies from other sources may be deposited in the inclusionary housing fund. The monies deposited in the inclusionary housing fund shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Monies deposited into the inclusionary housing fund must be used to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to moderate, low, very low, and extremely low income households in the city. Monies may also be used to cover reasonable administrative or related expenses associated with the administration of this article. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by the executive director, or his or her designee, who may develop procedures to implement the purposes of the inclusionary housing fund consistent with the requirements of this article and any adopted budget of the city. 
(3)  Monies deposited in accordance with this section shall be used in accordance with the city's housing element, consolidated plan, or subsequent plan adopted by the city council to construct, rehabilitate, or subsidize affordable housing or assist other government entities, private organizations, or individuals to do so. Permissible uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to housing development corporations, equity participation loans, grants, pre-home ownership co-investment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases, or other public-private partnership arrangements. The inclusionary housing fund may be used for the benefit of both rental and owner-occupied housing. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 )  
Sec. 41-1910. - Administrative. 
(a)  In-lieu fee calculation. The amount per square foot of the inclusionary housing in-lieu fee shall be subject to city council review and consideration before the end of calendar year 2018, but after June 30, 2018. Between July 1, 2018 and December 31, 2018, staff shall report on the effectiveness of this ordinance and provide options for council consideration on the components of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, the monetary amount of inclusionary in-lieu fee per square foot. 
(b)  Pipeline projects. The applicant(s) of any project for which a site plan review application was submitted and such application was deemed complete prior to August 4, 2015, may either construct the inclusionary units pursuant to the prior housing opportunity ordinance (Ordinance No. NS-2825) or pay an in lieu fee calculated by the formula under the prior housing opportunity ordinance (Ordinance No. NS-2825) or request to revise its inclusionary housing plan and/or inclusionary housing agreement and pay an in-lieu fee of nine dollars and thirty-five cents ($9.35) per square foot of habitable space for the entire project's inclusionary housing obligation. 
(c)  Administration fees. The council may by resolution establish reasonable fees and deposits for the administration of this article including an annual monitoring fee and an inclusionary housing plan submittal fee. 
(d)  Monitoring/audits. At the time of initial occupancy, and annually thereafter, the city will monitor the project to ensure that the income verifications are correct and in compliance with the inclusionary housing administrative procedures. For ownership units, the city shall monitor to verify that owner-occupancy requirements are maintained. Developer/property owners are required to cooperate with the city in promptly providing all information requested by the city in monitoring compliance with program requirements. The city will conduct periodic random quality control audits of inclusionary units to assure compliance with rules and requirements. Such audits may include verification of continued occupancy in inclusionary units by eligible tenants, compliance with the inclusionary housing plan and agreement, and physical inspections of the residential project. 
(e)  Administrative procedures. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate administrative procedures for the implementation of this article. 
( Ord. No. NS-2881, § 2, 9-1-15 ; Ord. No. NS-2885, § 2, 10-6-15 )  
Secs. 41-1911—41-1999. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - THE TRANSIT ZONING CODE, SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT NO. 84  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION PLAN AND ZONES ESTABLISHED  
DIVISION 3. - URBAN STANDARDS BY ZONES  
DIVISION 4. - ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS  
DIVISION 5. - ON-PREMISE SIGNS  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED  
DIVISION 7. - DEFINITIONS  
ARTICLE XX. - SMALL LOT SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 41-2100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a reasonable and uniform regulatory framework for the subdivision of land into small lots. Small lot subdivisions are intended to provide an alternative to the traditional single-family subdivision, increasing options for fee-simple home ownership opportunities. 
( Ord. No. NS-2937, § 3, 1-16-18 )  
Sec. 41-2101. - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this article: 
(a)  "Development site" shall mean the total land area of a small lot subdivision project after all required dedications for public improvements. 
(b)  "Drive Aisle" shall mean the paved area which has been designated as a vehicle passageway to provide access to a small lot. 
(c)  "Driveway" shall mean the paved area which has been designated to provide access to a dwelling or live-work unit's required parking, starting at a public street or alley, or at the ultimate right-of-way of a common access drive aisle that serves the lot, leading to a garage or uncovered parking space. 
(d)  "Interior lot line" shall mean all lot lines created within the development site for the purpose of subdividing and creating small lots. 
(e)  "Small lot" shall mean a parcel of land created through a small lot subdivision for the purpose of developing it with a single-family residence or live-work unit. 
(f)  "Small lot subdivision" shall mean a residential development containing detached single-family residences or live-work units on land that is subdivided into fee simple parcels containing each unit. 
( Ord. No. NS-2937, § 3, 1-16-18 )  
Sec. 41-2102. - Applicability. 
The subdivision of small lots is permitted subject to compliance with the following standards: 
(a)  Eligibility. Small lot subdivisions are permitted in the following districts: 
(1)  In any sub-zone within Specific Development No. 84 (Transit Zoning Code), Specific Plan No. 2 (Harbor Mixed Use Transit Corridor Specific Plan), and Metro East Mixed Use Overlay Zone (OZ-1) where single-family and live-work uses are allowed. 
(2)  Small lot subdivisions may be permitted through the establishment of a specific development district that is established in accordance with the provisions of Division 26 of Article III of this code. 
(b)  Small Lot Frontage and Access. 
(1)  Each individual small lot containing a dwelling or live-work unit shall have frontage on a public street or alley, or be provided with direct access to a public street or alley by an easement for access through the recorded subdivision map. 
(2)  Small lots are exempt from frontage requirements set forth in Section 34-56 of this Code. 
(3)  Areas within the small lot subdivision identified as points of shared access, walkways, drive aisles shall not be restricted by the construction of fences or walls, or other such barriers. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Size. 
(1)  Each small lot containing a dwelling unit shall have at minimum one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area. 
(2)  The calculation for minimum lot size shall not include any portion of the small lot that is designated or used as shared space. 
(d)  Lot Coverage. No more than seventy (70) percent of the small lot shall be covered by structures. 
(e)  Required Yards. 
(1)  The front, side, and rear yard building setback requirements of the underlying zone, specific plan, or overlay shall apply to the required yards of the development site. 
(2)  No minimum separation between buildings shall be required along interior lot lines created within an approved subdivision. 
(3)  Buildings on small lots that are placed in such a manner that they abut common open space or the private open space of an adjacent lot shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet and provide an appropriate stepback to preserve privacy and reduce the massing of multi-story buildings. 
(f)  Open Space. 
(1)  Individual small lots shall provide, at minimum, three hundred (300) square feet of private open space per dwelling unit as follows: 
a.  Private open space shall have a minimum dimension of fifteen (15) feet in each direction. 
b.  Private open space may be provided on the rooftop of dwelling units provided building massing and architectural features serve to screen the open space from neighboring properties that are not part of a small lot subdivision development site and that are used or zoned for single-family residential. 
(2)  In addition to the private open space requirement of subsection (1), small lot subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots shall provide accessible common open space in the amount not less than five (5) percent of the total development size, but shall in no case be less than one hundred (100) square feet per unit. 
(g)  Landscaping. All required yards and areas not designated for walkways, parking, drive aisles, or private open space, shall be landscaped and irrigated in accordance with an approved landscape plan. 
(h)  Driveway Length. 
(1)  A driveway that leads directly to a garage shall have a minimum length of twenty (20) feet if parking will be located in front of the garage. 
(2)  No driveway shall be more than three (3) feet in length if parking is not provided in front of the garage. 
(i)  Service Standards. Developments providing individual trash containers shall provide an area that is screened outside of required setbacks and yards for container storage. Individual trash containers located in a garage shall not encroach into the required parking area. 
(j)  Maintenance Agreement. 
(1)  All areas of a small lot subdivision with five (5) or more parcels subject to a reciprocal access and/or maintenance easement shall be maintained by an association that may be incorporated or unincorporated. 
(2)  Small lot subdivisions with four (4) or less parcels subject to a reciprocal access and/or maintenance easement may execute a maintenance agreement in lieu of requiring an association. 
(3)  A Maintenance Agreement shall be formed, composed of and executed by all property owners, to maintain all common areas and appurtenances such as trees, landscaping, water treatment facilities, trash, parking, driveways, drive aisles, walkways, private water lines, meters, etc. Each owner and future property owners shall automatically become members of the agreement and shall be subject to a proportionate share of the maintenance and related costs. The Maintenance Agreement shall be recorded as a Covenant and Agreement to run with the land. The subdivider shall submit a copy of this Agreement, once recorded, to the Planning Division for placement in the tract file. 
(k)  Construction. Each unit in a small lot subdivision shall be constructed on an individual parcel with no common foundation, walls or footings. 
(l)  Paving. No asphalt shall be permitted for paved areas. Driveways, drive aisles, and unenclosed parking areas shall consist of decorative concrete, pavers, or other materials as deemed appropriate by the Planning Manager. 
(m)  Mechanical Equipment. Roof mounted equipment is prohibited unless completely screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. 
( Ord. No. NS-2937, § 3, 1-16-18 )  
Sec. 41-2103. - Modification of standards. 
Development standards applied to small lot subdivisions pursuant to section 41-2102 may be modified by an application for a minor exception, which shall be heard by the zoning administrator pursuant to Article V of this chapter, in order to achieve a good project design, privacy, livability, and compatibility with surrounding uses. The decision of the zoning administrator on such applications may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to Article V of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. NS-2937, § 3, 1-16-18 )  
Sec. 41-2104. - Applicability to other regulations. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the development of small lots. Small lots must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the zoning code, other city ordinances, and state and federal law. Should a conflict exist between the provisions of this article and the provisions of other articles of this Code, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. NS-2937, § 3, 1-16-18 ) 
