HOW TO USE THIS CODE 
WHAT IS THE TUSTIN CITY CODE? 
The Tustin City Code is a compilation of City laws or ordinances organized or codified into a structure called a "Code". A Code is maintained and updated in order to represent the current laws of a City through the most recent updating which normally occurs quarterly. At the time of the updating, obsolete sections are removed and amended or new legislation is inserted. 
HOW IS THE CODE ORGANIZED? 
This Code is organized into nine major divisions called "Articles" which represent a functional division of City laws. This aids in locating particular laws by considering the Article which best describes the general category within which the specific law would fall. Thus a zoning regulation or subdivision regulation would be found in Article 9 entitled Land Use, whereas a taxicab regulation would be found in Article 3 entitled Business Regulations. 
Within each Article are several "chapters" which further divide the functional categorization. A chapter may or may not be further divided into "parts". The basic unit of the Code, however, is the "section". A section can be further divided into various levels of subsections depending upon the complexity of the particular law. 
HOW IS THE CODE NUMBERED? 
Sections of the Code, the basic unit, are assigned a four digit number which identifies the Article, chapter and part (if applicable) within which the section falls as follows: 
first digit - represents the Article 
second digit - represents the chapter 
third digit - represents the part, if used 
fourth digit - represents the unique section within the part (the third and fourth digit perform this function if the chapter is not divided into parts). 
A section is frequently divided into subsections by adding a lower case letter to the section number. A brief subject title is used with each section number and the lettered subsections to aid the user in locating the proper reference the user is seeking. For example, subsection "a" entitled "Issuance" under Section 5402 entitled OWNERSHIP CARD/BICYCLE PLATE describes the basic manner by which Bicycle Ownership Cards and License Plates will be issued. Incidentally, Section 5402 represents a section under Article 5 entitled PUBLIC SAFETY, and Chapter 4 entitled BICYCLE LICENSING. 
HOW ARE PAGE NUMBERS ASSIGNED? 
Each page is labeled across the top from left to right by the words "TUSTIN CITY CODE" the title of the chapter, and the page number. The page number used is the first section number, plus subsection identifiers if appropriate, found on the page. The pages; and therefore the articles, chapters, parts, sections and subsections; are arranged in ascending order. The section numbers therefore create a dynamic page numbering system which allows insertion or deletion of pages, without destroying a numbering system, much in the same manner as a telephone book or encyclopedia volume is indexed. 
HOW ARE THE SOURCE OF SECTIONS AND THE REVISION DATE OF PAGES SHOWN? 
Each four digit section, and even subsections where considered desirable, is identified at its close by a parentheses showing a notation such as "(Ord. No. 370, Sec. 2)". This means that that particular section was adopted by Ordinance No. 370 as or contained in section "2". In this way, the source and authority of a particular law and its effective date can be verified with reasonable ease. 
Original code pages are not identified as being revised, but all subsequent page revisions are shown by a notation in the lower left corner of the page such as Rev: 1-78 indicating the page was updated with current provisions as of January, 1978. Proper updating of the Code is highly essential as the legal ramifications of attempting to enforce an obsolete Code section are obvious. If any question arises as to the current nature of a page or section, one may consult the master copy in the City Clerk's Office. 
WHAT ARE THE REFERENCE TOOLS CONTAINED IN THE CODE? 
There are many aids in using the Code. 
First: 
The nature of the functional organization of the Code provides an easy method of finding material sought as does the extensive index tab system of Articles and Chapters. 
Second: 
A Table of Contents is provided in three parts at the front of the Code. 
a. a summary of Articles 
b. a summary of Chapters 
c. a detailed table of sections 
Third: 
An extensive subject index is placed in the appendix at the end of the Code. 
Fourth: 
A listing of all ordinances and the location in the code where they may be found is present in the appendix as is a list of all uncodified ordinances. 
WHAT ARE UNCODIFIED ORDINANCES? 
Uncodified Ordinances are ordinances which do not represent the laws of the City but instead represent special declarations which do not require codification because of their special application, limited application time wise, identification of specific properties or streets to which more general restrictions apply, etc. These ordinances are listed in the Appendix and include such materials as: 
a.  zone changes 
b.  pre-zoning actions 
c.  budget and tax levys 
d.  bond issuance actions 
e.  specific locations where traffic regulations are to be applied 
CONCLUSION 
The suggestions and comments of the users of this Code are solicited as it is the desire of the City Clerk and City Attorney to continually improve and make this Code of greater use and more convenient.  
ARTICLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER INDEX  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS  
PART 1 - CONSTRUCTION OF CODE 
 
1111 - HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Tustin, California" and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the "Tustin City Code." 
(TCC-1, Sec. 1-1.)  
1112 - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise. (TCC-1, Sec. 1-2 incl. all definitions unless otherwise marked.) 
Appellant. Any person challenging an administrative citation or other administrative decision or determination for which an appeal is available pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
City. The words "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Tustin." 
City Manager. The term "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Tustin or the designee of the City Manager. 
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean "The Code of the City of Tustin, California." 
Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 6800.) 
Council. Whenever the word "Council" is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Tustin. 
County. The words "the County" or "this County" shall mean the County of Orange. 
Day. A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 6806.) 
Daytime, nighttime. "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 12.) 
Enforcement Officer. The term "Enforcement Officer" means any officer or employee specified or described in Section 1132 of the Tustin City Code. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 12.) 
Hearing Examiner. Whenever in this Code, or any of the uniform codes adopted by this Code, the term "Hearing Examiner" is used, it shall be deemed to have the same meaning as and shall be interchangeable with the term "Hearing Officer". 
Hearing Officer. The term "Housing Officer" means an individual who is appointed by the City Manager as set forth in Section 1167 of the Tustin City Code to conduct administrative hearings and take action in administrative proceedings as specified therein. 
In the City. The words "in the City" shall mean and include all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. (See C.C., Sec. 12.) 
Legal nonconforming. The term "legal nonconforming" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 9297. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 6804.) 
Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 13.) 
Oath. "Oath" includes an affirmation. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 15.) 
Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Tustin, unless the context indicates otherwise. 
Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the City. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. "Person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 17; C.C.P., Sec. 17.) 
Personal property. Includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. (See C.C., Secs. 14 and 663.) 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Process. Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 22.) 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. (See C.C., Sec. 14; C.C.P., Sec. 17.) 
Public Safety Officer. The term "Public Safety Officer" means a police officer including the Police Chief or his designee, or the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee, authorized under the laws of the State of California or this Code to enforce the provisions of the Tustin City Code. A "Public Safety Officer" is an "Enforcement Officer" as defined in this Section. 
Real property. Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. (See C.C., Secs. 14 and 658.) 
Responsible person. The term "responsible person" means the owner of property upon which a violation of the Tustin City Code occurs or continues to occur. This term shall also include any nonowner, occupant, or other person or entity in control of the property who is creating, causing, or maintaining any condition in violation of the Tustin City Code. The term "responsible person" also includes the parents of a minor who creates, causes or maintains any condition in violation of the Tustin City Code. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 14.) 
Signature or subscription by mark. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but, a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 16.) 
State. The words "the State" or "this State" shall be construed to mean the State of California. 
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 11.) 
Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 6805.) 
Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (For similar State Law, see Gov. C., Sec. 8.) 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (For State Law definition of "year", see Gov. C., Sec. 6803.) 
(Ord. No. 1329, Sec. 1, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 1, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 1, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 2, 5-7-13)  
1113 - PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 1-3.)  
1114 - EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 1-4.)  
1115 - SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
1116 - CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 1-6)  
PART 2 - PENALTY PROVISIONS 
 
1121 - GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATION 
a  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Tustin City Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the provisions of the Tustin City Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless: 
(1)  The violation is classified as an infraction in the State Vehicle Code or the Tustin City Code in which case the person shall be guilty of an infraction; or 
(2)  The City Attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction; or 
(3)  A Public Safety Officer or an Enforcement Officer, as defined in Part 1 of Chapter 1 of this Code issues a citation charging the offense as an infraction. 
b  Any person who commits a second or subsequent violation of the same provision of this Code within one (1) year of the commission of the first such violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each such violation and shall be subject to penalties as provided in Subsection e of this Section, unless the City Attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction. Each day or portion thereof that a person, firm or corporation permits a violation of this Code to continue shall constitute a separate and subsequent offense. 
c  Violation of an ordinance of the City classified or charged as an infraction other than a building and safety code is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one (1) year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one (1) year. 
d  Violation of a building and safety code in the City classified or charged as an infraction is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation. For purposes of this section, "building and safety code" refers to Tustin City Code sections 8100 to 8999, as the same may be amended from time to time, and all uniform and other codes adopted therein by reference as modified therein. 
e  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code (unless otherwise provided herein) shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the Orange County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
f  Should a citation not be paid by the responsible party in the time specified therein, a penalty shall be assessed upon any administrative citation as follows: Thirty (30) days from the date of issuance, a penalty assessment shall [be] assessed in addition to the original amount by fifty percent (50%); should the responsible not pay the citation and penalty after another thirty (30) days, said citation shall increase by an additional fifty percent (50%). 
(Ord. No. 612; Ord. No. 932, Sec. 1, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 2, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 3, 5-7-13)  
1122 - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
a  Any violation of the Tustin City Code is a public nuisance. Except as provided in Section 9273(e), nonconforming uses or structures that have been determined not to be legal nonconforming, pursuant to Section 9273 of this Code, are illegal and are declared a public nuisance, and shall be altered to conform with all applicable standards and regulations, and shall be subject to actions and penalties allowed by this Code. If any ambiguity or conflict arises concerning the legal or illegal status of a nonconforming use or structure within the Tustin City Code, the provisions of Section 9273 shall prevail. 
b  The City Manager and all other Enforcement Officers of the City have the authority and powers necessary to abate public nuisances and gain compliance with the provisions of this Code and applicable State codes. These powers include, but are not limited to, the power to enter and inspect public and private property and the authority to use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under this Code and any applicable State codes, including the issuance of administrative citations pursuant to Part 6 of this Chapter. 
c  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773, the City has authority to judicially abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil actions. The City also has the authority under State Law to make the expense of abatement of the nuisance a special assessment, or a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with California Government Code Section 38773.1 or 38773.5. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.7, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period for abatement of a public nuisance finding the owner, minor or other person responsible for a condition that may be abated, except for conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 17980, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of abatement "Minor or other person" shall be defined as set forth in California Government Code Section 38772(d)(3). 
d  There shall be no civil liability on the part of and no cause of action shall arise against any Enforcement Officer acting pursuant to this Chapter and within the scope of his or her authority for false arrest or false imprisonment arising out of any arrest which is lawful or which the enforcement officer at the time of such arrest had reasonable cause to believe was lawful. An Enforcement Officer shall not be deemed an aggressor or lose his or her right to self-defense by the use of reasonable force to affect the arrest or to prevent escape or to overcome resistance. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 2, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 2, 11-15-11)  
1123 - CIVIL ACTIONS 
a  In addition to all other remedies, the City Attorney on behalf of the City may bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this Code, in which a court may impose the following remedies: 
(1)  An injunction or any other appropriate equitable remedy; 
(2)  Civil penalties in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation for each day, payable to the City, against any person who commits, continues, operates, allows or maintains any violation of any provision of this Code; 
(3)  Reimbursement of city administrative and abatement costs, including, but not limited to, investigative costs incurred in the enforcement of the provisions of this Code; and 
(4)  Award of attorneys' fees, where the city has elected at the initiation of the action to seek the recovery of such fees, in which case the prevailing party in such action shall be entitled to an award of attorneys' fees in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 2, 11-4-08)  
PART 3 - CITATION PROCEDURE 
 
1131 - CHAPTER 5C OF THE STATE PENAL CODE ADOPTED 
Except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 5C, Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth. (Ord. No. 644, Sec. 1)  
1132 - AUTHORITY TO MAKE ARRESTS 
The following designated officers and employees shall have the power to arrest persons for misdemeanor violations committed in their presence, and for infraction violations when the accused refuses to promise to appear and respond to the charges, as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Sworn Police Officers. 
(2)  Community Service Officers, Public Service Officers, Police Aides and such other employees of the Police Department, designated by the Chief of Police, shall have the power to make arrests for any violation of this Code relative to parking, abandonment and impounding of vehicles and for violations of any of the following sections of the California Vehicle Code: 4000, 4454, 5200, 5201, 5204, 22500, 22502, 22505, 22514, 22515, 22516, 22520, 22657, and 22700. 
(3)  The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal and officers and employees of the Fire Department designated by the Fire Chief shall have the power to make arrests for violations of provisions of this Code relating to the Uniform Building Code, the Dangerous Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code and the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. 
(4)  The Health Officer, Registered Sanitarians, Assistant Sanitarians and other officers and employees of the Health Department designated by the Health Officer shall have the power to make arrests for violations of provisions of the Tustin City Code, enforceable by the Health Officer, and for violations of provisions of the Health and Safety Code and Penal Code of the State of California, enforceable by the Health Officer. 
(5)  The Director of Community Development, the Building Official, Code Enforcement Officers, and employees of the Community Development Department, as designated by the Director of Community Development, shall have the power to make arrests for violations of the provisions of this Code relating to Zoning, the Sign Ordinance, Building Code, Mechanical Code, Housing Code, Dangerous Buildings Code, Plumbing and Electrical Code, and provisions of the Code relating to graffiti, property maintenance, and shopping cart nuisance. Employees of the field services division of the Public Works Department, as designated by the Director of Public Works, shall have the power to make arrests for the violations of the provisions of this Code relating to graffiti and shopping cart nuisance. 
(6)  For purposes of this section only, Animal Control Officers of the County of Orange who by contract perform animal control services for the City, shall have the power to make arrests for violations of provisions of this Code related to animals. (Ord. No. 757, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 932, Sec. 2, 6-3-85; Ord. No. 1184, Secs. 3, 4, 7-21-97)  
1133 - CITATION PROCEDURES 
a 
Misdemeanor 
(1)  Written Notice to Appear. If any person is arrested for the violation of any provision of this Code or any code adopted by reference herein, or of any ordinance of the City, including those ordinances hereafter enacted, violations for which are punishable as misdemeanors, and such person is not taken before a magistrate as is more fully set forth in the Penal code of the State of California, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written Notice to Appear in Court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in Court. 
(2)  Time to Appear. The time specified in the Notice to Appear shall not be less than fifteen (15) days after the arrest. (Ord. No. 757, Sec. 2) 
(3)  Place to Appear. The place specified in the Notice to Appear shall be either: 
(a)  Before a Judge of the Municipal Court in the Judicial District in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or 
(b)  Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail. 
(4)  Delivery of Copy of Notice. The officer shall deliver one (1) copy of the Notice to Appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his written promise so as to appear in court by signing the duplicate Notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the arrested person from custody. 
(5)  Filing of Notice. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate Notice with the magistrate specified in such Notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by such magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may, at his discretion, order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid in the County Treasury for distribution as provided by Section 1463 of the Penal Code of the State. 
(6)  Issuance of Warrant. A warrant shall not issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(7)  Failure to Appear. Every person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(8)  Failure to Appear; Arrest. When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in section 1133e, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after his failure to appear as promised. If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (Ord. No. 664, Sec. 3) 
b 
Infractions 
Citations for infractions shall be processed, issued and handled as provided by state law. An officer or designated non-safety employee making an arrest under the authority of this Section shall follow the citation release procedures prescribed in Chapter 5C, Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State of California, or such procedures hereafter enacted by the State of California. (Ord. No. 664, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 757, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 932, Sec. 3, 6-3-85)  
PART 4 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
 
1140 - ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS—LIMITATIONS 
a 
Purpose and Effect 
Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the City Council hereby enacts this Part to limit to ninety (90) days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. 
b 
Definitions 
As used in this Part, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings: 
"Decision" means and includes adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing, suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee, or after revoking or denying an application for a permit or a license, or after denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance. 
"Complete record" means and includes the transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearing officer, the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the City or its commission, board, officer or agent, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. 
"Party" means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted or dismissed; a person whose permit or license has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied. 
c 
Time limit for judicial review 
Judicial review of any decision of the City or its commission, board, officer, or agent may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the 90th day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provisions for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this Section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. Whenever the City Administrator's decision is said to be final except for the reserved right of the City Council to act as final authority, the decision is deemed final for the purposes of the time limit for judicial review on the date of the City Administrator's decision; provided that if the City Council does act as the final authority, the petitioner must file within ninety (90) days following the action of the City Council. 
d 
Preparation of the Record 
The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the City or its commission, board, officer or agent which made the decision and shall be delivered to the petitioner within 90 days after he has filed written request therefor. The City may recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. 
e 
Extension 
If the petitioner files a request for the record within 10 days after the date the decision becomes final, the time within which a petitioner pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure may be filed shall be extended to not later than the 30th day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or his attorney of record, if he has one. 
f 
Notice 
In making a final decision, the City shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Section 1140 of the Tustin City Code. (Ord. No. 712)  
PART 5 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1150 - BONDING IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE 
When any act is required by any ordinance, resolution or minute order of the City Council or by any resolution of the Planning Commission of the City of Tustin, whether as a condition or requirement of an approval or otherwise, and is required by such ordinance, resolution or minute order to be performed within a specified time as a condition precedent or which may be inferred to be required to be performed within a reasonable time, the City Council may by resolution or minute order grant an extension or deferral of time within which to perform said act upon the posting of security of a type, form, content and amount approved by the City Council. Such security may be in the form of a surety bond, cash deposit with the Treasurer of the City, or other type of security approved as to form by the City Attorney. Provided, however, that no such security may be accepted for such a purpose which does not otherwise meet the requirements of all applicable laws. (Ord. No. 671)  
PART 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
1160 - LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 
a  The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for various violations of the Tustin City Code. The City Council also finds that an appropriate method for enforcement of various violations is an administrative citation program that will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process for those cited. 
b  The procedures established in this Part are in addition to criminal, civil, or other legal remedies that may be available to the City to enforce violations of the Tustin City Code or applicable State Codes. 
c  This Part establishes an administrative citation program and monetary penalties to encourage and expedite compliance with the provisions of the Tustin City Code. This Part encourages voluntary compliance through the implementation of a process that informs the Responsible Person(s) of violations by giving a written warning before taking action and allowing reasonable time lines for compliance. 
d  The City Council finds and determines that enforcement of the provisions of the Tustin City Code and conditions on entitlements or permits are municipal affairs as well as matters of purely local concern to the citizens of Tustin. 
e  The goals of this Part focus on minimizing the number of code violations made by Responsible Persons by instituting a citation process and promoting a positive city image. The City Council finds that the adoption and implementation of this Administrative Citation Program as provided in the Part will achieve the following goals: 
(1)  Improve the quality of life for Tustin residents and business owners by reducing the number of code violations through the encouragement of expedient compliance. 
(2)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Tustin by minimizing potentially harmful municipal code violations. 
(3)  Help ensure compliance with the Tustin City Code and State Codes, ordinances, and regulations in a timely and efficient manner. 
(4)  Provide for (a) a simplified administrative process in order to encourage implementation and (b) an appeal process that will fully comport with due process and provide those cited with the right to a fair hearing without the need for legal counsel. 
(5)  Provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Tustin City Code, ordinances, agreements, or terms and conditions on entitlements in the City of Tustin. 
(6)  Reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited. 
f  Use of this Part shall be at the sole discretion of the City Manager and each Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1161 - RESERVED  
1162 - AUTHORITY AND FINES 
a  Any person violating any provision of the Tustin City Code may be issued an administrative citation by an Enforcement Officer as provided in this Part. A violation of this Code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of the Tustin City Code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the City Council, or the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement, or environmental document issued or approved pursuant to this Code. 
b  Each and every day a violation of the Tustin City Code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
c  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the Tustin City Treasurer's Office. 
d  Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the City Council, or where no amount is specified: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or more violation of the same ordinance or permit within one (1) year from the date of the first violation. 
e  Whenever an Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Code determines that a violation has occurred, either by receiving a complaint or being witness to the violation, the Enforcement Officer has the authority to take the actions identified in this Part and issue an administrative citation to one (1) or more Responsible Persons for the violation. In the event the violation is deemed to be an immediate threat to life, health or safety of persons or property, the Enforcement Officer shall refer the matter to the building official, police department, Orange County Fire Authority, or other applicable agency, depending on the nature of the violation, for immediate action. Prior to issuing an administrative citation for a violation of this Code that does not create an immediate danger to life, health or safety of persons or property, the Enforcement Officer shall serve a pre-citation or courtesy notice on the Responsible Person for the violation. A Public Safety Officer shall not be required to issue a pre-citation or courtesy notice; however, a Public Safety Officer, in the discretion of such officer, may issue such courtesy notice. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1163 - SERVICE PROCEDURES 
a  Personal Service. An administrative citation (or pre-citation or courtesy notice) on a form approved by the City Manager may be issued to the Responsible Person by an Enforcement Officer for violations of the Tustin City Code or applicable State Code by personal service in the following manner: 
1.  The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the Responsible Person and obtain the signature of the Responsible Person on the administrative citation. 
2.  If the Responsible Person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
b  Service of Citation by Mail. If the Enforcement Officer is unable to locate the Responsible Person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the Responsible Person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
c  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the Enforcement Officer does not succeed in personally serving the Responsible Person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City in which the City has knowledge that the Responsible Person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1164 - CONTENTS OF NOTICE 
a  Each administrative citation (or pre-citation or courtesy notice) shall contain the following information: 
1.  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
2.  The Code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s); 
3.  An order to the Responsible Person to correct the violations within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
4.  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
5.  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid; 
6.  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
7.  The name and signature of the Enforcement Officer and if possible the signature of the Responsible Person. 
Failure of a pre-citation or courtesy notice to contain all the required information shall not affect the validity of the pre-citation notice or any subsequent administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1165 - SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION 
a  Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the Responsible Person must take one (1) of the following actions to avoid additional penalties: 
1.  Correct the violation, pay the corresponding fine(s), if any, and contact the city to request a reinspection, prior to the compliance date specified in the administrative citation; or 
2.  Request an extension of time in writing, which shows a reasonable hardship pursuant to subsection b of this section, prior to the compliance date specified in the administrative citation; or 
3.  Request a hearing to appeal the administrative citation pursuant to Section 1166 of this Code. 
b  All requests for extensions must be made in writing, submitted to the Enforcement Officer, and describe a reasonable hardship that prevents or renders impractical the correction of the violation prior to the compliance date specified in the administrative citation. The Enforcement Officer may grant a one-time extension at his/her discretion after payment of any fine due. The extension shall not exceed thirty (30) days unless the City Manager grants additional time. The City Manager may grant additional time as determined in the City Manager's reasonable discretion, considering all relevant facts and circumstances of the hardship. If the case has been referred or appealed to the hearing officer, extensions may not be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1166 - APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION 
a  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Tustin City Code or that he or she is the Responsible Person or the amount of any fine imposed by completing a Request for Hearing form and returning it to the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the administration citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine imposed. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited by that Responsible Person/Appellant shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. If the Hearing Officer determines that a lower fine should have been imposed, the amount paid in excess of the fine determined by the Hearing Officer shall be refunded. 
b  Failure of any Responsible Person/Appellant to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that Responsible Person's/Appellant's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the administrative citation and the amount of the penalty. If no appeal is filed, the appeal is filed without the deposit of fine imposed, or if the appeal is abandoned in writing or by failure to appear at a hearing without being excused, the administrative citation shall be deemed a final administrative order and the person to whom the administrative citation was issued shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 4, 5-7-13)  
1167 - HEARING OFFICER 
a  The Tustin City Manager shall be responsible for designation of a Hearing Officer to hear appeals governed by this Code. The Hearing Officer shall not be a Tustin City employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the Hearing Officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld, reduced or overturned by the Hearing Officer. Each Hearing Officer shall be subject to the provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974 and all other laws, ordinances, or regulations of the state or the city relating to conflicts of interest. 
b  The City Manager and/or designee shall establish all appropriate administrative regulations for implementing this Part, including appointment of Hearing Officers, the conduct of hearings, and rendering decisions as set forth in the Hearing Officer Guidelines as adopted by City Council resolution, which shall be available for review in the office of the City Clerk and which may be amended administratively by the City Manager and/or his or her designee from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 5, 5-7-13)  
1168 - HEARING PROCEDURE 
a  No hearing to contest an administrative citation or other administrative decision governed by this Part before a Hearing Officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance. 
b  A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Part. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
c  The Hearing Officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred or administrative decision should be upheld, whether the Responsible Person/Appellant has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the Tustin City Code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation, and regarding the amount of the fine imposed, if any. 
d  The Responsible Person/Appellant contesting the administrative citation or other administrative decision shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation or administrative decision. 
e  The failure of any Responsible Person/Appellant to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
f  The administrative citation or notice of administrative decision and any additional documents submitted by the Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
g  At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the Enforcement Officer shall be delivered to the recipient of the administrative citation. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
h  If the Enforcement Officer or his or her designee, or the Appellant submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation or administrative decision to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this material also shall be provided to the other party in a manner reasonably calculated to ensure receipt of the material at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the date of the hearing. 
i  The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the Enforcement Officer or the Appellant prior to issuing a written decision. 
j  Hearing Procedures shall be subject to the Hearing Officer Guidelines established by Resolution of the City Council and as amended by the City Manager or his designee from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 6, 5-7-13)  
1169 - HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION 
a  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing to uphold, modify or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. 
b  If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. 
c  The Hearing Officer may modify the penalties stated in an administrative citation depending upon the circumstances of each case and the evidence presented and the Hearing Officer provides specific grounds for such modification in the written decision. The Hearing Officer has authority to reduce, conditionally reduce, or increase the amount of any penalties, subject to the fine amounts or limits established by the Council by resolution or as otherwise provided in this Part. The Hearing Officer may impose conditions and deadlines for correction of violations or payment of outstanding penalties. If the Hearing Officer reduces the amount of penalties deposited to the City, the City shall retain the amount of the reduced fine and return the remainder of the deposit. If the Hearing Officer conditionally reduces the fine amount, the City shall retain the reduced amount of the reduced fine and, upon satisfaction of all conditions of the reduction, shall return the remainder of the deposit. If the Hearing Officer increases the amount of the penalties, then the City shall retain the fine amount on deposit with the City and the person requesting the hearing shall pay to the City Clerk the amount of the increase within ten (10) days after the hearing, unless a different deadline is established by the Hearing Officer. 
d  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the Hearing Officer's written decision. Such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
e  If the Hearing Officer dismisses the administrative citation, all fines and appeal fees shall be refunded to the Responsible Person/appellant within thirty (30) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1170 - FAILURE TO PAY FINES 
a  The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the administrative citation constitutes a debt to the City. To enforce that debt, the City Manager may file a civil action, impose a special assessment as set forth below, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such debt, including reasonable costs of collection and attorneys' fees. 
b  The City Council may impose a special assessment against the property that is the subject of a citation if the citation has been issued to the property owner. If the citation concerns property not owned by the Responsible Person, the City Council may impose a special assessment against property owned by the Responsible Person. The City Manager shall record a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located when the special assessment procedure is used. When so made and confirmed, the cost shall constitute a lien on that property for the amount of the assessment. 
c  After confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be turned over to the tax collector for the county in which the property is located. At that point, it will be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular property tax bills levied against the lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes. Those amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. In the alternative, after recording, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law in the county and state in which the property is located. 
d  Nonpayment of fines which the city has made reasonable effort to collect shall be deemed a misdemeanor for which the Responsible Person may be prosecuted. 
e  Administrative citation fines collected pursuant to this Part shall be deposited into an appropriate fund to be administered in furtherance of the purposes of this Part and to fund such code enforcement and public nuisance abatement actions and proceedings, including but not limited to funds to reward reporters of graffiti and other code violations, as the City Council may identify or proscribe. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1171 - RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a Hearing Officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Orange County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1172 - NOTICES 
a  The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this Part shall be provided to the Responsible Person in accordance with the provisions of this Part. Unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such citation or notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
b  Failure to receive any notice specified in this Part does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
1173 - CIVIL OR CRIMINAL ACTIONS NOT AFFECTED 
Any administrative citations pursuant to this Part shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other action, civil or criminal, that may be brought to abate the public nuisance or violation or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same public nuisance or violation. 
(Ord. No. 1358, Sec. 3, 11-4-08)  
CHAPTER 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT  
PART 1 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
1210 - CITY HOLIDAYS 
The City's normal business days are Monday through Friday of each week, excluding holidays. The following are the holidays observed by the City: 
DATE 	HOLIDAY 
January 1 	New Year's Day 
Third Monday in February 	President's Day 
Last Monday in May 	Memorial Day 
July 4 	Independence Day 
First Monday in September 	Labor Day 
November 11 	Veterans Day 
Fourth Thursday in November 	Thanksgiving Day 
Day following Thanksgiving Day 	Day after Thanksgiving Day 
December 24 	Christmas Eve 
December 25 	Christmas Day 
December 31 	New Year's Eve 
 
When a holiday occurs on a Sunday, the following Monday will be observed instead. When a holiday occurs on a Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed instead. 
(Ord. No. 710; Ord. No. 1394, Sec. 1, 3-1-11)  
1211 - TRANSPARENCY IN CITY GOVERNMENT WEB PAGE 
The City shall make publicly available, and centralize on the City's web site, links to specified public reports, forms, city documents, and financial information. The materials to be linked and available include, but need not be limited to, those public reports, forms, city documents, and financial information specified by Resolution of the City Council, as updated from time-to-time. 
(Ord. No. 1388, Sec. 1, 9-21-10)  
PART 2 - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST (REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 1147)  
PART 3 - RESTRICTIONS ON GIFTS 
 
1230 - PURPOSE 
The City Council finds that the receipt of excessive amounts of gifts by public officials from persons who may do business with the City erodes public confidence in the impartiality of decisions made by those officials. The purpose of this part is to prohibit the receipt of gifts, valued individually or cumulatively at the dollar limit established by Government Code Section 89503, as adjusted on January 1 each odd-numbered year by the Fair Political Practices Commission to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index (the "Gift Limit"). 
(Ord. No. 1129, Sec. 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1269, Sec. 1, 4-7-03)  
1231 - DEFINITIONS 
Except as otherwise defined, the terms used in this Part 3 including the definition of "gift" shall have the same meaning as defined in the California Political Reform Act (Title 9 of the California Government Code) and regulations issued by the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to the authority of the Political Reform Act, as the act and regulations shall be, from time to time, amended. 
For the purposes of this part: 
(a)  "City" means the City of Tustin. 
(b)  "City Officer" means every person who is elected or appointed to an office in the City which is specified in Section 87200 of the California Government Code. 
(c)  "Designated employee" means every employee of the City who is designated in the City's Conflict of Interest Code to file a statement of economic interest and every member of a board or commission under the jurisdiction of the City Council required to file such a statement. 
(Ord. No. 1129, Sec. 1, 8-15-84; Ord. No. 1269, Sec. 1, 4-7-03)  
1232 - PROHIBITION 
(a)  No City officer or designated employee shall accept gifts from any single source in any calendar year with a total value, either individually or cumulatively, that exceeds the Gift Limit. 
(b)  Gifts which are not subject to limitation under state law and are not required to be disclosed on a statement of economic interest, pursuant to the Political Reform Act and regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission, are not included within the prohibition of 1232(a) above. 
(Ord. No. 1129, Sec. 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1269, Sec. 1, 4-7-03)  
1233 - PENALTIES 
(a)  Any City officer or designated employee who violates the provisions of Section 1232 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any Designated Employee who violates the provisions of Section 1232 may be subject to discipline for such violation, including termination of employment, or removal from office in the case of members of City Boards or Commissions. 
(Ord. No. 1129, Sec. 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1269, Sec. 1, 4-7-03)  
1234 - NO CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW INTENDED 
Nothing contained within this Part 3 is intended to conflict with provisions of the California Political Reform Act or the regulations adopted thereto by the Fair Political Practices Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1129, Sec. 1, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1269, Sec. 1, 4-7-03)  
PART 4. - CITY SEAL AND LOGO 
 
1240 - CITY SEAL—DESIGNATION 
The city seal is the impression made by that certain instrument retained and used by the City Clerk for the purpose of attesting documents as acts of the City Council. The general design and the details of the impression made by the city seal, shall correspond substantially with the following representation thereof:   
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1241 - CITY SEAL USE 
The city seal, or any facsimile thereof, shall not be affixed to any document or writing, except by the City Clerk or such assistants to the Clerk as may be authorized by the City Clerk, and except for the purpose of attesting the document to be an act of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1242 - CITY SEAL OMISSION, EFFECT 
No act of the City Council or document in evidence thereof shall be invalid by reason of the omission of the city seal. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1243 - CITY SEAL LOSS 
In the event of loss of the instrument used for affixing the seal, the words "Seal, City of Tustin, California", written by the City Clerk in attestation of a document, shall constitute the city seal. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1244 - CITY LOGO—DESIGNATION 
The city logos are designs used for the purpose of symbolically representing the authority of the City of Tustin and the capacity of its officers, employees and agents as representatives of the City of Tustin. The general design and the details of the city logo, shall correspond substantially with the following representation thereof:   
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1245 - USE IN ELECTION CAMPAIGN PROHIBITED 
No person shall use the city logo, or any facsimile thereof, for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any city or other public office of himself or herself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such city logo on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writings issued by the City of Tustin or the City Council as a whole pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1246 - USE BY PERSON OTHER THAN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
No person, other than an officer or employee of the City of Tustin, shall use the city logo or any facsimile thereof for any purpose except to the extent such officer or employee may be authorized to do so by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1247 - USE FOR MALICIOUS OR FINANCIAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED 
No person shall use the city logo, or any facsimile thereof, for any malicious purpose or for the purpose of personal financial gain. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1248 - MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF SOUVENIRS AND DECORATIVE ITEMS 
Nothing in this Part shall prevent a person from manufacturing or selling non-documentary objects, such as souvenirs or decorative items, bearing the city logo as part of the design, provided that such person undertakes such activity pursuant to agreement with the City, approved by the City Council or by such officer as the City Council may designate, containing such requirements and limitations as the City Council or such officer shall deem appropriate to assure that such use of the city logo is in good taste and in the best interests of the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
1249 - AUTHORITY OF CITY CLERK 
The City Clerk or the City Clerk's representative shall be the custodian of the seal and logo of the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1312, Sec. 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1352, Sec. 1, 4-15-08)  
PART 5 - CITY COUNCIL BADGES 
 
1260 - ISSUANCE OF BADGES 
A.  For the purposes of this Part, the term "badge" shall mean a badge, credentials, or such other form of identification as allowed or provided under this Code or state law. 
B.  The City Manager is authorized to issue to each member of the City Council a city badge designating the member as a member of the City Council, Mayor pro tem, or Mayor. No member of the City Council shall have more than one badge at any time during such member's term of office. 
C.  The size, shape, and content of each badge shall not be designed in such a manner that an ordinary reasonable person would be deceived into believing that such badge is authorized for use by a peace officer or that the badge could indicate membership in an organization whose name would reasonably be understood to imply that the organization is composed of law enforcement personnel. The terms "peace officer, "police officer," "police," "law enforcement," or any similar term shall not be used on any badge issued pursuant to the provisions of this Part. The City Manager shall consult with the Police Chief and the City Attorney on the design of any badge proposed to be issued to a member of the City Council. 
D.  Each badge issued shall have a unique serial or identification number and the City Manager shall maintain records containing the serial or identification number of each badge, the date of issuance, and the name and resident address of the member of the Council to whom the badge is issued. 
E.  Each member of the City Council to whom a badge is issued shall reimburse the City for the cost of the badge in the event the badge is destroyed through the member's negligence or the badge is lost. 
F.  The City Manager shall formulate and implement rules and regulations consistent with, and in furtherance of, the provisions of this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1329, Sec. 2, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1342, Sec. 1, 9-18-07)  
1261 - PRESENTATION OF BADGE UPON TERMINATION OF SERVICE 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Tustin City Code, the City may present to the member of the Council the member's badge or badges (including if applicable a Mayor pro tem badge and/or Mayor badge) upon termination of the members service as a member of the Council. Prior to such presentation, the City Manager shall cause the badge or badges to be affixed permanently to a plaque, within a frame, within lucite, or otherwise presented in a manner that will effectively preclude improper use of the badge. 
B.  No person shall remove a badge presented from the plaque, frame, lucite, or other presentation material, or wear such badge, or otherwise display the badge unless the badge is displayed in or on the presentation material. 
(Ord. No. 1329, Sec. 2, 2-20-07)  
1262 - UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY COUNCIL BADGE 
It shall be unlawful for any member of the City Council to use the badge for any purpose except as reasonably necessary for identification when acting in an official capacity as a member of the City Council or as the Mayor pro tem or the Mayor. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to wear, exhibit, or use the badge with the intent of fraudulently impersonating a city official or of fraudulently inducing the belief that the person is a city official at the time the badge is worn, displayed, or used. 
(Ord. No. 1329, Sec. 2, 2-20-07)  
CHAPTER 3 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
1301 - REGULAR MEETINGS 
A.  Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each calendar month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, Tustin City Center, Centennial Way at Main Street, Tustin, California. An alternative time or location for one or more regular meetings may be approved by City Council Resolution approved at the least 14 calendar days prior to the meeting date. When the regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the following day. 
B.  Closed sessions of the City Council [may be conducted] at 5:30 prior to the 7:00 p.m. business portion of regular meetings and at the same location. If necessary, closed sessions not completed prior to the business portion will be considered at the conclusion of the business portion of the meeting, or as otherwise determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 735, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 883, Sec. 1, 2-22-83; Ord. No. 1326, Sec. 1, 1-15-07; Ord. No. 1474, Sec. 1, 11-1-16) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 5 of Ord. No. 1326 provided the provisions of section 1 (amending Sec. 1301) shall become effective on March 1, 2007.  
1302 - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
The proceedings of the City Council shall be governed under "Robert's Rules of Order," or such other rules or regulations as the City Council may adopt or implement on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law, but no ordinance, resolution, proceeding or other action of the council shall be invalidated or the legality thereof otherwise affected by the failure or omission to observe or follow such rules. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 2-8; Ord. No. 2, Sec. 10; Ord. No. 1326, Sec. 2, 1-15-07)  
1303 - RESERVED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1427, adopted December 4, 2012, repealed in its entirety section 1303 which pertained to compensation of members and derived from Ord. No. 683; Ord. No. 806, adopted August 6, 1979; Ord. No. 865, adopted January 18, 1982; Ord. No. 903, adopted January 16, 1984; Ord. No. 941, adopted September 3, 1985; Ord. No. 1000, adopted February 16, 1988; Ord. No. 1074, adopted July 1, 1991; Ord. No. 1227, adopted January 17, 2000; Ord. No. 1298, adopted April 4, 2005; Ord. No. 1326, adopted January 15, 2007; and Ord. No. 1383, adopted July 6, 2010.  
1304 - COUNCILMEMBER EXPENSES 
Payment and reimbursement of expenses of councilmembers shall be accorded only as provided by State law or as provided in this section. 
(a)  Expenses of councilmembers shall be paid or reimbursed pursuant to ordinances and resolutions of the City Council only. 
(b)  No councilmember shall have authority to obligate the City for any expense, purport to incur any expense on behalf of the City or be entitled to reimbursement for any expense except as prescribed by State law, the Tustin City Code, or both. 
(c)  No councilmember shall direct the City Manager or any member of City staff to incur any expense on behalf of a councilmember that has not been provided for in the annual City budget. 
(d)  Expense accounts of the annual City budget shall not be adjusted to include a nonbudgeted City Council expense unless approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 745; Ord. No. 1096, Sec. 1, 7-20-92)  
1305 - COMMISSIONERS WHO ARE CANDIDATES FOR COUNCIL 
a 
Non-Eligibility of Candidate to Serve as Commissioner 
No person shall be appointed to serve or to continue to serve as a member of any commission of the City while that person is serving as a member of the City Council. 
b 
Resignation of Commissioner Council Candidate 
Any member of any commission of the City who has been elected to the City Council shall immediately resign from that person's position as commissioner upon certification by the City Council of that person's election results. In the event such resignation is not filed by said commissioner, that person's appointment shall be terminated as of the date of the certification of that member's election results. 
(Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. II, 5-21-13)  
1306 - MINUTES OF CLOSED SESSIONS OF THE COUNCIL 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 54957.2, the City Attorney is directed to attend each closed session of the City Council and keep and enter into a minute book a record of topics discussed and decisions made at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1011, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 1243, Sec. 1, 8-20-01) 
Note— It should be noted that Section 2 of Ord. No. 1243, adopted Aug. 20, 2001, provided that any tape recordings previously made and retained under prior Section 1306 shall be erased or destroyed.  
1307 - LIMITATION ON CONSECUTIVE TERMS OF MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL 
a 
Findings and Purpose 
The people hereby find and declare: 
(1)  The Founders established a system of representative government based upon free, fair, and competitive elections. The increased concentration of political power in the hands of incumbent representatives has made our electoral system less free, less competitive, and less representative. 
(2)  The ability of legislators to serve an unlimited number of terms contributes heavily to the extremely high number of incumbents who are reelected. This unfair incumbent advantage discourages qualified candidates from seeking public office and creates a class of career politicians, instead of the citizen representatives envisioned by the Founders. These career politicians become representatives of the bureaucracy, rather than of the people whom they are elected to represent. 
(3)  The purpose of this section is to restore a free and democratic system of fair elections, and to encourage qualified candidates to seek public office, by limiting the powers of incumbency, by placing limitations upon the number of consecutive terms which may be served by members of the City Council. 
b 
Limitations on Consecutive Terms for Councilmembers 
(1)  No person shall be elected as a member of the City Council for more than two (2) full consecutive terms. Any member of the City Council who has served two (2) consecutive terms shall not be reelected as a member of the City Council for at least two (2) years from the last date of the second consecutive term. 
(2)  This section shall not operate to shorten any current term of members of the City Council presently in office. 
(3)  This section shall apply prospectively from the effective date of the enactment of Government Code Section 36502.5, which date is January 1, 1997. 
(4)  This section shall not be amended or repealed by the City Council without the approval of the electors of the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1126, Sec. 1, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 1175, Sec. 3, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1180, Sec. 3, 3-17-97)  
1308 - RESERVED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 1 of Ord. No. 1427, adopted December 4, 2012, repealed in its entirety section 1308 which pertained to benefits of members and derived from Ord. No. 1383, adopted July 6, 2010.  
CHAPTER 4 - CITY OFFICERS  
PART 1 - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
 
1411 - OFFICE ESTABLISHED 
The office of the City Manager is hereby created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-27/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1) 
a 
Residence Requirements 
Residence in the City shall not be required as a condition of appointment. (Ord. No. 514; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1) 
b 
Eligibility for Appointment 
No person elected as a Councilman of the City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one (1) year has elapsed after such Council member shall have ceased to be a member of the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-29/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1) 
c 
Compensation 
The City Manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall from time to time determine and duly fix, and such compensation and expense shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-32/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1) 
d 
Position to be Full-Time 
The position of City Manager shall be full-time, and the Manager shall have no other employment without prior Council approval. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-46/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1) 
e 
Appointment of Manager Pro Tempore 
The City Council may from time to time appoint a Manager pro tempore, to serve during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-31/Ord. No. 322; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 1)  
1412 - COUNCIL-CITY MANAGER RELATIONSHIP 
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, and except for the purpose of inquiry, neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his orders and instructions from the City Council when sitting in a duly held meeting of the City Council, and no individual Council member shall give orders or instructions to the City Manager. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-48/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 2)  
1413 - ASSISTANCE FROM OTHER CITY OFFICERS 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the City Treasurer and City Attorney to assist the City Manager as well as the City Council in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the City. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-49/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 3) 
(Ord. No. 1417, Sec. 1, 9-18-12)  
1414 - ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS OF COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES 
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Agency, and any other department, commission, board, or committee hereafter created by the City Council upon his own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof. He shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-50/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 4)  
1415 - POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and subject to policy set by the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the City. He shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute and such other authority as may be granted by the City Council. Without limiting the foregoing general grant of powers, responsibilities, and duties, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in the subsections. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-33/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
a 
Enforcement of Laws, Franchises, Contracts, Permits, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to see that all laws and ordinances of the City are enforced and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City Council are faithfully observed. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-34/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
b 
Authority over Department Heads 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments, except the City Attorney and City Treasurer. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-35/Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
(Ord. No. 1417, Sec. 1, 9-18-12) 
c 
Powers as Director of Personnel 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to act as Director of Personnel. He shall have the authority to appoint, promote, discipline, demote, remove, reassign, or dismiss all department heads, officers, and employees of the City, except the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and the City Attorney, subject to any and all applicable rules, regulations, position allocations and financial appropriations. All department heads, officers, and employees shall perform their duties subject to the direction of the City Manager or that of the superior to whom the Manager may assign such officer or employer. Provided, that the Manager may delegate to any other department head, officer or employee the authority to hire or discharge any employees or officers so designated by the Manager. For all department heads, officers and employees, normal merit pay increases will be approved or denied by the City Manager. Exceptional merit pay increases for all department heads, officers and employees must be approved by the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-36; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 332; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
d 
Reorganization of Offices, Positions, etc. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Manager to reorganize, consolidate or combine duties, offices, positions, departments or units under his direction within the limits established by this code or the annual budget, as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the City's business. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-37; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
e 
Duty to Recommend Adoption of Necessary Measures and Ordinances 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient for the welfare of the City. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-38; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
f 
Attendance at Council Meetings Required 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-39; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
g 
Financial Reports to City Council Required 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City, and to prepare short-range and long-range financial plans as necessary and desirable. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-40; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
h 
Preparation of Annual Budget and Salary Plan 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the City Council for its approval and to be responsible for their administration after adoption. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-41; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
i 
To Act as Purchasing Agent 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to purchase, or cause to be purchased, all supplies for all the departments and divisions of the City. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the City Council except on report and approval of the City Manager. Neither the City Manager nor any member of City staff shall incur any expense on behalf of a councilmember that has not been provided for in the annual City budget. Neither the City Manager nor any member of City staff shall adjust expense accounts of the annual City budget to include a nonbudgeted City Council expense unless approved by the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-42; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5; Ord. No. 1096, Sec. 2, 7-20-92) 
j 
Investigation of Affairs and Obligations of City 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof and any contract for the proper performance of any obligations of or to the City. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-43; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
k 
Complaints; Service by Public Utilities, Franchises and Permits 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City Government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully performed and observed. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-44; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
l 
Supervision over Public Property 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets, and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council and not specifically assigned to another board or officer for care and control. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-45; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
m 
Reports and Recommendations 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to make such reports and recommendations as may be necessary or desirable or as are requested by the City Council. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-47; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
n 
Service as Officer or Department Head 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to serve in any appointive office or as head of a department or division in the City Government to which he is qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
o 
Leadership for Civic Movements 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to provide leadership for civic movements to benefit the residents of the City when so authorized by the City Council. (Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5) 
p 
Additional Duties 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the City Council. (Ord. No. 848, Sec. 5)  
1416 - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 
a 
Required Vote; Notice of Intention to Remove 
The removal of the City Manager shall be only upon a three-member or more vote of the whole Council in the City in regular Council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his intended removal by the City Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the Council's intention to remove him and reasons therefor at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his removal. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-51; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 6) 
b 
Hearing by Council 
Within seven (7) days after the delivery to the City Manager of such notice, he may, by written notification to the City Clerk, request a hearing before the City Council. Thereafter the City Council shall fix a time for the hearing, which shall be held at its usual meeting place but before the expiration of the thirty-day period, at which the City Manager shall appear and be heard with or without counsel. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-52; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 6) 
c 
Suspension Pending Hearing 
After furnishing the City Manager with written notice of intended removal the City Council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the Council, passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-53; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 6) 
d 
Discretion of Council; Decision to be Final 
In removing the City Manager, the City Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the City Manager to present to the City Council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. (TCC-1, Sec. 22-54; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 6) 
e 
Limitations on Removal 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article hereinbefore enumerated, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the City, at which election a member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of such ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding subsection as to the removal of the City Manager shall apply and be effective. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-55; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 6)  
1417 - WRITTEN NOTICE OF RESIGNATION REQUIRED 
The City Manager shall give the Council thirty (30) days' written notice of his intention to resign. (TCC-1, Sec. 2-56; Ord. No. 269, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 848, Sec. 7)  
1418 - REFERENCES TO "CITY ADMINISTRATOR" DEEMED APPLICABLE 
All references in this Tustin City Code, in Resolutions of the City Council of the City of Tustin, in the Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of Tustin, in the Council Policy Manual, in agreements and contracts, and in all other City documents, to "City Administrator" shall apply to and be deemed to refer to the City Manager and all duties and responsibilities heretofore designated to the City Administrator shall be assumed and performed by the City Manager. (Ord. No. 863, 12-7-81)  
PART 2 - CITY CLERK[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 1417, adopted Sept. 18, 2012, deleted Part 2 of Article 1, which consisted of sections 1421—1423, and derived from TCC-1/Ord. No. 97 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
1421 - APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF THE CITY CLERK 
The City Manager shall appoint and remove the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the City Council shall from time to time determine and duly fix, and such compensation and expense shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. Residence requirements shall not be required as a condition of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Sec. 2, 9-18-12)  
1422 - DUTIES 
The City Clerk shall execute all duties as defined by the laws of the State of California, issues licenses and permits as authorized and directed by this Code and by ordinances or resolutions of the City Council duly enacted from time to time, and attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 1417, Sec. 2, 9-18-12)  
PART 3 - CITY TREASURER 
 
1431 - BOND REQUIRED 
Before entering upon duties of his office, the City Treasurer shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00). (Ord. No. 681, Sec. 1)  
CHAPTER 5 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
PART 1 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, adopted Nov. 1, 1982, amended Part 1 of Chapter 5 of Article 1 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Part 1 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of Sections 1511—1515, and was derived from Ord. No. 731, and Ord. No. 735, Sec. 2. 
 
1511 - PLANNING COMMISSION AUTHORITY 
a 
[Established] 
The Planning Commission of the City of Tustin is hereby established, with composition, jurisdiction, duties, terms of office and other characteristics as provided by law and as specified herein. 
b 
State Regulation 
Subject to the provisions of State Law, the Planning Commission shall be, and it hereby is declared to be regulated by the provisions of the Government Code of the State of California, statutes of the State of California, and such amendments thereto as may be adopted hereafter from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82)  
1512 - MEMBERS 
The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be both residents and registered voters of the City during all times they hold office. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 1393, Sec. 1, 2-15-11)  
1513 - APPOINTMENT AND TERMS 
a  Appointment. Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. All members of the Commission shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
b  Removal. All members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed upon motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes. A member of the Planning Commission shall automatically be deemed removed from office upon certification of election of that member to the City Council as provided in Section 1305b of this Code. 
c  Terms of Office. The terms of office of the three (3) current Planning Commission members who were appointed in 2017 are hereby extended to March 1, 2021. The terms of office of the two (2) current Planning Commission members who were appointed in 2016 are hereby extended to March 1, 2019. The term of each said office shall thereafter be for four (4) years commencing on the expiration date of each office as prescribed hereinabove. 
d  Limitation on Consecutive Terms of Office. For all terms that commence after January 1, 2017, no person shall be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive four-year terms on the Planning Commission. A term of office that commenced prior to January 1, 2017, shall not be counted when determining the number of consecutive terms a Commissioner has served. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 1015, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 1137, Sec. 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1233, Sec. 1, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 1255, Sec. 1, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 1, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. III, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1481, Sec. I, 5-16-17; Ord. No. 1502, Sec. II, 7-2-19)  
1514 - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS 
Members of the Planning Commission shall receive compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 942, Sec. 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 2, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. IV, 5-21-13)  
1515 - REGULAR MEETINGS 
The Planning Commission shall hold its regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, except when such a day falls on a legal holiday, in which event the Planning Commission shall meet at 7:00 p.m. on the first weekday following which is not a legal holiday. The Planning Commission may meet at such other times and places as hereafter may be determined from time to time by the Planning Commission to be necessary or convenient. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82; Ord. No. 1006, Sec. 1, 4-18-88; Ord. No. 1326, Sec. 4, 1-15-07) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 5 of Ord. No. 1326 provided the provisions of section 4 (amending § 1515) shall become effective on March 1, 2007.  
1516 - PLANNING AGENCY 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 65100 of the California Code, the Planning Commission of the City is established as the Planning Agency of the City. The Community Development Department shall assist the Planning Agency in the performance of all its duties as may now or hereafter be provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82)  
1517 - DIRECTIONS TO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT STAFF 
The Planning Commission may by motion regularly adopted make such requests and give such directions to the Community Development Department staff as are consistent with policies established by the City Council and within the budgetary limitations of the department. 
(Ord. No. 874, Sec. 1, 11-1-82)  
1518 - AUTHORITY PERTAINING TO FORMER REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
The Planning Commission shall serve as the decision making authority for land use entitlement actions that implement the General Plan and for which the former Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency is designated in any statute, ordinance, or specific plan as the decision making authority. 
(Ord. No. 1415, Sec. II, 3-6-12)  
PART 2 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION (Repealed by Ord. No. 734)  
PART 3 - LICENSE AND PERMIT BOARD (Repealed by Ord. No. 1252)  
PART 4 - AUDIT COMMISSION 
 
1537 - ESTABLISHMENT 
The Audit Commission of the City of Tustin is hereby established with composition, jurisdiction, duties, terms of office, compensation and other characteristics as specified in this Part. The Audit Commission shall perform duties of oversight, review, investigation and reporting and shall provide recommendations to the City Council on matters of finance, investments and audit as shall be prescribed by the City Council from time to time. Compensation of the members of the Audit Commission shall be as prescribed by ordinance of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1022, Sec. 1, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 1336, Sec. 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. V, 5-21-13)  
1538 - MEMBERS AND QUALIFICATIONS 
The Audit Commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be both residents and registered voters of the City during all times they hold office, subject to the following exception: Up to two (2) members may reside and be registered voters within the area served by the Tustin Water Department, but outside the City. 
(Ord. No. 1022, Sec. 1, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 1023, Sec. 1, 6-5-89; Ord. No. 1292, Sec. 2, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 1336, Sec. 6, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1353, Sec. 2, 6-17-08; Ord. No. 1393, Sec. 2, 2-15-11)  
1539 - APPOINTMENT AND TERMS 
a  Appointment. Members of the Audit Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. All members of the Commission shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
b  Removal. All members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed upon motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes. A member of the Audit Commission shall automatically be deemed removed from office upon certification of election of that member to the City Council as provided in Section 1305b of this Code. 
c  Terms of Office. The terms of office of the three (3) current Audit Commission members who were appointed in 2015 shall expire on March 1, 2019. The terms of office of the two (2) other Audit Commission members are hereby extended to March 1, 2021. The term of each said office shall thereafter be for four (4) years commencing on the expiration date of each office as prescribed hereinabove. 
d  Limitation on Consecutive Terms of Office. For all terms that commence after January 1, 2017, no person shall be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive four-year terms on the Audit Commission. A term of office that commenced prior to January 1, 2017, shall not be counted when determining the number of consecutive terms a Commissioner has served. 
(Ord. No. 1022, Sec. 1, 3-20-89; Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 3, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 1234, Sec. 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 1255, Sec. 2, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 2, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. VI, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1481, Sec. II, 5-16-17; Ord. No. 1502, Sec. III, 7-2-19)  
PART 5 - COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION 
 
1551 - COMMISSION ESTABLISHED 
There is hereby established the Community Services Commission of the City of Tustin with the compensation, jurisdiction, duties, terms of office and other characteristics as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07)  
1552 - MEMBERS 
The Community Services Commission shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be both residents and registered voters of the City during all times they hold office. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1283, Sec. 1, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1393, Sec. 3, 2-15-11)  
1553 - APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS 
a  Appointment. Members of the Community Services Commission shall be appointed by the City Council. All members of the Commission shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
b  Removal. All members of the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed upon motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes. A member of the Community Services Commission shall automatically be deemed removed from office upon certification of election of that member to the City Council as provided in Section 1305b of this Code. 
c  Terms of Office. The terms of office of the three (3) current Community Services Commission members who were appointed in 2017 are hereby extended to March 1, 2021. The terms of office of the two (2) current Community Services Commission members who were appointed in 2016 are hereby extended to March 1, 2019. The term of each said office shall thereafter be for four (4) years commencing on the expiration date of each office as prescribed hereinabove. 
d  Limitation on Consecutive Terms of Office. For all terms that commence after January 1, 2018, no person shall be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive four-year terms on the Community Services Commission. A term of office that commenced prior to January 1, 2018, shall not be counted when determining the number of consecutive terms a Commissioner has served. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1016, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 4, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 1137, Sec. 3, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1233, Sec. 2, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 1255, Sec. 3, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 1283, Sec. 2, 2-17-04; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 3, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. VII, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1481, Sec. III, 5-16-17; Ord. No. 1502, Sec. IV, 7-2-19)  
1554 - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS 
Members of the Community Services Commission shall receive compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 5, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 1434, Sec. VIII, 5-21-13)  
1555 - DUTIES 
The Community Services Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the City Council and the Community Services Staff on all matters relating to parks, park design and development, recreation, and community services. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07)  
1556 - MEETINGS 
At its first meeting, the Community Services Commission shall establish, by resolution, the time and place of subsequent regular meetings which shall be held not less than once every three (3) months. The Community Services Commission may meet at such other times and places as hereafter may be determined from time to time by the Commission to be necessary or convenient. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act, Government Code Sections 54950 through 54961. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07)  
1557 - JOINT MEETING WITH CITY COUNCIL 
The City Council shall meet with the Community Services Commission at least once each year to give the Commission direction regarding Council policy. 
(Ord. No. 1009, Sec. 1, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1331, Sec. 5, 3-6-07)  
PART 6 - CULTURAL RESOURCES ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
1561 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 1331, adopted March 6, 2007, repealed § 1561 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to terms of office as enacted by Ord. No. 1058, Sec. 6, 3-18-91; as amended by Ord. No. 1301, § II, 9-19-05.  
PART 7 - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
1571 - BOARD ESTABLISHED 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official or the Fire Marshal relative to the application and interpretation of the City's building regulations or the California Building Standards Codes (Tustin City Code Chapter 8), as adopted by the City, including any plan check or inspection determination, and any other matter specified in the Tustin City Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Building and Fire Board of Appeals. For matters related to the interpretation of the 1997 Uniform Housing Code, the Building Board of Appeal shall act as the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1572 - COMPOSITION 
The Building Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall be both residents and registered voters of the City during all times they hold office. The Board shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction, fire protection, or standard waterworks practices. Preference in the selection of the members of the Board shall be given to those individuals who possess state licenses or certificates in the field of engineering, construction, or related professions or trades. At least two (2) members of the Board shall be physically disabled. The Building Official shall act as secretary of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1573 - APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS 
a  Appointment. Members of the Building Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council. All members of the Board shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
b  Removal. All members of the Board shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed upon motion of the City Council adopted by at least three (3) affirmative votes. A member of the Building Board of Appeals shall automatically be deemed removed from office upon certification of election of that member to the City Council as provided in Section 1305b of this Code. 
c  Terms of Office. The terms of office shall be for four (4) years commencing on the date of appointment for each office. 
d  Limitation on Consecutive Terms of Office. No person shall be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive four-year terms on the Building Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18; Ord. No. 1502, Sec. V, 7-2-19)  
1574 - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS 
Members of the Building Board of Appeals shall receive compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1575 - BOARD RULES AND PROCEDURES 
The Building Board of Appeals shall, from time to time, adopt or amend Rules of Procedure pursuant to Section 113.1 of the California Building Code and Section 203.1 of the Uniform Housing Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the California Building Standards Code), for use by the Tustin Building Board of Appeals and the Housing Advisory and Appeals Board as the rules of procedure for conducting administrative appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1576 - TIME LIMITS 
Applications for appeal shall be filed with the Tustin City Clerk during regular business hours within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the City provides notice of the order or action of the Building Official, provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted as such in accordance with the applicable law, such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1577 - FEES AND NOTICES 
Applicants for a hearing before the Building Board of Appeals shall pay a fee in the amount set by City Council resolution prior to administrative processing for any proceedings. The applicant shall complete the established City application form for an appeals hearing along with submittal of required fees. 
Applicants for a Building Board of Appeals hearing shall be notified at least one (1) week prior to any hearing or proceedings concerning their case. The applicant shall be given the opportunity to present his/her case at any proceedings involving their applications. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
1578 - FINAL DECISION 
Pursuant to Section 113.1 of the California Building Code, the decision of the Building Board of Appeals shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 2, 1-16-18)  
CHAPTER 6 - FINANCE  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
1611 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT 
a 
Established 
A Finance Department is hereby established to be responsible for the accounting and financial functions and activities of the City. 
b 
Responsibilities 
The Finance Department shall perform the following duties and responsibilities, subject to the policies and direction of the City Manager: 
(1)  Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the City and its various departments. 
(2)  Perform all accounting functions and duties in accordance with appropriate municipal accounting procedures. 
(3)  Keep and maintain appropriate inventory records of city property. 
(4)  Perform functions relating to the administration of taxes levied and collected by the City. 
(5)  Perform all assigned municipal functions and duties relating to preparation of, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands against the City, including payroll. 
(6)  Supervise purchases of supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and materials required by the City. 
(7)  Assist in the preparation of an annual budget and in its administration. 
c 
Finance Director 
The Finance Department shall be managed and directed by the Finance Director, subject to the policies and direction of the City Manager. 
(1)  The statutory accounting and financial duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Government Code Sections 40802 through 40805 shall be performed by the Finance Director. 
(2)  If so appointed by the City Council, the Finance Director shall assume the title of and perform the duties of City Treasurer. 
d 
Audit and Approval of Demands 
Claims and demands shall be audited by the Finance Director or such person as he may designate, shall be certified as to their accuracy and the availability of funds for payment thereof. The register of audited demands shall be submitted to the City Council for confirmation prior to payment, provided, however, that payroll warrants and checks and warrants and checks drawn for payment of demands certified or approved by the Finance Director or designee as conforming to a budget approved by ordinance or resolution of the City Council need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment. Budgeted demands paid by warrants or checks prior to audit by the City Council shall be presented to City Council for ratification and approval at its first meeting after delivery of the warrants or checks. 
e 
Checks and Warrants 
(1)  No check, order or warrant upon the City Treasury shall be drawn except upon and in accordance with the terms and provisions of an ordinance, resolution or minute order of the City Council, the Oversight Board of the Successor Agency to the Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency (the "Agency"), or the Tustin Public Finance Authority (the "Authority"), and unless there are sufficient unencumbered funds in the fund upon which it is drawn. 
(2)  All checks, orders and warrants upon the City Treasury for payment of any money drawn in the name of the City, the Agency, or the Authority, on its respective account, shall bear the electronic signature of any two (2) of: the City Manager, City Clerk, Finance Director, City Treasurer, and other person or persons designated by resolution or minute order of the City Council, the Agency, or the Authority. The designated depository shall be entitled to honor and to charge the City, Agency, or Authority, as applicable, for all such checks, drafts or other orders for the payment of money. 
(Ord. No. 871, Sec. 1, 5-17-82; Ord. No. 1164, Sec. 1, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 1490, Sec. I, 1-16-18) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 871, Sec. 1, adopted May 17, 1982, amended Section 1611 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Section 1611 pertained to checks and warrants and was derived from Ord. No. 388 and Ord. No. 832, adopted Aug. 18, 1980.  
1612 - INVESTMENT OF FUNDS 
a 
Surplus. 
In the discretion of the City Treasurer, any surplus funds that are not needed for the immediate operation of the City, Agency, or Authority shall be invested to bring the maximum legal and safe return to the City. 
b 
State and Local Compliance. 
All investments shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of California and the then currently adopted City Investment Policy, and no other investments except those so authorized shall be utilized. 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1164, Sec. 2, adopted Apr. 1, 1996, repealed Ord. No. 832, adopted Aug. 18, 1980, being section 1612, Investment of funds. Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 1164 enacted new provisions pertaining to the same subject matter. 
c 
Report to Council. 
Periodic reports shall be made to the Council as to the nature of the investments and the returns thereon, and at such other times as the Council may ask for such reports. (Ord. No. 1164, Sec. 1, 4-1-96)  
PART 2 - PURCHASING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. I of Ord. No. 1438, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, amended Part 2 of Chapter 6 of Article 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Part 2 consisted of sections 1621—1626, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from TCC-1; Ord. 277; Ord. 284; Ord. 871, adopted May 17, 1982; and Ord. No. 1287, adopted Aug. 16, 2004. 
 
1621 - ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to secure for the City supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to ensure the quality of purchases, a purchasing policy is hereby adopted. 
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Purchasing System." 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1622 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
"Facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement (subject to the limitation found in the definition for public project in this section). 
"Maintenance work" means work that includes all of the following: 
a.  Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes; 
b.  Minor repainting; 
c.  Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one (1) inch; 
d.  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
"Professional services" means, but is not limited to, any type of professional services that may be lawfully rendered including the services of architects, attorneys, consultants, engineers, physicians, accountants, information technology professionals, or other individuals or organizations professing a high degree of professional or technical expertise, but does not include public projects. 
"Public works contract" shall have the meaning set forth in California Public Contract Code 1101, as amended from time to time. 
"Public project" means any of the following to which the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (California Public Contract Code section 22000 et seq.) applies: 
a.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated facility; or 
b.  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated facility. 
"Purchase order" means a written authorization by the issuing party for the recipient to provide labor, materials or services for which the issuing party agrees to pay. 
"Responsible bid" means an offer, submitted by a responsible bidder in ink or typewritten form, to furnish supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services in conformity with specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included in the invitation for bids. 
"Responsible bidder" means a bidder who submits a responsible bid; who has furnished, when requested, information and data to prove that his financial resources, production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services on which the bids are made, and who has not violated, or attempted to violate, any provision of this Part. 
"Supplies, materials and equipment" mean any and all articles or things which shall be furnished to or used by any agency. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1623 - PURCHASING MANAGER 
a.  Creation of Position of Purchasing Manager 
There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Manager, who shall be the City Manager. The City Manager may delegate, subject to his control and direction, any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as Purchasing Manager to any other officer or employee of the City. 
b.  Power and Duties 
1.  As Purchasing Manager, the City Manager directs and supervises the acquisition of all goods and services under the authority of TCC Section 1623a. 
2.  Purchasing Agents. In accordance with TCC Section 1623a the City Manager may delegate responsibility for administering purchasing policies and procedures to one or more department heads. A department head who has been delegated authority by the Purchasing Manager hereunder is referred to herein as a Purchasing Agent. Unless the Purchasing Manager directs otherwise, the authorized Purchasing Agents shall include: 
i.  Deputy City Manager 
ii.  Director of Finance 
iii.  Director of Parks and Recreation Services 
iv.  Director of Community Development 
v.  Chief of Police 
vi.  Director of Public Works 
3.  Purchasing Delegates. Additionally, the Purchasing Manager may delegate authority to the Purchasing Agents to delegate authority to additional individuals within their supervision who shall be authorized to make purchases. Individuals delegated purchasing authority hereunder are referred to as "Purchasing Delegates". Purchasing Delegates shall be designated in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  A written list of Purchasing Delegates must be submitted to the Finance Director and include the name and maximum dollar purchasing authority authorized for each individual. 
ii.  A written list of Purchasing Delegates must be approved on an annual basis or upon changes in employment status, whichever is more frequent, by the Purchasing Manager, Finance Director, and the applicable Purchasing Agent. 
iii.  The Finance Director must maintain a written record of all approved Purchasing Delegates. 
4.  The Purchasing Manager or the Finance Director are each authorized to approve all purchases regardless of dollar value if the following conditions are met: 
i.  The purchase is for a purpose, and within an amount, appropriated by City Council; and 
ii.  The purchase follows this ordinance with regards to use of purchase orders, contracts and bids or quotes. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1624 - PURCHASING PROCEDURE 
a.  Availability of Funds. Except in emergencies as defined in Section 1625a, no notice of award of contract shall be issued, no contract shall be signed and no open market purchase order shall be issued unless the unexpended balance in the appropriation or appropriations concerned is sufficient to defray the amount of such contract or purchase order. 
b.  Purchaser Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate handling a purchase: 
1.  To reduce, to the maximum extent possible, the number of purchase transactions by combining into bulk orders and contracts the requirements of departments or City for common-use items or items repetitively purchased. 
2.  To obtain a completed IRS Form W-9 from any vendor not previously used for City purchases and submit it to the finance department. The finance department shall perform procedures to ensure the validity of all new vendors before any purchase can be made with the new vendor. 
3.  To ensure that the person that documents the receipt of the goods purchased is not the same individual that authorized the purchase and to follow the procedures of TCC Section 1629 for inspection of materials and equipment. 
4.  Except as otherwise authorized in this Part or by State or Federal law, to select the lowest responsible bidder when bids are solicited, whether formal or informal. If the lowest priced bid is not selected, then the decision process must be documented explaining why the lowest bid was not chosen. 
5.  If the item(s) to be purchased is only available through one vendor and or sole source provider, back up verifying that the vendor is the sole source provider must be provided. 
c.  The Purchasing Manager is authorized to prescribe the use of various types of contracts and orders, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Use of petty cash is authorized for single purchases of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or less. Petty cash reimbursements must be supported by a receipt and approved by the employee's supervisor. The Finance Department will review the receipts and approvals attached to the request for petty cash replenishment from each department to verify purchases made are approved and legitimate. 
2.  Purchase orders shall be used for all purchases of goods, materials and equipment in accordance with the following: 
i.  Any single item or aggregate purchase with an estimated value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or greater. 
ii.  When the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent, or Purchasing Delegate expects to make multiple purchases with a single vendor and purchases are expected to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) annually for a single project, he or she should utilize an open purchase order. Open purchase orders must be approved by the Purchasing Manager or Purchasing Agent and renewed at least annually. 
d.  With the exception of emergencies (as defined in TCC Section 1625a) and the other exceptions noted in TCC Sections 1625b and 1625c, the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent and Purchasing Delegate shall follow the following procedures with regards to purchases of goods, materials and equipment: 
1.  For any single item or aggregate purchase with an estimated value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall solicit three (3) informal bids or quotes. 
i.  Bids or quotes may be obtained from the vendors in verbal or written format. 
ii.  The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate must submit written documentation of the bids and quotes with the purchase order. 
2.  For any single item or aggregate purchase with an estimated value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall solicit three (3) formal bids. 
i.  Bids must be obtained in writing from the vendors. 
ii.  The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate must submit written documentation of the bids with the purchase order. 
3.  Any single item or aggregate purchase of vehicles and heavy-duty equipment and machinery or maintenance with an estimated value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or greater must be approved by City Council. 
e.  Professional development and training costs do not require purchase orders. Any travel related costs should also be in accordance with the City's Travel Policy. 
f.  Purchases by credit card of goods, material, and equipment must follow the following procedures: 
1.  Credit cards may be provided to employees as determined appropriate by the Finance Director, in consultation with the employee's immediate supervisor. 
2.  The Finance Director and in his/her absence the City Manager is responsible for the issuance of credit cards, accounting, monitoring, and generally overseeing compliance with these procedures. 
3.  Credit card limits will be determined by the Finance Director and in his/her absence the City Manager. There shall be no cash access feature (cash advance) on the credit cards. The Finance Director shall establish policies for the safekeeping of credit cards and procedures in the event a credit card is lost, stolen or destroyed. 
4.  Credit cards must only be used by City employees for proper City business purposes. Use of credit cards for personal purchases is prohibited. 
5.  Employees using credit cards must retain detailed credit card receipts, attach them to the credit card statements and present this documentation to their immediate supervisor for approval. In the case of meals and business travel expenses, each receipt must include the names of all persons involved in the purchase, and a brief description of the business purpose. Receipts shall be reconciled to the monthly credit card statement by the Finance Department. An employee who fails to provide credit card receipts to the Finance Department within three (3) days of when the charges were made may be required, at the Finance Director's discretion, to reimburse the City for the charges, and at the Finance Director's discretion, may have his or her credit card privileges revoked. 
6.  Each credit card issued in the name of the City of Tustin will be kept in a safe place and released for use only under the authority of the Finance Director. Credit cards are the property of the City and shall be returned to the employee's supervisor upon demand or upon termination of employment with the City, whichever occurs first. 
7.  Before being issued a credit card, employees must complete and sign the acknowledgement form stating that they understand and will comply with the City's credit card policy. 
8.  Examples of allowable uses of credit cards include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Conferences/training/seminars (registration, airline/car rental, hotel accommodations, meals and fuel). 
ii.  Business lunch with representatives from other government agencies or consultant under contract to the City, furnishing lunch for interview panels and/or evaluation review boards. 
iii.  Publications/manuals. 
iv.  Providing meals, equipment and material to work crews in cases of emergency. 
v.  Should the credit card be used to purchase goods, materials or services, the purchase must be made in a manner consistent with Section 1624c. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1625 - EXCEPTIONS TO PURCHASING PROCEDURE 
a.  Emergency Purchases. The emergency procedure applies to purchases made necessary from an emergency situation that poses an immediate threat to public health, welfare or safety as determined by the Purchasing Manager for which no time exists to seek Council action or approval, if such action or approval were otherwise required. 
1.  An emergency situation is defined as follows: 
i.  A public disaster; 
ii.  An immediate need to prepare for national or local defense; and 
iii.  A breakdown of machinery or an essential service immediately affecting public health, safety, or welfare. 
2.  The Purchasing Manager, a Purchasing Agent, or any Purchasing Delegate may purchase supplies, equipment, or services directly subject to parameters set forth in City Council resolution(s) or administrative guidelines. The Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate will submit a report of the circumstances of the emergency to the Purchasing Manager as soon as possible. The report will be filed with the City Council and will be entered in the minutes of the Council at its next regular meeting. 
b.  Bidding: Exceptions. 
1.  Purchases of supplies and equipment and contracts for Public Projects, except Public Works Contracts, shall be by bidding procedures pursuant to the provisions of Section 1624 and as described in sections 1626 and 1627 of this Part; 
2.  Bidding shall be dispensed with upon authorization of the Purchasing Manager or the Finance Director: 
i.  Where bidding would be impossible or impractical; 
ii.  Where the commodity or service can be obtained from only one (1) vendor. When there is only one (1) vendor that provides the product or service, the details must be documented and supported in order to dispense with bidding requirements; 
iii.  Where the price of the commodity or service is controlled by law such that bidding would be unlikely to result in any cost savings; or 
iv.  For Public Works Contracts that are subject to the provisions of the California Public Contract Code, in which case the Contract(s) shall be procured in conformity with the Public Contract Code. 
3.  For the purposes of this section: 
i.  "Impossible" shall mean impossibility or extreme and unreasonable difficulty or expense; and 
ii.  "Impractical" shall mean incapable of being performed by the bid procedure. 
4.  Whenever exceptions to bidding procedures are authorized, the Purchasing Manager shall prepare a report in detail to the City Council at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. 
c.  Other Exceptions. When in the opinion of the Purchasing Manager or Purchasing Agent supplies, materials or equipment can be more efficiently or more cheaply obtained if acquired on behalf of the City by the State Department of General Services or through the County of Orange Cooperative Purchasing Program, or other government purchasing program, the Purchasing Manager or Purchasing Agent shall so advise the City Council. Acquisition of any such supplies, materials or equipment by the State Department of General Services or through the County of Orange Cooperative Purchasing Program or other government purchasing program may be authorized by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1626 - PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
a.  Use of Requests for Proposals. The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall make use of the Request for Proposal (RFP) process and/or obtain quotes for Professional Services whenever practical. 
b.  Guidelines for Selection. The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate primarily responsible for the project for which Professional Services are required shall select firms or individuals based on their ability to perform the specific functions including, but not limited to, such factors as: 
1.  Overall professional experience, reliability, and continuity of the firm as related to the tasks described in the solicitation for proposals or bids; 
2.  Professional experience of the firm in executing contracts of a similar nature; 
3.  Adequacy of personnel numbers within specific disciplines required to complete the work required by the solicitation for proposals or bids; 
4.  Experience and training of key personnel as related to the work described in the solicitation for proposals or bids; 
5.  Adequacy of number of principal(s) which are intended to be assigned to the contract; 
6.  Knowledge of applicable regulations and technology associated with the contract; 
7.  Quality and timeliness of recently completed or nearly completed projects which were similar to the work described in the solicitation for proposals or bids; 
8.  Specialized qualifications for the services to be performed. 
Such factors shall be weighed by the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate and by the City department primarily responsible for the project according to the nature of the contract, the needs of the City and complexity and special requirements of the specific contract for which the services will be provided. 
c.  RFP Procedures. If a formal RFP is used, the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall abide by the following procedures: 
1.  A Request for Proposal solicitation document shall be issued to potential individuals or firms. The solicitation document shall discuss the following: 
i.  Scope of work or specification desired. 
ii.  List any required qualifications. 
iii.  List the evaluation criteria. 
iv.  The date of submission for the response by the vendor. 
v.  Only criteria disclosed in the solicitations may be used to evaluate the supplies or services proposed. 
2.  The solicitation document shall be made available to a minimum of three (3) qualified firms or individuals and shall be made available for no less than fourteen (14) calendar days. 
3.  Evaluation of proposals received will be conducted by either an individual or a review committee. Discussions may be conducted, at the discretion of the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate, with one (1) or more responsible offerors who has submitted a proposal and is determined to be reasonably susceptible for being accepted for award. These discussions may be held for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. 
4.  The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall notify the selected contractor and obtain a written contract. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1627 - INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE 
a.  Informal Bidding Procedures. The following shall govern purchases of goods, services, equipment and the selection of contractors when a Public Project is anticipated to fall within the monetary limits on informal bids described in applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the limitations established pursuant to California Public Contract Code section 22032, as the same may be adjusted from time to time: 
1.  The City shall prepare a notice of the opportunity to bid which describes the project in general terms, states the time and place for the submission of bids and describes how to obtain more detailed information about the project. 
2.  The City shall mail the notice to all contractors for the category of the work to be bid, as shown on the list of contractors developed and maintained by the Department of Public Works in accordance with criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission ("Commission"). 
3.  The City may also mail the notice to all construction trade journals specified by the Commission for the County of Orange. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may also be notified at the discretion of the purchasing agent; provided, however, (1) if the City has not prepared a list of qualified contractors for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission; and (2) if the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be legally obtained only from a certain contractor(s), the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor(s). 
4.  All mailings of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to this section shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due. 
b.  Bid Selection. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of goods, services, and equipment and public projects shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The determination of the "lowest responsible bidder" shall be determined by the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate authorized to conduct the procurement. 
2.  Exceptions: Purchases of goods, services, equipment and Public Projects (other than Public Works Contracts) may be awarded to a bidder other than the lowest responsible bidder only upon a written finding, approved by the Purchasing Manager or Purchasing Agent, and supported with written documentation setting forth the reasons that greater overall value to the City will be achieved by awarding to the other bidder. Alternatively, the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate may reject all bids and either halt the procurement or conduct the procurement again. Awards of Public Works Contracts and contracts for Public Projects shall be made in accordance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1628 - FORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE 
a.  Bid Solicitation Procedures. 
1.  The City Council shall approve plans and specifications for all Public Projects and Public Works Contracts which are required per applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall prepare and provide for advertisement a notice inviting formal bids, stating the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describing the public project, commodity, or class of commodities. The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall publish each and every notice inviting bids in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  The notice shall be published in accordance with the requirements of California Public Contracts Code section 20164, as that section may be modified. 
ii.  Contracts for services for the painting, maintenance or repair of public buildings and works specifically governed by Government Code Sections 37901 and 37902 shall be subject to the solicited bid process in accordance with applicable laws. 
iii.  The purchasing agent shall, in addition, solicit bids from prospective bidders for the class of commodities being purchased or sold as listed on the bidders list, by sending them copies of the newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. All pending purchases or sales shall also, in all cases, be advertised by posting a copy of the contract bid form on a public bulletin board in or adjacent to the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate's office or on a bulletin board in a prominent place in the City Hall. 
iv.  In addition to notice required by this section, the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate may give such other notice as he or she deems proper. 
3.  All bids shall be presented under sealed cover and accompanied by one (1) of the following forms of bidder's security: 
i.  Cashier's check made payable to the City; 
ii.  A certified check made payable to the City; or 
iii.  A bidder's bond executed by an admitted surety insurer, made payable to the City. 
4.  The security shall be in an amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the amount bid. A bid shall not be considered unless one (1) of the forms of responsible bidder's security is enclosed with it. If the bidder to whom the contract is awarded shall for ten (10) days after the award fail or neglect to enter into the contract and file the required securities, the City shall deposit in its treasury the bid security if the security is in the form of cash or its equivalent. 
5.  Provisions shall be included in any invitation for bid and in any contract documents for the furnishing of securities and/or the withholding of retentions earned to ensure performance under a contract in an amount and type as determined by the Director of Public Works, consistent with State law. Provisions shall be included in any invitation for bid and in any contract documents for insurance coverage in an amount, type and term as may be specified by the City. 
6.  When required by State law, the contractor shall not pay less than the general prevailing rates of wages, as determined by the Director of the Department of Industrial Relations, to all workers employed on a Public Project or Public Works Contract. 
b.  Formal Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk with the bid number written on the envelope where they will be date and time stamped. All bids must be received and date and time stamped by the City Clerk's clock on or before the date and time due; late bids (as determined by reference to the City Clerk's clock) will be returned unopened. The Purchasing Manager, or his or her designee, shall publicly open all bids at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids shall be available for public inspection in the City Clerk's Office during regular business hours for a period of one (1) year after bid opening. 
c.  Rejection of Formal Bids. In its discretion, the City Council may reject and all bids presented if the Purchasing Manager, prior to rejecting all bids, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder, informing the bidder of the City's intention to reject the bid at least two (2) business days prior to the hearing at which the City Council intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the City Council may: (a) abandon the project; (b) re-advertise for bids in the manner prescribed by this chapter; or (c) perform the work with City employees, after passing a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the City Council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by City employees. 
d.  Award of Formal Bid Contracts. All Public Works Contracts with a value exceeding the limitations established pursuant to California Public Contract Code section 22032, as the same may be adjusted from time to time, shall require the approval of the City Council and shall be executed by the Mayor and approved as to form by the City Attorney. Unless the agreement provides otherwise, the City Manager may approve dollar increases to contracts that have been approved by the City Council. The extent of the City Manager's authority to approve such increases shall be in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or ten (10) percent, whichever is greater, or an amount specifically designated by City Council for the particular project. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder that submits a responsive bid. The determination of the "lowest responsible bidder" shall be at the discretion of the City Council pursuant to the findings and recommendations presented by the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate at the time of award of contract. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the following shall be considered by the City Council, in addition to price: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The sufficiency of the bidder's financial resources to perform the contract or provide the service; 
4.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and services where such maintenance and service is essential; 
5.  The quality and timeliness of the bidder's performance on previous contracts for the City; 
6.  Litigation by the bidder on previous contracts with the City; 
7.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
8.  The bidder is licensed under the Contractors' State License Law (commencing with Section 7000 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, as the same may be amended from time to time) to perform the work for which it submitted a bid proposal. 
e.  Tie Formal Bids. If two (2) or more formal bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the City Council may, at its discretion, accept the one (1) it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders. 
f.  No Formal Bids. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the City by force account or through a negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. 
g.  Bid Selection. If a contract is awarded, it shall be to the lowest responsible bidder that submits a responsive bid. The determination of the "lowest responsible bidder'' shall be made in accordance with subsection d, above. 
h.  Nothing contained in this section is intended to be in conflict with applicable state law including Sections 37901 and 37902, and Sections 37931 through 37935, of the Government Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1629 - INSPECTION OF MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT, ETC. 
a.  The receiving departments shall inspect deliveries of supplies, materials and equipment or the furnishing of contractual services to insure their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase order or contract. 
b.  Any department which has the necessary facilities and staff for adequate inspection may be authorized and directed by the City Council, on the recommendation of the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate, to inspect deliveries made to other departments. 
c.  The Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries to the extent necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. For such tests, the Purchasing Manager, Purchasing Agent or Purchasing Delegate shall have authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any department or to engage the services of any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
1630 - DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 
a.  Surplus or Obsolete Commodities. 
1.  All departments shall submit to the Purchasing Manager at such times and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. The Purchasing Manager shall have authority to transfer any such commodities which are usable to another or other departments in of the same or similar articles. 
2.  The Purchasing Manager shall make a written estimate of the value of any surplus items not usable by any City department or not required for public use. The Purchasing Manager shall have the authority to sell all such supplies, materials and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have been found by the City Council not to be required for public use or to exchange or trade in such articles in part or full payment for new supplies, materials or equipment of a similar nature. Any such sale, exchange or trade-in shall be made in accordance with Section 1626 or Section 1627, whichever is applicable. The Purchasing Manager shall report in detail, including the amount of revenue received upon any such sale, to the City Council within forty-five (45) days thereafter. 
b.  Unclaimed Property in Possession of Police Department. 
1.  Unclaimed Property Defined. "Unclaimed property" is all personal property, the title of which is not vested in the City of Tustin, which property has come into the possession of the City of Tustin as lost property, property which has been confiscated or impounded by the City as being in violation of law or any other personal property coming into possession of the City of Tustin which is not specifically provided for by any other provision of law. 
2.  Procedure. 
i.  If the estimated value of the unclaimed property exceeds ten dollars ($10.00) the Police Department or the administrative official who obtained possession of the property shall, within ten (10) days of receipt of the property, notify the owner, if his identity is reasonably ascertainable, that it possesses the property, and where it may be obtained. The Police Department or the administrative official may require payment by the owner of a reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the property. 
ii.  If the owner appears within ninety (90) days of the notification given in subparagraph a. above, proves his ownership of the property, and pays all reasonable charges, the Police Department or the administrative official shall restore the property to him. 
iii.  After retention of the property for four (4) months, the property may be: 
a)  Sold at public auction to the highest bidder; 
b)  Retained by the City of Tustin if it is determined that the property is needed for a public use, and after public notice has been made of the City's intention to retain the property; or 
c)  Where the property is a bicycle or toy in the possession of the Police Department, the property may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, be given to the Welfare Department of the County, or to any charitable or nonprofit organization authorized under its Articles of Incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
3.  Public Sale or Retention of Property. 
i.  When it is determined that unclaimed property, valued at fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, shall be retained or shall be sold at public auction, the Police Department or the administrative official, shall cause notice of such sale or retention to be published at least five (5) days before the time fixed therefore once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which such property was found or confiscated, or otherwise in Orange County. 
ii.  Such notice shall contain the time and the place of the sale. 
iii.  Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the City. 
iv.  Any revenue received from the disposition of public property shall be deposited and recorded in the appropriate City fund and general ledger account by the Finance Director in accordance with the approved budget. 
(Ord. No. 1438, Sec. I, 1-21-14)  
PART 3 - AUDIT 
 
1631 - ANNUAL INDEPENDENT AUDIT 
Each fiscal year the Finance Director shall cause to be prepared by an independent auditor, an audit of the financial statements, books, records and accounts of the previous fiscal year. (Ord. No. 1135, Sec. 2, 8-15-94)  
1632 - REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS 
Requests for proposals for independent auditors shall be solicited periodically at the discretion of the City Council. Requests for proposals and the selection of the independent auditor shall follow guidelines developed by the Audit Commission and such other criteria as may be recommended from time to time by the Finance Director. 
(Ord. No. 1135, Sec. 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1377, Sec. 1, 12-1-09)  
PART 4 - INFORMAL BIDDING (REPEALED)[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. II of Ord. No. 1438, adopted Jan. 21, 2014, repealed Part 4 of Chapter 6 of Article 1, which consisted of Sections 1641—1650, and derived from Ord. No. 1268, adopted Apr. 7, 2003, in its entirety. 
 
CHAPTER 7 - PERSONNEL  
PART 1 - TRAINING 
 
1711 - PEACE OFFICER AND PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER TRAINING 
a 
State Aid 
The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of Chapter 1, Title IV, Part 4, of the State Penal Code, for the training of peace officers and public safety dispatchers. 
b 
Standards for Recruitment and Training 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of the State Penal Code, the City while receiving aid from the State pursuant to Chapter One, Title IV, Part 4 of the State Penal Code, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training for the training of peace officers and of public safety dispatchers. 
c 
Inquiries Concerning Recruitment and Training 
Pursuant to Section 13512 of the State Penal Code, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the City's peace officer and public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (TCC-1, Secs. 2—6; Ord. No. 156, Sec. 2, 9-5-61; Ord. No. 1017, 2-21-89)  
PART 2 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
1721 - STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM AUTHORIZED 
A contract between the City Council of the City of Tustin and the Board of Administration, California Employees' Retirement System is hereby authorized. (Ord. No. 358 represents the City's original contract and Ord. No. 445 represents the amendment deleting coordination with Social Security program.)  
PART 3 - SPECIAL SERVICES 
 
1730 - SPECIAL PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES 
In any instance in which a special event or occurrence including, but not limited to, the premiere of a motion picture, the opening of a new store or building, a bazaar, a wedding, a sports or athletic event, a carnival, a circus, or any gathering which may attract a large number of people, or which for other reasons may be, or become, a hazard to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, unless attended or supervised by the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, as the case may be, or personnel under their respective commands, or in any instance where a person, firm, or corporation desires special public safety services over and above the normal services provided by the Police Department or the Fire Department of the City, such services, is approved by the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, as the case may be, may be provided at the expense of the applicant or person in charge of such event under the following conditions: 
(a)  The Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, as the case may be, shall notify the person in charge of such event of the necessity of having in attendance at such event as the case may be, policemen, firemen, parking control officer or crossing guard, and the required number of each; 
(b)  The person, firm, organization, or corporation in charge of such event and so required to or desiring to employ the services of the City's police or fire personnel to be in attendance thereat, shall file a request for such services with the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, as the case may be, stating the nature of the event, the approximate number of policemen, firemen, parking control officers or crossing guards requested to be in attendance, the approximate length of time such services are required or are desired, and a written agreement to pay the City for such special services as provided elsewhere herein. 
(c)  The Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, as the case may be, may approve or deny such request, or increase or decrease the number of personnel assigned for such special security assignment. 
(d)  When assigned for duty on such special security assignment, policemen, firemen, parking control officers or crossing guards, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be on regular duty under the general supervision of the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, and any officer in charge under their respective commands, and shall be entitled to any and all benefits provided by law or ordinance for such personnel as members of the Police Department or Fire Department of the City. 
(e)  A charge for the services provided herein shall be made to the person, firm or corporation conducting such event in accordance with a standard fee schedule established by the City Administrator. 
(f)  The Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department shall provide the Finance Director with the name of the person, firm, organization or corporation requesting or requiring such special security personnel, the dates and times between which such services are expected to be required, the number and type of personnel required, and the hours estimated to be required for each. The Finance Director shall determine the amount estimated to cover the charges for such services. This sum shall be deposited with City a sufficient time in advance of said event so as to enable City to arrange and provide the required personnel. 
(g)  After the conclusion of the event the Fire Chief or Chief of Police shall report to the Finance Director the names of the employees so employed, the category of employment of each employee, and the number of hours of employment of each employee. The Finance Director shall thereupon compute the total charge for such services and shall either make a refund of any unused part of the amount on deposit or shall bill the person, firm or corporation employing such personnel for any deficit, which shall be a debt due to City. (Ord. No. 617)  
1731 - EMPLOYMENT—STATE SUMMARY REPORT 
a 
Disqualification 
A person shall be prima facie disqualified for city employment if he has been convicted of a felony. As used herein, the term "conviction" includes pleas of guilty and nolo contendre. The Personnel Officer is specifically authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as provided for in Section 11105 of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
b 
Appeal 
An applicant who is thus prima facie disqualified for employment may make an appeal in writing to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall consider the mitigating factors, such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since such conviction, the age of the person at the time of the conviction, contributing social or environmental conditions, the nature and seriousness of the conduct, the circumstances surrounding the conduct, the position for which the person is applying and whether the conviction is unrelated to that position. The City Administrator shall render a decision based on the above factors which shall be final and conclusive. 
c 
Peace Officers 
Notwithstanding the general appeal rights given applicants in this chapter, applicants for a position as peace officer shall be conclusively disqualified for conviction of a felony and have no rights of appeal. 
d 
Employment Without Reports Not Considered Permanent 
No person employed after September 1, 1977 shall be considered to have permanent employment, tenure, or service with the City until a report has been received from both the local law enforcement agency and the Attorney General's Office, and the Personnel Officer has acted pursuant to those reports. (Ord. No. 751, Sec. 1)  
ARTICLE 2 - REVENUE AND TAX  
CHAPTER 1 - REVENUE: GENERAL 
 
2101 - TRANSFER OF TAX COLLECTION AND ASSESSMENT DUTIES 
The duties of the City Treasurer insofar as they are incident to the collection of taxes and the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector are hereby transferred to the Treasurer, Assessor and Tax Collector of the County. (TCC-1, Sec. 20-1/Ord. No. 107, Sec. 1)  
CHAPTER 2 - FUNDS ESTABLISHED  
PART 1 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
2211 - DEPOSIT OF MONEY 
All money received by the City from the State under the provisions of the State Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State highways shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. (TCC-1, Sec. 9-6/Ord. No. 42, Sec. 2)  
2212 - EXPENDITURE OF MONEY 
All money in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the State Streets and Highways Code. (TCC-1, Sec. 9-7/Ord. No. 42, Sec. 3)  
PART 2 - CITY BEAUTIFICATION FUND 
 
2221 - DEPOSIT OF MONEY 
All revenues received by the City from the Real Property Transfer Tax shall be paid into the City Beautification Fund. (Ord. No. 387, Sec. 1)  
2222 - EXPENDITURE OF MONEY 
All money in the City Beautification Fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all the provisions of this Part. (Ord. No. 387, Sec. 2)  
2223 - PURPOSES 
Such revenues as are received from the Real Property Transfer Tax shall be used for any and all City beautification projects including all costs of acquisition, design, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation related to the beautification of public parks, streets and other City property, and including but not limited to design, construction, reconstruction and maintenance of parks, parkways, City entrance signs, Civic Center and all other City property. (Ord. No. 387, Sec. 3)  
PART 3 - CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND 
 
2230 - AUTHORITY FOR FUND 
The City Council hereby establishes a capital outlay fund in accordance with Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 4, Article 4 (Sec. 5370, et seq.) of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 706)  
2231 - GENERAL PURPOSE 
The capital outlay fund may be used to accumulate funds for the purpose of capital outlays and may be shown in the City budget as reserved for future expenditures in subsequent years which shall be identified as to purpose. (Ord. No. 706)  
2232 - RESTRICTION ON DISBURSEMENTS 
The capital outlay fund shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays and money shall not be disbursed from the fund except for the prescribed capital improvements unless the City Council of the City of Tustin submits a proposition to the electors of the City of Tustin to obtain their consent to use the money in the fund for some other specific purpose. The proposition may be submitted at any election. A two-thirds vote of all of the voters voting at the election shall be necessary to authorize the expenditure of the money in the fund for such other purpose. (Ord. No. 706)  
2233 - DESIGNATION OF SUB-ACCOUNTS 
The capital outlay fund may have a general account and one or more sub-accounts created by the City Council by ordinance. Any such sub-account shall be described as to geographical area served, source of revenues pledged, capital outlays contemplated, and any other conditions or restrictions incumbent on said sub-account. (Ord. No. 706)  
PART 4 - AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND 
 
2240 - INTENT 
This part is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management District's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the City of Tustin into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. (Ord. No. 1073, Sec. 2, 6-17-91)  
2241 - DEFINITIONS 
As applied in this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "City" shall mean the City of Tustin. 
(b)  "Mobile source air pollution reduction programs" shall mean any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(c)  "Fee administrator" shall mean the Finance Direction of the City or his or her designee. (Ord. No. 1073, Sec. 2, 6-17-91)  
2242 - ADMINISTRATION OF VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEES 
a 
Receipt of Fee 
Vehicle registration fees due pursuant to this article disbursed by the South Coast Air Quality Management District and remitted to the City shall be accepted by the fee administrator. 
b 
Transfer of Funds 
Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate account as hereinafter specified. 
c 
Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund 
The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds. Interest earned by the account shall be credited to that account and shall be used to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs. 
d 
Audits 
The City consents to audits, at least once every two (2) years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues provided under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast Air Quality Management District in conformance with the provisions of the Single Audit Act of 1984 and the U.S. Office of Management and Budget Circular A-128, Audits of State and Local Governments. The said district may be paid for any audit costs incurred by it from the funds within the air quality improvement trust fund. 
e 
Use of Funds 
Funds within the air quality improvement trust fund shall be used solely to reduce pollution from motor vehicles and for related planning, monitoring, enforcement and technical studies necessary for the implementation of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 within the City of Tustin. (Ord. No. 1073, Sec. 2, 6-17-91)  
CHAPTER 3 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
2301 - SHORT TITLE 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance" of the City of Tustin  
2302 - RATE 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this Chapter shall be one percent (1%).  
2303 - PURPOSE 
The City Council hereby declares that the ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(a)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(b)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(c)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
(d)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 708)  
2304 - OPERATIVE DATE 
City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date of this Chapter, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the City and by the State. (Ord. No. 708)  
2305 - SALES TAX 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. (Ord. No. 708)  
2306 - PLACE OF SALE 
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. No. 708)  
2307 - USE TAX 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. No. 708)  
2308 - ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. No. 708)  
2309 - LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the City of Tustin shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. No. 708)  
2310 - PERMIT NOT REQUIRED 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this Chapter. (Ord. No. 708)  
2311 - EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS—MEASURE OF TAX 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(a)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2312 - EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS—AMOUNT SUBJECT TO TAX 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2313 - EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS—MEASURE OF TAX 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(a)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by and City and County, County, or City in this State. 
(c)  The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside this City and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: For application of the exclusions and exemptions set out in section 2313, the reader's attention is directed to section 2315(b).  
2314 - EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS—AMOUNT SUBJECT TO TAX 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or City in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this Chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(f)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: For application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions set out in section 2314, the reader's attention is directed to section 2315(b).  
2315 - APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS 
(a)  Sections 2311 and 2312 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
(b)  Sections 2313 and 2314 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2316 - AMENDMENTS 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2317 - ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. No. 708; Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2318 - PENALTIES 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in this Code. (Ord. No. 901, Sec. 1, 12-19-83)  
2319 - SEVERABILITY 
If any provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. No. 901, Sec. 2, 12-19-83)  
CHAPTER 4 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
2401 - TITLE 
This Chapter shall be known as "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Tustin." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 1)  
2402 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX IMPOSED 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 2)  
2403 - PAYMENT OF TAX 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 2402 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 3)  
2404 - EXEMPTIONS 
a 
Debt Exemption 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 4) 
b 
Governmental Exemption 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. No. 448) 
c 
Reorganization Exemption. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceedings in a Court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a Court involving a corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subdivisions (1) and (4), inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 6) 
d 
Commission Order Exemption 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if— 
(1)  The Order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 7) 
e 
Partnership Exemption 
(1)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if— 
(a)  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(b)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(2)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(3)  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (2), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 8)  
2405 - ADMINISTRATION BY COUNTY RECORDER 
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 9)  
2406 - CLAIMS FOR REFUND 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 10)  
2407 - OPERATIVE DATE 
This Chapter shall become operative on January 1, 1968, the operative date of an Ordinance adopted by the County of Orange, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 381, Sec. 11)  
CHAPTER 5 - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, adopted April 21, 2003 repealed Chapter 5 of Article 2 in its entirety. Said ordinance further provided for a new Chapter 5, Article 2 to read as herein set out. See the Ordinance History List. 
 
PART 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
2511 - INTRODUCTION 
a 
Definitions 
Business. Professions, trades, and occupations, and all and every kind of calling, whether or not for profit. 
Director. The Director of the Community Development Department or his or her designee. 
Gross receipts. The total amount of the sale price of all sales in Tustin and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service in Tustin of whatever nature it may be for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable or losses, or other expenses whatsoever. 
Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be anything exempted by State law, cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; credit allowed on property sold; and tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. 
Person. An individual, partnership, or corporation. 
b 
Chapter for Revenue Purposes 
This Chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for the purpose of regulation. 
c 
Not Substitute for Other Licensing Measures 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this Chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business as required by any other ordinance of the City and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
d 
Effect on Prior Obligations and Actions 
Neither the adoption of this Chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the City shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2512 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
a 
Business License Application 
Applicants for City business licenses required by this Article shall obtain an application form from the Director. 
b 
License Tax Imposed 
There are hereby imposed upon the businesses specified in this Chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business in the City without first having procured a license from the City to do so, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this Chapter. Vendors, contractors, and similar businesses that provide work or services to the City under a City contract or agreement shall also comply with any and all applicable provisions of this Chapter. 
c 
Certain Businesses Exempted 
Subsection (b) shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States of America or of the State. 
Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States of America or of the State shall be liable for the payment of the tax imposed by this Chapter. 
There shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter the business of any express corporation, freight forwarder, motor transportation broker, or person or corporation owning or operating motor vehicles in the transportation of property for hire upon the public highways, under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, which consists of the transportation of property and every service performed in connection therewith, other than where the origin point and the destination point of such transported property are within the boundaries of the City of Tustin. Services not directly related to the transportation of property, such as gasoline delivery, retrieval of keys from locked vehicles, and repair of broken windows shall not be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter. 
The following are exempt from the requirement to obtain a business license: 
(1)  Small family day care homes. 
(2)  Residential community care facilities serving six (6) or fewer individuals. 
d 
Branch Establishments 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business located in the City and licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
e 
Issuance of License 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application to the Director in such form as the Director shall designate, and upon payment of any applicable business license application processing fee and a prescribed license tax, the Director shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom the license is issued, 
(2)  The business licensed, 
(3)  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on, 
(4)  The date of expiration of such license, and 
(5)  Such other information as the Director may deem reasonable or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
All information specified to be set forth on any application form prescribed by the Director shall be submitted completely and accurately and the license subsequently issued shall be based upon the information submitted. Any license shall be deemed based upon the application on file, and if the information is incomplete or inaccurate, the license shall be deemed invalid. If information submitted in an application subsequently becomes incomplete or inaccurate by reason of a change in circumstances, the license shall thereafter be deemed invalid. Upon the Director's learning of any inaccuracy or incompleteness, notice shall be given forthwith to the licensee, at the address shown on the license, that the license is invalid. If the address shown on the license is known to be inaccurate due to a change in circumstances, notice may be given to the licensee at any address deemed appropriate by the Director. 
f 
Investigation of Application 
The Director shall make such investigations and inspections required for particular businesses as may be necessary and may designate investigations and inspections to be made by other departments in accordance with the following general guides: 
(1)  The Building Division shall review applications involving a change of occupancy of any portion of a building and in such other circumstances as may involve questions of compliance with building, electrical, plumbing, or other construction codes. 
(2)  The Orange County Fire Authority shall review applications which involve businesses or premises which may constitute substantial fire risks, hazardous materials, or any risks of serious danger to human life or property. 
(3)  The Police Department shall review applications for businesses which may affect public morals, involve substantial danger of fraud or deception, pose unusual police problems, may involve the handling or receiving of stolen goods to a higher degree than usual, tend to affect traffic control, involve public assembly, include police-type functions, or otherwise substantially affect public safety. If the Police Department, in the person of the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, determines that it is reasonable or necessary, it may require fingerprinting and photographing of a proposed licensee, and any or all of its officers, partners, owners, managers, or employees. 
(4)  The Orange County Health Department shall review applications for businesses which involve the preparation, storage or sale of food or drink, except in sealed containers. 
(5)  The Water Operations Division of the City's Public Works Department shall review applications for businesses which involve the use of water in manufacturing or processing. 
(6)  Other departments, agencies, or officers shall review applications when the proposed business poses special problems dealt with by such department, agency, or officer. 
g 
Appeal from Decision of the Director 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
h 
Licenses Not Transferable 
No license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable, provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefore, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
i 
Duplicate Licenses 
A duplicate license may be issued by the Director to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact. 
j 
Posting and Display of License 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
(1)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City shall display the license in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
(2)  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operated at a fixed place of business in the City, shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(3)  All vehicles licensed by the City shall have a sticker issued by the City placed in a conspicuous place upon such vehicle at all times. 
(4)  All vending machines licensed by the City shall have a current sticker issued by the City placed upon such vending machine at all times in a conspicuous place. Any and all machines not having such required current sticker shall be subject to impoundment by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 1, 11-17-09)  
2513 - EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX PAYMENT 
a 
Generally 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt, by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States of America or of the State, from the amount of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
None of the license taxes provided for by this Chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the Director for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business, and such other information as the Director may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The Director shall then conduct an investigation, and, after first having consulted with the City Attorney, shall affix as the license tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the Director shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts, or any other measure which will assure that the license assessed will be uniform with that assessed on business of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the Director determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, the Director may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the City or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefrom, provided that no additional license tax, during any one calendar year, shall be required after licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax, as prescribed in this Chapter. 
b 
Organizations and Persons Exempted 
A license shall be obtained without payment of the usual fee under the provisions of this section by the following: 
(1)  Any institution or organization which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, eleemosynary, or benevolent purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly, subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Any nonprofit organization which engages in fundraising ventures, solicitations, carnivals, fairs, or other events, when all of the net proceeds from the fundraising venture, solicitation, carnival, fair, or other event is solely utilized for a charitable or eleemosynary purpose, and no direct or indirect monetary profit or benefit is derived by any other person, institution, or organization. However, any person or entity desiring to solicit donations for a charitable purpose must first comply with the requirements set forth in Section 2513f of this Chapter. In no event shall a solicitation or event be engaged in within the City except in conformance with the provisions of all applicable ordinances of the City regulating the particular event. 
If a portion of the proceeds of the charitable or eleemosynary fundraising venture, solicitation, carnival, fair, or other event are to be received by or are for the direct or indirect benefit of any other person, institution, or organization, then the fee which would ordinarily be charged for such venture, if it were wholly a profit venture, shall be reduced in proportion to the percentage of the proceeds which are to be received by any such person, institution, or organization. 
c 
Procedure for Obtaining Fee—Exempt License 
Businesses that are exempt from the payment of the license tax are required to obtain a fee-exempt business license. 
(1)  A fee-exempt license may be issued by the Director to any person when the application for issuance of a business license is accompanied by a statement of facts that is verified or certified under penalty of perjury and clearly shows that the applicant meets the requirements of one or more of the classifications set forth in Section 2513b. 
(2)  The burden of proof of entitlement to exemption shall in all cases be upon the applicant to establish the facts showing entitlement to a fee-exempt license. The Director may prescribe the form or forms of statements of fact required and may require the applicant to present such other proof of entitlement as may be reasonable in the particular case. (Ord. No. 328, Sec. 13) 
d 
Appeal from Denial of Fee—Exempt License 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
e 
Limitations on Fee—Exempt Licenses 
(1)  Every license issued without payment of the usual fee shall be stamped "Exempt" upon its face. 
(2)  Any license issued as fee-exempt may be revoked by the Director in the event it is determined by the Director that the applicant is not entitled to exemption, except that no such license shall be revoked without forty-eight (48) hours notice to the licensee. If the license is revoked, the licensee shall be required to surrender the license to the Director within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving the notice of revocation from the Director. 
(3)  Any license issued as fee-exempt shall be void and shall afford no defense in any civil or criminal prosecution if any material statement contained in the application, statement of facts, or any other document or representation made to the Director in claiming exemption is false or fraudulent. 
(4)  No fee-exempt license may be transferred. 
(5)  Upon any uncertainty, for lack of information or otherwise, as to the entitlement of any organization or activity to a fee-exempt license, the Director may require the filing of a verified report of all funds received and disbursed by any licensee. Upon demand such licensee shall file its report in the form and detail as required by the Director within fifteen (15) days after demand. 
f 
Charitable Solicitation Permits 
(1)  No person shall solicit donations for charitable purposes within the City without first obtaining a permit from the Director for the particular solicitation and for the stated purposes and period provided therein. 
(2)  A completed application for a permit to solicit donations for charitable purposes shall be filed with the Director prior to soliciting donations in the City and a permit issued for such solicitation. The application shall contain all of the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the person or organization; 
(b)  The State Charitable Trust number;* 
(c)  Name, address, telephone number, and birth date, along with any aliases used, of the individual in charge of the solicitation; 
(d)  The purpose of the solicitation; 
(e)  The type of donations to be solicited; 
(f)  If the solicitation is for a special event, the nature of the event and the time and place of the event; 
(g)  The anticipated beginning and ending dates of the solicitation; 
(h)  Whether the solicitation is on behalf of an organization other than the applicant and if so, the name, address, and business telephone number of the other organization; 
(i)  The method of solicitation to be utilized; 
(j)  If paid solicitors are used, the total estimated cost of fundraising expenses; 
(k)  The estimated percentage of the amount of donations which will be used for charitable purposes; 
(l)  The names, residential addresses, and day-time telephone numbers of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(m)  The names, business addresses, and day-time telephone numbers of all agents, volunteers, solicitors, promoters, and managers to be involved with the solicitation; 
In addition, the applicant shall provide the following documents, as they apply: 
(a)  The articles of incorporation and bylaws of corporations and bylaws of unincorporated entities; 
(b)  The Internal Revenue Service Notice of Tax-Exempt Status; 
(c)  The notice from the California Attorney General Registrar of Charitable Trusts confirming registration in good standing or in the case of a religious corporation sole, a Certificate of Status of Domestic Corporation from the Secretary of the State; 
(d)  A copy of the most recent periodic report filed with the Attorney General;* 
(e)  A copy of the solicitation or sale for charitable purposes card which must be exhibited to prospective donors pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17510.3;* and 
(f)  If the solicitation is for the benefit of an organization other than the applicant, a letter from such organization authorizing applicant's solicitation. 
Upon submittal of the application, the Director shall verify within five (5) working days as to whether the application is complete. If complete, a permit will be issued within five (5) working days, or the City will apply to the court for an order enjoining the applicant's solicitation. If the Director determines that the application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified within five (5) working days of such determination, along with the specific reasons therefore. The permit is valid for six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 2, 11-17-09) 
*Not applicable to a corporation solely organized for religious purposes.  
2514 - STATEMENTS 
a 
Not Conclusive 
No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing thereof preclude the City from collecting, by appropriate action, such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. 
b 
Examination by Experts 
The Director, with the approval of the City Council, is hereby authorized and empowered to retain from time to time accountant or accountants licensed by the State of California to examine, audit, and inspect the books and records of any licensee or applicant for a license to ascertain and verify that the matters in any statement or statements are correct. Upon any such verification by accountant or accountants, no information shall be given to the Director by such accountant or accountants other than the statement is correct or incorrect. 
All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the City are hereby required to permit examination of their books and records for the purposes aforesaid. 
The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section or Section 2512d shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the City or by any accountant or accountants retained as provided herein shall constitute a misdemeanor, and such person shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 1121, in addition to any other penalties provided by law. 
c 
Failure to File; Hearing Before City Council 
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if at the demand therefore made by the Director the person fails to file a corrected statement, the Director may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. 
If such a determination is made, the Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or depositing it, by certified mail, in the United States Post Office in Tustin, California, addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last-known address. Such person may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the Director for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen (15) days before the City Council. The Director shall give at least ten (10) days notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed for service of notices of assessment. The City Council shall consider all evidence produced and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. 
d 
Extension of Time for Filing 
In addition to all other authority conferred upon him or her, the Director shall have the authority, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such cases to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued and shall have the further authority, with the consent of the City Council, to compromise any claim as to the amount of license tax due. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2515 - UNLAWFUL BUSINESS NOT AUTHORIZED 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter or the payment of any tax required under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in any illegal manner. Licenses issued to unlawful businesses shall be deemed invalid and shall be surrendered to the Director within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving notice from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2516 - ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; RIGHT OF ENTRY 
It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the Chief of Police shall render such assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the Director or the City Council. The Director, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder, and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the City to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
The Director and other City staff shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued in his or her possession or under his or her control who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by Section 1121. It shall be the duty of the Director to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of such provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2517 - REMEDIES DEEMED CUMULATIVE 
All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2518 - EXEMPTION FROM BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIREMENT 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, real estate agents shall be exempt from obtaining a business license and from paying a corresponding business license fee. This section shall not apply to real estate brokers. 
(Ord. No. 1439, Sec. I, 12-17-13)  
PART 2 - FEES 
 
2521 - REQUIREMENTS 
a 
Generally 
Every person who engages in business within the City shall pay a license tax upon business done within the City annually, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, in the amounts and at the rates hereinafter designated. 
b 
Unexpired Licenses 
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the City, the tax paid therefore under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted, and the terms of such license have not expired, then the license tax prescribed by this chapter for such business shall not be required to be paid until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
c 
Penalties for Failure to Pay When Due 
For failure to pay the license tax when due, the Director shall add a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of such license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof, provided that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
d 
When Payable 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January of each year, provided that license taxes covering new operations commenced after the first day of January may be prorated for the balance of the license period, by quarters. 
Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  Annual: Due and payable on the first day of January of each year; delinquent on February 1st of the same year. 
(2)  Daily flat-rate license taxes: Each day, in advance. 
(3)  New businesses: Due immediately prior to commencement of business and delinquent on the last day of the month in which business commenced. 
e 
Deemed Debt Owed City 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2522 - TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS 
a 
Original License 
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of the license tax is to be measured by gross receipts, such person if engaged in business or registering in the first quarter of the calendar year shall pay the amount based on anticipated annual gross receipts. For succeeding quarters, the payment shall be reduced by one-fourth if made after March 31st, by one-half if made after June 30th, and by three-fourths if made after September 30th. 
The Director shall not issue to any person another license for the same or any other business until such person has submitted a complete application to the Director and paid the license tax required by this Chapter. 
b 
Determination of Tax 
The license fee for any business whose license fee is determined under Sections 2523a, b, and c shall be based upon the gross receipts of such business for the preceding year, except that in the case of a new business, the fee shall be based upon an estimate of the gross receipts which the business will have for the year for which the license is granted. The amount of the actual gross receipts used to determine the license tax shall be consistent with the amount reported to the State and the Federal government for tax purposes. 
All gross receipts and license taxes shall be prorated on the basis of the quarter of the year in which they are initially paid. 
For businesses paying the license tax prior to March 31st, the full amount shall be paid based upon estimated gross receipts for the year. For license taxes paid subsequently, the amount shall be three-fourths of the full amount if paid after March 31st, but prior to June 30th; one-half of the full amount if paid after June 30th, but prior to September 30th; one-fourth of the full amount if paid after September 30th. 
Persons making application for any such business shall furnish to the Director a verified written statement upon the form provided by the Director, setting forth such information as may be therein referred to and required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, which estimate, if accepted by the Director as reasonable, shall be used to determine the amount of license tax to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
2523 - TAX SCHEDULES 
a 
Retail and Wholesale Sales Generally 
Retail and wholesale sales businesses, and all other businesses not otherwise specified: 
0 to 999.99 	Excluding all activities conducted wholly within the limitations and definitions of "Home Occupation" as provided in Ordinance No. 330 of the City of Tustin. 	$25.00 
1,000 to 25,000 		25.00 
25,001 to 100,000 		40.00 
100,001 to 200,000 		50.00 
200,001 to 300,000 		60.00 
300,001 to 600,000 		80.00 
600,001 and over 		100.00 
 
b 
Manufacturing 
Any business consisting primarily of manufacturing, packing, processing, canning, or fabricating goods or produce: 
0 to 999.99 	Excluding all activities conducted wholly within the limitations and definitions of "Home Occupation" as provided in Ordinance No. 330 of the City of Tustin. 	$25.00 
1,000 to 25,000 		25.00 
25,001 to 100,000 		40.00 
100,001 to 200,000 		50.00 
200,001 to 300,000 		60.00 
300,001 to 600,000 		80.00 
600,001 and over 		100.00 
 
c 
Services Generally 
Any profession, trade, or occupation, not including retail or wholesale sales or manufacturing, and not otherwise specifically named or described, and involving principally a service rather than a sale or the furnishing or rendering of a facility or thing: 
0 to 999.99 	Excluding all activities conducted wholly within the limitations and definitions of "Home Occupation" as provided in Ordinance No. 330 of the City of Tustin. 	$25.00 
1,000 to 25,000 		25.00 
25,001 to 100,000 		40.00 
100,001 to 200,000 		50.00 
200,001 to 300,000 		60.00 
300,001 to 600,000 		80.00 
600,001 and over 		100.00 
 
d 
Enumerated Businesses 
The taxes for certain particular business shall be as follows: 
Ambulance (per vehicle) ..... $25.00 
Amusement facilities and devices: 
(1)  Parks and facilities, card rooms, bowling alleys, skiball, batball, handball, shuffleboard, pool—For each facility ..... 25.00 
Plus, for each table, court, alley, ride, or device, in excess of one ..... 5.00 
(2)  Billiards, similar facilities, amusement parks of all kinds, mechanical devices of any kind—For each facility ..... 25.00 
Plus, for each table, court, alley, ride, or device, in excess of one ..... 5.00 
(3)  Rinks, ranges, and courses: 
Ice or roller skating rinks ..... 50.00 
Shooting gallery ..... 50.00 
Golf course ..... 50.00 
Miniature golf course ..... 50.00 
Archery range ..... 50.00 
Golf driving range ..... 50.00 
Riding academy or stable ..... 50.00 
Go-cart, bicycle, or similar courses ..... 50.00 
Similar facilities ..... 50.00 
(4)  Places of assembly: 
Cafe with dancing ..... 100.00 
Nightclub ..... 100.00 
Dance hall (admission charged) ..... 100.00 
Public hall for rent ..... 100.00 
(5)  Coin-operated machines: 
Coin-operated machines shall be taxed upon the gross receipts received from said machines in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section 2523. Licensees shall, with the business license application and each renewal thereof, file with the Director a list of each location within the City at which licensee has machines, showing the number of machines at each such location. Within fifteen (15) days after any change in location or in the number of machines at such location, the licensee shall file an amended and current list. 
(6)  Entertainment: 
Circus or carnival (all devices, shows, sales, and facilities included)—For each consecutive series of days ..... 100.00 
Plus each day in excess of one ..... 25.00 
Motorcycle or car show, per day ..... 35.00 
Parade advertising any circus or carnival where business is located outside the City, per day ..... 25.00 
Traveling lecture or professional theatrical performance of any kind, except in a licensed theater ..... 25.00 
Plus, per day, in excess of one ..... 12.50 
Trained animal show, per day ..... 35.00 
Circus, carnival, lecture, parade, or other theatrical performance of any kind if determined by the City Clerk to be primarily educational, non-professional, or sponsored by a school P.T.A.-type group primarily for children and primarily non-profit, per day ..... 2.00 
Sports arena, hall or stadium: 
Under five hundred (500) seats, per exhibition ..... 30.00 
Five hundred (500) or more seats, per exhibition ..... 60.00 
Auction sales, house, or yard ..... 200.00 
An auction of goods conducted by an individual who personally owns such goods and who did not acquire such goods for resale, house, or yard, per day ..... 25.00 
or per year ..... 200.00 
Baths, steam rooms, pools, gymnasiums, and health clubs ..... 35.00 
Bill posting (except billboards), per day ..... 5.00 
Building construction, general contractors ..... 80.00 
Building construction, sub-contractors ..... 40.00 
Day nursery or child care center ..... 25.00 
Hand bill or sample distribution ..... 50.00 
Homes for the aged and rest homes: 
1 to 4 guests ..... 15.00 
5 to 9 guests ..... 25.00 
10 or more guests ..... 35.00 
House movers ..... 40.00 
Newspapers and magazine sellers or distributors selling, distributing, or delivering materials printed or published outside of the City to local dealers or to any other persons, by means of agents or employees (excluding newsstands and magazine stands operated by a licensee including such activity in gross receipts tax rate) ..... 25.00 
Lawn care and gardeners (if not state-licensed contractors) ..... 25.00 
Outdoor advertising (billboards with space available), per sign per year ..... 50.00 
Outdoor advertising (not including billboards with space available), per year ..... 40.00 
Outdoor advertising (benches only) 
First ten ..... 50.00 
Over ten, each ..... 5.00 
Pawn broker ..... 100.00 
Private patrolman, detective agency, and security patrol ..... 25.00 
Rental of real property, residential, commercial, or industrial: 
Fewer than four (4) rental units in the City ..... No tax 
Four (4) or more rental units in the City ..... 25.00 
Plus for each unit in excess of four (4) ..... 1.00 
Rooming house or boarding house: 
Fewer than four (4) roomers or boarders ..... No tax 
4 to 9 roomers or boarders ..... 25.00 
10 or more roomers or boarders ..... 35.00 
Route sales or services (no established place of business in the City; occasional solicitation only), each vehicle ..... 25.00 
Searchlight/beacon advertising, each device per day ..... 2.00 
Or annually ..... 25.00 
Sign building, installation, and construction companies ..... 40.00 
Solicitors—Solicitors, registered agents (persons having non-employed agents as itinerant or transient merchants, vendors, peddlers, hawkers, hucksters, canvassers, solicitors, and the like), itinerant or transient merchant or vendor, peddler, hawker, huckster, canvasser, solicitor, photographer, or book agent, or like business (employees of licensees excluded), per day per person ..... 10.00 
Transfer, moving, or any other business involving the movement of anything whatsoever, excepting human passengers, by means of vehicles, not included in any other specific category, minimum ..... 25.00 
Plus for each vehicle stored, garaged, or principally used in the City ..... 5.00 
Trailer parks and mobile home parks, for the first four (4) spaces ..... 25.00 
Each space in excess of four (4) ..... 1.00 
e 
Vehicles 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the City who delivers goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind by vehicle or who provides any service by the use of vehicles in the City, shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle, provided that any such person may elect to pay a license tax measured by gross receipts from business done within the City, pursuant to the preceding provisions of this chapter. 
f 
Fortunetelling 
Every person engaging in the business of fortunetelling, as defined by Section 3141 of the Tustin City Code, shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1270, Sec. II, 4-21-03)  
CHAPTER 6 - NEW CONSTRUCTION TAX 
 
2601 - STATEMENT OF POLICY 
The City Council finds that the continuing increase in construction of buildings and conversion to condominium status in the City, together with the accompanying increase in population and activity of the City, has created an urgent need for additional funds to be used for the purpose of providing public safety, public works, and other municipal services. The City Council herein declares that the fees required to be paid hereby are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the City and are solely for the purpose of producing revenue. (Ord. No. 624)  
2602 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the words defined in this Chapter shall have the meanings assigned to them unless from the context it appears that a different meaning is intended. 
"Person" shall mean every person, firm or corporation constructing dwelling units itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. 
"Residential Unit" shall mean a single-family dwelling, a dwelling unit in a duplex, apartment house, condominium, hotel, motel, dwelling group which contains a kitchen, and any other place designed for human occupancy which contains a kitchen, and any space in a mobilehome park designed or intended for a house trailer, mobilehome, camper or similar vehicle. 
"Commercial Unit" shall mean any space in a building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes, including sleeping rooms in hotels and motels without kitchens or kitchen facilities, and shall include roofed space which can be used for any of the foregoing purposes. 
"Industrial Unit" shall mean any space in a building or structure designed or intended for manufacturing, processing, research, warehousing or similar purposes, (as above). 
"Addition" shall mean any roofed space which can be utilized for the above described purposes. 
"Condominium Conversion" shall mean the conversion of any existing apartments to a condominium. 
"Mobilehome Park" shall mean any area where one or more lots or spaces are rented or held out for rent to be occupied by a house trailer, mobilehome, camper or similar vehicle. (Ord. No. 624)  
2603 - TAX AMOUNT 
a 
Tax Imposed 
A tax is hereby imposed upon the construction of each residential unit, commercial unit, professional unit and industrial unit in the City and upon the conversion of any apartment complex to a condominium status. 
b 
Rates 
The rates of the tax hereby imposed are as follows: 
(1)  Residential 
Single-family dwellings, attached or detached, per unit ..... $350.00 
Duplexes, per unit ..... 350.00 
Multifamily dwellings, Townhouses or Condominiums (three or more units) or Condominium conversions (multifamily dwellings having already paid a tax may credit such amount against the new amount), per unit ..... 350.00 
plus, per bedroom over one (1) in each unit ..... $100.00 
Mobile home park pads, per pad ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 831, 7-8-80) 
(2)  Commercial, Professional or Industrial 
For each commercial, professional or industrial building unit in the building, per square foot of gross floor area, including any area upon or within a building designed for the parking of vehicles, per square foot ..... $0.10 
For each hotel or motel rental unit without a kitchen, per unit ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 772)  
2604 - TAX: WHEN PAYABLE 
The tax imposed by Section 2603 of this Chapter shall be due and payable prior to issuance of a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling, commercial or industrial unit, prior to issuance of any grading, electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit in connection with the construction of a mobilehome park and prior to signature and recording of a final map for a condominium conversion and shall be in addition to all other building permit, grading permit, electrical permit, plumbing permit, mechanical permit fees and shall be in addition to all inspection fees required to be paid in connection with the construction of a mobilehome park. (Ord. No. 624)  
2605 - OPERATIVE DATE 
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall apply to the construction or addition to all residential, commercial and industrial units or buildings, or for the construction of any mobilehome park, for which an application for a building permit is submitted after October 16, 1972, and to the enlargement or expansion of structures originally constructed after October 16, 1972, and to the enlargement or expansion of commercial and industrial units or buildings and mobilehome parks, originally constructed after October 16, 1972 and to all apartments converted to a condominium after August 1, 1974. (Ord. No. 624)  
2606 - EXCEPTION 
There are excepted from the tax imposed by this Chapter the following: 
(a)  The construction and occupancy of a residential, commercial or industrial unit which is a replacement of a unit being removed from the same lot or parcel of land, and for the same type of use. 
(b)  The reconstruction or remodeling of any structure existing on October 16, 1972, except condominium conversions. 
(c)  The enlargement or expansion of any structure existing on October 16, 1972, for the same type of use. 
(d)  The construction of unenclosed patios and like structures on residential properties. (Ord. No. 624)  
2607 - EXEMPTIONS 
The following shall be excluded from the tax imposed by this Chapter, so long as the said use and occupancy shall continue: 
(a)  The construction and occupancy of any building or unit by any bank, including national banking associations. 
(b)  The construction and occupancy of any building by an insurer as that term is defined in Article XIII Sections 14-4/5 of the Constitution of the State of California. 
(c)  The construction and occupancy of any building by the United States or any department or agency thereof or by the State of California or any department, agency or political subdivision thereof. 
(d)  The construction and occupancy of any building by a non-profit corporation exclusively for religious, educational, hospital or charitable purposes. Upon any change in any aforedescribed use and/or occupancy this Ordinance shall become fully applicable and enforceable as to any such building in which a change in such use and/or occupancy has occurred, immediately upon the date that any such change occurs. (Ord. No. 624)  
2608 - PAYMENT REQUIRED FOR COMMENCING CONSTRUCTION 
No permit shall be issued authorizing the construction or conversion to condominium status of any residential, commercial or industrial unit or building or any mobilehome park in the City without the payment of the tax due under this Chapter. (Ord. No. 624)  
2609 - REFUNDS 
Any tax paid to the City under this Chapter for any building or unit of a building or mobilehome park which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and a showing to the satisfaction of the Building Official that the building or unit has not been constructed or construction commenced and that the building permit issued for the building or unit has been cancelled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of the building or unit. (Ord. No. 624)  
2610 - DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS 
All proceeds from the tax, penalty and interest collected under this Chapter shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City, and shall be used for such municipal purposes as are authorized by law. (Ord. No. 624)  
CHAPTER 7 - UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
2701 - SHORT TITLE 
This Chapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law Chapter.  
2702 - DEFINITIONS 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Block Reservation" - means an arrangement whereby a person reserves, whether on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis, a room or block/group of rooms, for a defined period of time under a written or oral agreement with an operator, intending for such room(s) to be occupied by that person's employees or agents on an intermittent, periodic, or "as needed" basis during that defined period of time. A block reservation arrangement shall not constitute a Qualifying Rental Agreement. 
"Person" - the term person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Hotel" - the term hotel shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, hostel, bed and breakfast, time-share project rental unit, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" - the term occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to use or possess, any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Transient" - the term transient shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying or entitled to occupy space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) consecutive and uninterrupted days of occupancy has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. Any break or interruption in occupancy shall start a new thirty-day period subject to the tax. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
In the case of a block reservation, a person's employee or agent shall be deemed a transient if that employee or agent exercises or is entitled to occupancy of a room for a period of thirty (30) executive calendar days or less, regardless of the duration of any block reservation agreement. By way of example, if a corporation enters into a one-year block reservation agreement with an operator and one of the corporation's employees occupies a room for thirty (30) calendar days, the employee shall be deemed a transient whose occupancy is subject to the tax, notwithstanding the fact that the block reservation agreement has a duration longer than thirty (30) calendar days. 
"Rent" - the term rent shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Operator" - the term operator shall mean the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, time-share project owners' association licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Time-Share Project" means a structure or real property (including airspace) in which either a time-share estate or a time-share use (as those terms are defined in Section 11212 of the Business and Professions Code) and any similar form of ownership involving a right in perpetuity, for life, or for a term of years, to occupy any room, place or area has been sold. 
(Ord. No. 1453, Sec. 2, 12-2-14)  
2703 - TAX IMPOSED 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of thirteen percent (13%) of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the City Treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1453, Sec. 3, 12-2-14; Ord. No. 1499, Sec. 1, 12-4-18)  
2704 - EXEMPTIONS 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
(a)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided. 
(b)  Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business. 
(c)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City Treasurer.  
2705 - RESPONSIBILITY OF OPERATOR 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from each transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner hereinafter provided.  
2706 - REGISTRATION OF HOTEL 
By June 1, 1978, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the City Treasurer and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(a)  The name of the operator. 
(b)  The address of the hotel. 
(c)  The date upon which the certificate was issued. 
(d)  The following statement: This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law Chapter by registering with the City Treasurer for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.  
2707 - REPORTING AND REMITTING 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter or of such different reporting period a return as may be established by the City Treasurer, make a return to the City Treasurer, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received, the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies, and such other information as he may reasonably require. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer may establish either shorter or longer reporting periods for any individual certificate holder or category of certificate holders if he deems it necessary or desirable in order to insure collection of the tax or to increase the efficiency of its administration. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the City Treasurer.  
2708 - PENALTIES AND INTEREST 
a 
Original Delinquency 
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
b 
Continued Delinquency 
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquent penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed. 
c 
Fraud 
If the City Treasurer determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Subparagraphs a and b of this section. 
d 
Interest 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (½%) per month for each month or portion of a month that the tax shall be delinquent on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid. The interest shall be computed on a monthly basis and shall not be subject to proration for any portion of a month. 
e 
Penalties Merged with Tax 
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.  
2709 - PROCEEDINGS FOR REMEDY 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the City Treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the City Treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the City Treasurer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the City Treasurer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the City Treasurer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the City Treasurer shall give not less than five (5) days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the City Treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the City Treasurer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 2710.  
2710 - APPEAL 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the City Treasurer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.  
2711 - RECORDS 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection and payment of to the City, which records the City Treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.  
2712 - REFUNDS 
a 
Claim Required 
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in Subparagraphs b and c of this section; provided, that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Treasurer within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City Treasurer. 
b 
Claim by Operator 
An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the City Treasurer that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
c 
Claim by Transient 
A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in Subparagraph a but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Treasurer, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
d 
Evidence 
No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.  
2713 - TAX DECLARED A DEBT-ACTION TO COLLECT 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Tustin for the recovery of such amount.  
2714 - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the City Treasurer, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. No. 775)  
CHAPTER 8 - THOROUGHFARES AND BRIDGES FEE PROGRAM 
 
2800 - ESTABLISHED; REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  A building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, shall pay a fee as hereinafter established to defray the costs of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways and canyons, or constructing major thoroughfares. 
(b)  Definitions 
(1)  "Construction" as used in this section includes preliminary studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction. 
(2)  "Major thoroughfare" means those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the Master Plan of Arterial Highways, the Circulation Element of the General Plan. The primary purpose of such roads is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highways system. 
(3)  "Bridge facilities" means those locations identified in the transportation or flood control provisions of the Circulation Element or other element of the General Plan as requiring a bridge to span a waterway, a railway, freeway or canyon. 
(4)  "Area of benefit" means a specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located therein will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare or bridge project. 
(c)  The provisions herein for payment of a fee shall apply only if the major thoroughfare or bridge facility has been included in an element of the City's General Plan or the General Plan of the County of Orange adopted at least thirty (30) days prior to the application for a building permit and on land located within the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(d)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a widening or reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(e)  Payment of fees shall not be required unless any planned bridge facility is a new bridge serving the area or an addition to an existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(f)  Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the City Council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works. The City Council shall set a public hearing for each proposed area benefited. Notice of the time and place of said hearing including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs and the method of fee apportionment shall be given in the following manner: 
(1)  Notice shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing by the following: 
a.  Notice published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the proposed area of benefit. 
b.  Notices posted throughout the proposed area of benefit with at least three (3) notices posted at arterial highway intersections within the proposed area of benefit. 
c.  Notices sent by first-class mail addressed to each property owner within the boundary of the proposed area of benefit. 
d.  Notices sent by first-class mail to all municipal advisory committees and known homeowners' associations within the proposed area of benefit. 
e.  Notice by first-class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor with the Director of Public Works. Such request shall apply for the calendar year in which it is filed. 
(g)  (1)  At the public hearing the City Council will consider the testimony, written protests, and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing the City Council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn as specified in subsection g(3), determine to establish an area of benefit. If established, the City Council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit, setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded by the City Clerk with the Orange County Recorder's Office. 
(2)  Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property or portions thereof. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the City Council shall make provisions of payment of the share of improvement cost apportioned to such lands from other sources. 
(3)  Written protests shall be received by the City Clerk at any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the City Council shall not, for one (1) year from the filing of said written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section. Any protests may be with drawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public meeting. 
(4)  If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this section to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one (1) year, but the City Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. Such proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as set forth in subsection (f) above. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such improvement or portion thereof. 
(h)  Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned bridge facility project or each planned major thoroughfare project. If the area of benefit is one in which more than one (1) bridge or major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the bridge projects or major thoroughfares in the area of benefit. If the area of benefit encompasses one (1) or more bridges and one (1) or more thoroughfares and all lands within the area of benefit are subject to the same proportionate fee for all bridges and thoroughfares, a single fund may be established to account for fees paid. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the improvements serving the area to be benefited and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the City for the costs of constructing the improvement. 
(i)  The City Council may approve the acceptance of consideration in lieu of the payment of fees established herein. 
(j)  The City Council may approve the advancement of money from the general fund or road fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered herein and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility or major thoroughfare funds established pursuant to this section. 
(k)  If the building permit applicant, as a condition of the issuance of the building permit, is required or desires to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare, the City Council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the applicant. Such agreement may provide for payments to the applicant from the bridge facility or major thoroughfare funding covering that specific project to reimburse the applicant for costs not allocated to the applicant's property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the bridge or major thoroughfare fund covers more than one (1) project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro rata basis reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. (Ord. No. 948, Sec. 1, 10-21-85)  
ARTICLE 3 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
PART 1 - PURPOSE 
 
3111 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Article is to regulate businesses within the City which are recognized as having characteristics which may pose particular threats to the public health, safety, or welfare. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 2 - SCOPE/APPLICABILITY 
 
3121 - SCOPE/APPLICABILITY 
The business regulations in this Article shall apply to those businesses operating within the City and identified in this Article. Whenever the applicability of this Article to a particular business is subject to varying interpretation, the City Council shall be the appeal body and final decision maker as to the scope of this Article and its application to a particular business. 
All businesses operating within the City of Tustin shall comply with the requirements of Article 3 regardless of when they began operating within the City. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. VII, 6-15-10)  
PART 3 - AUTHORITY 
 
3131 - AUTHORITY 
The City's authority to regulate businesses is derived from its police powers under Article XI, Section 7 of the State Constitution, the provisions of various State statutes including the Porter Cologne Act, and the federal Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 4 - DEFINITIONS 
 
3141 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Part, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. Terms and phrases that are not defined shall have the common meanings ascribed to them in Webster's or other dictionaries recognized as "standard." 
Abandoned. Ceased or suspended for one (1) year or more, as determined by the Director. 
Adult entertainment. Dancing, modeling, stripping, or other conduct which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or suggesting specified sexual activities or exposing or suggesting the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment booking agency. A person, as defined herein, who in exchange for a fee, charge, or other form of consideration, provides or arranges for adult entertainment, whether by employee, independent contractor, or other arrangement. 
Amusement activity. A carnival, circus, fair, boxing or wrestling exhibition, ferris wheel, marathon, bicycle or road race, zoo, menagerie, merry-go round, rodeo, trained animal show, wild animal show, traveling show, wild west show, street dance, or any other similar or related type of amusement, place, or activity, which takes place on a temporary basis on public property, private property, or in City streets and is open to the public. The term shall not include activities such as petting zoos, pony rides, children's attractions, and other minor amusements that are accessory to City-approved temporary uses. 
Autobroker. An auto dealer who engages in the business of brokering motor vehicles. 
Auto dealer. A person who: 
(1)  For commission, money, or other thing of value, sells, exchanges, buys, or offers for sale, negotiates, or attempts to negotiate, a sale or exchange of an interest in, a motor vehicle, or induces or attempts to induce any person to buy or exchange an interest in a vehicle and who receives or expects to receive a commission, money, brokerage fees, profit, or any other thing of value, from either the seller or purchaser of said vehicle; or 
(2)  Is engaged wholly or in part in the business of selling motor vehicles or buying or taking in trade, motor vehicles for the purpose of resale, selling, or offering for sale, or consigned to be sold, or otherwise dealing in motor vehicles, whether or not such motor vehicles are owned by such person. 
The term "auto dealer" does not include a person who: 
a.  Does not sell motor vehicles at retail; 
b.  Is regularly employed as a salesperson by an auto dealer licensed under this Part while acting within the scope of that employment; 
3.  Is not engaged in the purchase or sale of motor vehicles as a business; or 
4.  Is a "pawnbroker." 
Bingo game. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
Body art. The practice of physical body adornment including, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing or application of permanent cosmetics. 
Body art facility. The area within a building or other location in which a practitioner performs body piercing, tattooing or application of permanent cosmetics, as defined in this Chapter, including the preparation and procedure area. 
Body piercing. The creation of an opening in the human body for the purpose of inserting jewelry or decorative objects. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose, belly button, cheek, forehead or eyebrow. Body piercing does not, for the purpose of this Chapter, include piercing the leading edge, or earlobe of the ear, with a sterile, disposable, single-use stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
Brokering. An arrangement under which an auto dealer, for a fee or other consideration, provides or offers to provide the service of arranging, negotiating, assisting, or effectuating the purchase of a new or used motor vehicle, not owned by the auto dealer, for another or others. 
Business establishment. Any retail store, food market, theater, restaurant, service station, bar, hotel, motel, or any other establishment which is open to, and provides, the public with any goods or services. 
Check casher. A person that for compensation engages in the business of providing pay day loans or cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose as cash, not including a state or federally charted bank, savings association, credit union, industrial loan company, or retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods that cashes checks or issues money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding an amount established by State Law, as a service to its customers that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
City. The City of Tustin. 
Compensation. The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
Convicted, conviction. A plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
Director. The Director of the Finance Department or designee. 
Employee. An individual who works for another in return for financial or other compensation, including an independent contractor. 
Establish an adult entertainment booking agency. Includes any of the following: 
(1)  To open or commence an adult entertainment booking agency, as a new business; 
(2)  To add adult entertainment booking agency services to an existing business; or 
(3)  To relocate any adult entertainment booking agency. 
Firearm. Any device, designed to be used as a weapon, from which is expelled through a barrel a projectile by the force of any explosion or other form of combustion. 
For pay. The exchange of a service or merchandise for a fee, reward, donation, loan, or receipt of anything of value. 
Fortunetelling. The telling of fortunes, forecasting of fortunes, or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult, psychic power, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, or other such reading, mediumship, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature. 
Garage sale. A garage, yard, lawn, patio, or similar type sale held anywhere on the premises in any residential property for the purpose of disposing of personal property owned by the person or persons conducting the sale. 
Goods. Tangible personal property, including motor vehicles, but excluding secondhand items such as books, sports equipment, clothing, and furniture. 
Large outdoor gathering. A music festival, dance festival, public dance, show, exhibition, fair, or any other organized outdoor gathering or activity, which takes place on a temporary basis on public property or private property with the property owner's consent, and is anticipated to be attended by more than five hundred (500) persons at any one time. Parades, marches, or organized gatherings involving more than twenty-five (25) people on City streets or sidewalks are not governed by this Article 3. 
Live entertainment. Includes live music, dance, comedy, fashion, illusionist, or dramatic performances in bars, restaurants, public spaces at shopping malls, other places open to the public, or on public property with the property owner's consent. Except that for purposes of this Article, live entertainment does not include single performers, duos, disc jockeys, karaoke singers, or sexually oriented businesses. 
Marijuana dispensary. Any person, association, business, facility, use, establishment, location, delivery service, cooperative, collective, or provider, whether fixed or mobile, that possesses, cultivates, processes, distributes, makes available or otherwise facilitates the distribution of marijuana (in any form or incorporated into any other product), whether for recreational or medicinal use, to any person, including, but not limited to, a qualified patient, a person with an identification card, or a primary caregiver as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
"Marijuana dispensary" shall not include an individual aged twenty-one (21) years or older who: 
(1)  Possess, processes, transports, purchases, obtains or gives away to adults aged twenty-one (21) or older without compensation whatsoever, recreational marijuana; or 
(2)  Possesses, plants, cultivates, harvests, dries, or purchases six (6) or fewer living marijuana plants or who possesses the marijuana produced by those plants, provided that such activity is conducted within the person's "private residence", as that phrase is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5), or upon the grounds of that private residence, provided that such activities are conducted within a fully enclosed, locked space, and are not visible by normal unaided vision from a public place. 
Mobile automobile service. A service that has no regular fixed location or services and generally comes to businesses to provide vehicle washing, cleaning, and/or maintenance. The term shall not include temporary car wash fundraisers that have temporary use permits. 
Mobile vendor, mobile vending. Mobile Vendor means persons who operate a mobile vending business, including an owner or operator of the vehicle used in the business. A mobile vending business offers products, food, or services for sale from a vehicle on a public street or while parked on a public street. Mobile vending does not include mobile automobile services, delivery services, plumbers, electricians, landscapers, roofers, pizza or restaurant delivery services or the delivery of stamps to a postal box by the United States Postal Service. 
Motor vehicles. Vehicles of a type subject to registration or motorcycles of a type subject to identification or State registration. 
Pattern of violation. Three (3) or more violations within two (2) years. 
Pawnbroker. Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan. "Receiving goods as security for a loan" does not include the good faith, outright purchase of goods. 
Permanent cosmetics. The application of pigments to or under human skin for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eye shadow, or lip color. 
Permit. An official document or certificate issued by the Director, Planning Commission, or City Council authorizing performance of a specified activity. 
Person. An individual person, joint venture, association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity. 
Property. Something tangible or intangible to which its owner has legal titles. 
Secondhand dealer. Includes any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, auctioning, or taking in pawn secondhand tangible personal property. "Secondhand Dealer" does not include: 
(1)  A coin dealer or participants at gun shows or events, as those terms are defined in Business and Professions Code Section 21626 or successor provisions; 
(2)  A person performing the services of an auctioneer for a fee or salary; or 
(3)  A person whose business is limited to the reconditioning and selling of major household appliances, provided the appliances are not traded, taken in pawn, accepted for drop off, accepted for sale on consignment, accepted for auction, auctioned, or bought except in bulk. 
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult tanning salon, adult theater, adult stripper or dancer, sexual encounter establishment, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall, or nude model studio. 
Specified anatomical areas. Include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitals in discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(3)  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections (1) or (2) above. 
Specified sexual activities. Include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts, whether of self or another; 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subdivision (1) through (3) of this subsection; 
(5)  Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models dressed only in lingerie to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed; 
(6)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(7)  The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon himself/herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh region, genitals, buttocks, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast. 
State check casher permit. A permit issued by the California Department of Justice authorizing a person to engage in the business of check casher. 
Tangible personal property. Includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  All secondhand personal property, excluding motor vehicles, which bears, or at the time acquired by the dealer bears, evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription; 
(2)  All tangible personal property, new or used, including motor vehicles, received in pledge by a pawnbroker; 
(3)  All personal property for which a report is required to be made under the provisions of Division 8 of the Financial Code regarding pawnbroker regulations, and Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code regarding secondhand goods, or successor provisions. 
The term shall not include secondhand books, CDs, sports equipment, clothing, or furniture. 
Tattooing. To pierce or puncture the human skin with a needle or other instrument for the purpose of the application of pigments or the inserting of pigment under the surface of the skin; the application of pigments or inks inserted into or under the skin for the purpose of producing a mark or by production of scars. 
Transfer of ownership. Includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, including the transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
Weapon. Any firearm or explosive device, or any device designed to be used in offensive or defensive combat or for sport, whether or not the weapon will be so used, and which is otherwise allowed by law to be possessed or sold. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 5, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 1289, Sec. 3, 1-3-05; Ord. No. 1324, Sec. III, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. IV, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 1407, Sec. III, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 1409, Sec. 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 1462, Sec. III, 11-3-15; Ord. No. 1466, Sec. 2, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 1478, Sec. 1, 4-4-17)  
PART 5 - PROHIBITED USES AND BUSINESSES 
 
3151 - PROHIBITED USES 
Any use or activity that is illegal under local, State or Federal law shall be deemed a prohibited use in all districts within the City. 
Any use that is not expressly permitted in a district as a permitted use or as a conditionally permitted use, including a use in a district determined to be similar in character to a particular use allowed in such district as provided in this Code, shall be deemed a prohibited use and such use shall not be allowed in such district. 
(Ord. No. 1466, Sec. 4, 1-19-16)  
3152 - MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES 
Marijuana dispensaries as defined in this Code are expressly prohibited within the City. 
(Ord. No. 1466, Sec. 4, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 1478, Sec. 2, 4-7-17)  
CHAPTER 2 - ENTERTAINMENT  
PART 1 - AMUSEMENT ACTIVITY 
 
3211 - AMUSEMENT ACTIVITY PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall establish, set up, maintain, exhibit, participate in, conduct, or carry on any amusement activity, with or without a charge being made therefor, without first having obtained an amusement activity permit from the Director. Amusement activity does not include marches or parades on City streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3212 - INVESTIGATION 
The Director shall cause to be investigated the place where the activity is to occur and whether it is suitable for the type of activity proposed, and whether the granting of such permit with or without conditions will be detrimental to the public safety, morals, comfort, and welfare, or detrimental to adjacent properties or uses. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3213 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file all of the following with the Director: 
(1)  A detailed description of the program, agenda, or plan of activities of the proposed amusement activity; 
(2)  A statement of the estimated number of persons reasonably expected to attend the amusement activity; 
(3)  A detailed description of each of the following items proposed by the applicants for the proposed amusement activity: 
(a)  A copy of each proposed advertisement and a description of all proposed publicity; 
(b)  A plan of the proposed access and traffic flow routes of ingress and egress together with proposed directional signing; traffic barriers, traffic control officers, and pedestrian control officers; 
(c)  A proposed parking plan; 
(d)  A proposed sanitation plan, including provisions for toilets and drinking water; 
(e)  A proposed plan for medical first aid assistance; 
(f)  A proposed plan for fire protection; 
(g)  A description of existing or proposed physical improvements, including fences, gates, ticket booths, stages, light and sound towers, grandstands, food vending, and other booths; 
(h)  A proposed cleanup plan for the premises, adjacent areas and routes of access for ingress and egress; 
(i)  A proposed plan for providing food and beverages; 
(j)  A proposed illumination plan; 
(k)  A proposed dust control plan; and 
(l)  A proposed sound amplification system plan. 
(4)  Written evidence of the property owner's consent to the proposed amusement activity. 
(5)  Evidence of liability insurance. 
(6)  Evidence of required permits or approvals, or requests for such approvals, from other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3214 - EXEMPTIONS 
Activities such as petting zoos, pony rides, children's attractions, and other minor amusements that are accessory to City-approved temporary uses shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain an amusement activity permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 2 - BINGO GAMES 
 
3221 - BINGO PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall establish, set up, maintain, conduct, or carry on any bingo game without first having obtained a bingo permit from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3222 - ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS 
Only organizations exempted from the payment of California bank and corporation taxes by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 237011 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, mobile home park associations, and senior citizens organizations are eligible to apply for a bingo permit, provided that the receipts of such games, with specified exceptions, are to be used only for charitable purposes ("eligible organizations"). Application for a bingo permit shall not be filed unless the applicant has, for at least twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of such application, owned or leased the property within the City of Tustin upon which such games are proposed to be conducted; provided, however, (1) that any organization which has held a valid license or permit for such games for premises within the City for at least one (1) year and relocates to new premises within the City, shall not be disqualified from receiving a permit at its new premises even though it has not occupied the new premises for one (1) year, provided that it is otherwise qualified to receive a permit for such new premises; and (2) further provided that an eligible organization which owns or, leases property on which the organization proposes to conduct such games, and which property has been used by such organization for an office or for the purposes for which the organization is organized shall not be disqualified from receiving a permit for such premises even though the organization has not occupied the premises for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3223 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to the information requested on the City's application form, the application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A statement that the applicant represents an eligible organization under this Part 3 and a Certificate or Determination of Exemption under Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g or 237011, if applicable, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento showing such exemption. Mobile home park associations or senior citizen organizations shall submit copies of their organizational documents. 
(2)  The name and signature of at least two (2) officers, including the presiding officer, of a corporation where applicable, and the trustee(s) of any trust. 
(3)  The particular property, address(es) on which property(ies) the bingo games will be conducted, the occupancy capacity of such place, and a description of parking facilities and spaces available. 
(4)  Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of the games. A statement of whether the application is for a single game or for a series of games, and if for a series, the specific dates or the specific period of recurrence (weekly, monthly) of the games. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant shall conduct such games in strict accordance with the provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5 and this Part as may be amended from time to time. The permit to conduct such games may be revoked by the Director upon violation of any of such provisions. 
(6)  A description of any security measures to be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3224 - REGULATIONS FOR GAMES 
a 
Financial Interest 
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity, except the permittee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of bingo games. 
b 
Open to Public 
All games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. 
c 
Attendance Limited to Occupancy Capacity 
Notwithstanding that such games are open to the public, attendance at any game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Building Division. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. 
d 
Games Conducted Only on Permitted Property 
A permit issued under this Part shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct such games only on property the address of which is stated in the application. 
e 
Exclusive Operation by Permittee 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by a member of the permittee organization. Such member shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from such game. Only the permittee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. 
f 
Minors Not to Participate 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in a game. 
g 
Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate 
No person who is obviously intoxicated or under the influence of illegal drugs shall be allowed to participate in a game. 
h 
Participants Must be Present 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the game is being conducted. 
i 
Times of Operation 
(1)  Any location approved pursuant to a permit granted by the City may be utilized for the conduct of bingo games on only two (2) days during any seven-day period regardless of the number of licensees permitted to conduct games at such location. Once during each calendar year, the Director of Community Development may permit a permittee to conduct games for more than two (2) days during any seven (7) day period, provided that such permission shall be limited to games conducted in conjunction with an established annual event regularly held by the permittee such as an annual festival, bazaar, or similar event. 
(2)  No bingo game shall be held before 10:30 a.m. nor after 11:30 p.m. of any day and each session of games shall not exceed six (6) hours in duration. 
j 
Maximum Amount of Prizes 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind for each separate game which is held. 
k 
Accounting and Audit 
The permittee shall keep full and accurate books of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with bingo games authorized by this Part. The City shall have the right to examine and audit such records between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and permittee shall fully cooperate with the City's right to examine by making such records available. 
l 
Profits to be Kept in Separate Fund or Account 
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the California bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from bingo games shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
(1)  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
(2)  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds before the deduction of floor prizes, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 3 - LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 
 
3231 - LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall establish, set up, maintain, conduct, or carry on any live entertainment for pay or for no charge, without first having obtained a live entertainment permit from the Director. 
Sexually oriented businesses, including entertainers or performers, must obtain special permits pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 3900 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3232 - REQUISITES FOR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT 
A person shall be disqualified from receiving a permit pursuant to this Part if he or she has been convicted of illegal drug usage, drug dealing or prostitution within the last five (5) years. 
No person shall be eligible to receive a live entertainment permit until such person has obtained a valid conditional use permit for live entertainment pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 9270(b). 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3233 - INVESTIGATION 
Upon receiving an application for a live entertainment permit, the Director shall cause to be investigated: the applicant, the place where the entertainment is to be presented, the type of entertainment proposed, and if the place is suitable for the type of entertainment proposed. 
The Director shall approve or conditionally approve the permit for such entertainment if the following determinations are made based on the required investigation: 
(1)  The entertainment proposed is not unlawful; 
(2)  The place where the entertainment is to be presented is suitable for the type of entertainment proposed; and, 
(3)  The applicant is eligible and not disqualified from receiving the live entertainment permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3234 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file all of the following with the Director: 
(1)  The names of any co-owners, partners, silent partners, financial supporters, and/or investors; 
(2)  A list of at least ten (10) entertainers with their names, addresses, phone numbers, business names, and the dates and locations or places where they worked for the applicant; and, 
(3)  Any other names by which the applicant is known or done business as (dba). 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3235 - EXEMPTIONS 
A live entertainment permit shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  For single performers, duos, disc jockeys, or karaoke singers; 
(2)  For the use of a radio, record, tape, compact disc player, juke box, or television receiver; 
(3)  For the use of a piano, organ, or keyboard in any establishment; 
(4)  For any entertainment provided for members and their guests at a private club where admission is not open to the public; 
(5)  For entertainment conducted in any theater holding a valid business license; 
(6)  For entertainment conducted or sponsored by any religious organization or by any bona fide nonprofit club, society, or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic, or literary purposes having an established membership and which holds regular meetings other than such entertainment at regular intervals, when the proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used for the purposes of such club, society, or association; and, 
(7)  For sexually oriented businesses, which are regulated by Tustin City Code Section 3910 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3236 - REGULATION OF LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 
a 
Transferability 
The live entertainment permit shall be nontransferable to any other person even if the type of live entertainment proposed is identical to the live entertainment authorized by a previous live entertainment permit for the same location and even if the entertainment has been provided continuously. If the ownership of a business at which live entertainment has been conducted changes such that the person in receipt of a live entertainment permit is no longer an owner, co-owner, or partner of the business, the presentation of live entertainment shall cease until a live entertainment permit has been issued to an owner, co-owner, or partner. 
b 
Visibility 
Stage or entertainment areas shall not be open to view from outside the premises. 
c 
Employees 
No business operating with a valid Live Entertainment Permit shall have any employee who has been convicted of illegal drug usage, drug dealing or prostitution within the last five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3237 - MODIFICATION OF PERMIT 
Whenever a permittee intends to present a different type of live entertainment than that authorized by a live entertainment permit, the permittee shall so advise the Director in writing and shall furnish such additional information as may be required. The Director may in his/her discretion authorize the permittee to present the requested type of entertainment without requiring that application for a new permit be made. Any such authorization shall be in writing and shall specify the conditions of the modified permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 4 - LARGE OUTDOOR GATHERINGS 
 
3241 - LARGE OUTDOOR GATHERING PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall establish, set up, maintain, exhibit, participate in, conduct, or carry on any large outdoor gathering for pay or for no charge, without first having obtained a large outdoor gathering permit from the Director. Large outdoor gatherings do not include parades, marches, or other gatherings on City streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3242 - INVESTIGATION 
The Director shall cause to be investigated the place where the activity is to occur and whether it is suitable for the type of activity proposed, and whether the granting of such permit with or without conditions will be detrimental to the public safety, morals, comfort, and welfare, or detrimental to adjacent properties or uses. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3243 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file all of the following with the Director: 
(1)  A detailed description of the program, agenda, or plan of activities of the proposed large outdoor gathering; 
(2)  A statement of the estimated number of persons reasonably expected to attend the large outdoor gathering; 
(3)  A detailed description of each of the following items proposed by the applicants for the proposed amusement activity: 
(a)  A copy of each proposed advertisement and a description of all proposed publicity; 
(b)  A plan of the proposed access and traffic flow routes of ingress and egress together with proposed directional signing; traffic barriers, traffic control officers, and pedestrian control officers; 
(c)  A proposed parking plan; 
(d)  A proposed sanitation plan, including provisions for toilets and drinking water; 
(e)  A proposed plan for medical first aid assistance; 
(f)  A proposed plan for fire protection; 
(g)  A description of existing or proposed physical improvements, including fences, gates, ticket booths, stages, light and sound towers, grandstands, food vending, and other booths; 
(h)  A proposed cleanup plan for the premises, adjacent areas, and routes of access for ingress and egress; 
(i)  A proposed plan for providing food and beverages; 
(j)  A proposed illumination plan; 
(k)  A proposed dust control plan; and, 
(l)  A proposed sound amplification system plan. 
(4)  Written evidence of the property owner's consent for the proposed activity. 
(5)  Evidence of liability insurance. 
(6)  Evidence of required permits or approvals, or requests for such approvals, from other regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3244 - EXEMPTIONS 
The following activities are exempted from the requirement to obtain a large outdoor gathering permit: 
(1)  Amusement activities for which permits have been granted by the Director; 
(2)  Events conducted on Tustin Unified School District property with District approval; and, 
(3)  Events sponsored or cosponsored by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3245 - NO OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS BY PATRONS OF LARGE GATHERING 
Patrons of the large gathering shall not gather together and obstruct the free passage of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or access way used by members of the public. 
Patrons of the large gathering shall not stand, sit, or lie on any street or sidewalk so as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of others. 
The holder of the large gathering permit shall be responsible for enforcement of the foregoing, and the Director may require that security forces be employed to ensure that public ways are not obstructed. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
CHAPTER 3 - MOBILE BUSINESSES  
PART 1 - MOBILE VENDING 
 
3311 - MOBILE VENDING PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall operate any mobile vending business without first having obtained a mobile vending permit from the Director for each vehicle so engaged. If the owner and operator of the vehicle are different, both shall be applicants for a mobile vending permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3312 - PREREQUISITES FOR MOBILE VENDING PERMIT 
A person shall be disqualified from receiving a permit pursuant to this part if he or she has been convicted of any offense requiring registration pursuant to Section 290 of the Penal Code or Section 11590 of the Health and Safety Code, or any other offense involving a minor. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3313 - INVESTIGATION 
The Director shall cause to be investigated all persons proposed to participate in the operation of the mobile vending business. Such persons shall be photographed and fingerprinted at the Police Department. All vehicles proposed to be licensed shall be inspected for safety at the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3314 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all information requested on the application form, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  A certificate of liability insurance for the business operation; 
(2)  If applicable, evidence of compliance with the provisions of Part I of Chapter 1 of Article IV of the Tustin City Code pertaining to food and food establishments; and 
(3)  If applicable, evidence of compliance with applicable County and State health requirements. 
(4)  Evidence that the vehicle is insured in accordance with California law. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3315 - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 
(a)  No person shall operate a mobile vending business which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street: 
(1)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any school property, public or Homeowner Association park, public playground or public recreational facility; 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any other food vending vehicle which is engaged in the operation of vending; 
(3)  Within 100 hundred (100) feet of an intersection; 
(4)  When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley or highway is greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(5)  When the vending vehicle is parked in violation of any other provision of this Code or the California Vehicle Code; 
(6)  When any part of the vending vehicle is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right side of the street, alley or highway; 
(7)  When the vending vehicle is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street, alley or highway; 
(8)  When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle; 
(9)  When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic; or 
(10)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  No person shall back a vending vehicle to make or attempt to make a sale. 
(c)  No mobile vending business shall be conducted in any one (1) location for longer than thirty (30) minutes, and shall be moved a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from the previous location before vending again. 
(d)  No minor under the age of sixteen (16) shall ride in or on a vending vehicle while such vending vehicle is engaged or about to be engaged in the operation of vending. 
(e)  No additional lighting other than that required by the California Vehicle Code may be installed or operated on vending vehicle. 
(f)  All vending vehicles shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle, and the operator of the vending vehicle which shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a fifty (50) foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved. 
(g)  Noise-making devices for mobile vending shall be limited to musical devices. No person shall employ horns or whistles. Noise-making devices shall remain silent for a cumulative total of at least three (3) minutes during any five (5) minute time period. 
(h)  Mobile vendors shall carry proof of liability insurance for their vehicle at all times and shall maintain such insurance continuously in compliance with the Vehicle Code. 
(i)  Mobile vendors shall continuously maintain vehicles in compliance with safety provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(j)  Mobile vendors shall continuously comply with all provisions of County and State law regarding the safe and healthful handling and storage of foodstuffs. 
(k)  No person conducting a mobile vending business shall establish a stationary display of wares on a public street, the public parkway or the public sidewalk. The stationary display of all products and services shall be contained within the vending vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3316 - APPLICABILITY OF PERMIT REQUIREMENT TO EXISTING BUSINESSES 
The provisions of this Part requiring a permit shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of this ordinance. All such persons and businesses shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance to file a completed application for a mobile vending permit with the Director. All other regulations herein shall apply on the effective date of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
3317 - NUISANCE. 
Any mobile vending business operated contrary to the provisions of this Part shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof, in the manner provided by this Code, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a mobile vending business contrary to the provisions of this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 4, 4-21-03)  
PART 2 - MOBILE AUTOMOBILE SERVICES 
 
3321 - MOBILE AUTOMOBILE SERVICES PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall operate or maintain a mobile automobile service without first having obtained a mobile automobile services permit from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3322 - REGULATION OF MOBILE AUTOMOBILE SERVICES 
Mobile automobile services shall comply with the provisions of City Code Section 4900 et seq., Water Quality Control, pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). 
When cleaning engines and/or vehicles using chemical additives such as soaps, solvents, or degreasers: 
(1)  Service must be performed at a facility that has the equipment to treat, process, and dispose of the contaminated wastewater runoff; or 
(2)  Service must be performed using a leak-proof ground cover device that will catch and contain all wastewater runoff for later disposal in a manner that complies with City, County, State, and Federal codes. 
Equipment, such as ground cover devices, shall be regularly inspected and maintained to ensure proper and effective functioning. 
Automotive service is a commercial activity that is not an approved residential use pursuant to the Tustin City Code. Services shall not be provided at residential properties. 
Performance of work on motor vehicles on a public right-of-way or in visible yard areas of residential properties, other than emergency repairs or minor maintenance performed by the owner of the vehicle, shall constitute a public nuisance pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 5502. 
Automotive repair requiring disassembly and/or replacement of major parts shall not be provided because the removal of essential equipment, parts, or contents from automobiles visible to the public constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 5502. 
All mobile automotive work shall be done on an appointment basis only. Multiple appointments and/or a continuing presence at any location would be considered a permanent automotive business and would be prohibited or require approval of a conditional use permit and compliance with development standards. 
Written approval from the property owner and/or property manager shall be obtained and maintained in company records prior to performing automotive services. Written approval shall be provided to the Community Development Department within twenty-four (24) hours of a written or verbal request. 
If the proposed business results in a nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration in non-residential zones, business activities shall cease until approval of a conditional use permit has been obtained pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 9270(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
CHAPTER 4 - SECURITY BUSINESSES  
PART 1 - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS (REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 1302)  
PART 2 - PRIVATE PATROL OPERATORS 
 
3421 - GENERAL 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a private patrol operator providing patrol and/or standing guard service without Director approval. Private patrol operators are regulated pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7580 et seq. To operate, business licenses must be continuously maintained and updated annually. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3422 - REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
All private patrol operators providing patrol and/or standing guard service shall register their names and file with the Director a copy of their current state identification card, evidencing a license pursuant to Business and Professions Code Sections 7580 et seq. Only a business license application and fee shall be required for registration. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3423 - PATROL AND STANDING GUARD REGULATIONS 
a 
Compliance with State Law 
All private patrol operators shall comply with applicable provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 7500 et seq., applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code regarding vehicles used in private patrol operations, and applicable provisions of the Penal Code regarding the use and carrying of weapons. 
b 
Identification and Qualification Cards 
Each private patrol operator shall carry his/her private patrol operator ID card issued by the State Department of Consumer Affairs and any firearm or baton qualification card on their person at all times while on duty as a private patrol operator. 
c 
Verbal Identification 
Upon confrontation with any unknown individual, a private patrol operator shall immediately identify himself or herself as a private guard or patrol operator. A private patrol operator shall not identify or represent himself or herself to be a peace officer or other public officer. 
d 
Cooperation with Law Enforcement 
An operator shall cooperate fully with the Police Department to provide information regarding the time and location of street patrols and other pertinent information upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
CHAPTER 5 - SALE AND EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY  
PART 1 - PAWNBROKERS 
 
3511 - PAWNBROKER PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker without a valid pawnbroker permit issued by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3512 - PREREQUISITES FOR PAWNBROKER PERMIT 
No person shall be eligible to receive a pawnbroker permit until such person has obtained a valid conditional use permit for such use. 
No person who has been convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property, or any other offense involving stolen property, shall be eligible to receive a pawnbroker permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3513 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file the following with the Director: 
(1)  A pawnbroker's two-year non-revocable surety bond in the amount of at least twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or such amount as required by Division 8 of the Financial Code regarding pawnbroker regulations or successor provisions. The pawnbroker's bond shall be executed by a surety admitted in the State of California and shall be in favor of the State of California, for the benefit of persons who pledged property, when the property is not available for proper redemption due to the pawnbroker's criminal conduct. 
(2)  A financial statement confirming that the applicant has at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in the form of liquid assets readily available for use in each licensed business for which an application is made. The one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall not include real property. The financial statement shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the applicant and a California certified public accountant, verifying that he or she has reviewed the financial statement. 
(3)  A list of the names, addresses, and fingerprints of the employees at the location proposed to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3514 - INVESTIGATION 
Upon receiving an application for a pawnbroker permit, the Director shall cause to be investigated the applicant and his/her employees, the place where the pawnbroker activity is to take place, the type of pawnbroker activities proposed, and if the place is suitable for the type of pawnbroker activities proposed. 
The Director shall approve or conditionally approve the permit for such pawnbroker activities if the following determinations are made based on the required investigation: 
(1)  The applicant and those persons associated with the applicant in the conduct of the business are of good moral character; 
(2)  The pawnbroker activities proposed are not unlawful; 
(3)  The place where the pawnbroker activities are to take place is suitable for the type of pawnbroker activities proposed; and, 
(4)  The granting of such permit will not be detrimental to the public safety, morals, comfort, and welfare, nor detrimental to adjacent properties or uses. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3515 - PAWNBROKER REGULATIONS 
a 
Employees 
No pawnbroker permittee shall employ any person in such business who would be disqualified from obtaining a pawnbroker permit under this Part. A revised list shall be submitted to the City Police Department, within ten (10) days of hiring any new employee(s), along with the fingerprints of the new employee(s). Employees of a pawnbroker permittee shall comply with all provisions of this section. 
b 
Location 
The business shall be carried on only at the location designated on the pawnbroker permit. Property of the business may be stored at other locations only with written consent of the Director and Police Chief. The Police Department and Community Development Department each has the authority to verify the location of storage of property. 
c 
Hours of Operation 
No pawnbroker business shall accept any item in pawn, nor make any loan on items of personal property except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
d 
Display of Permit 
The City's pawnbroker permit, certified by the City, shall be displayed on the premises in plain view at all times. 
e 
Criminal Activity 
A pawnbroker permittee shall not attempt to receive stolen property or commit any other criminal offense involving stolen property. 
f 
Advertisement 
A pawnbroker permittee shall not advertise the pawnbroker business unless the pawnbroker permit number is clearly displayed in the advertisement. 
g 
No Transfer or Assignment of Permit 
A permittee shall not transfer or assign a pawnbroker permit. 
h 
Property Reporting, Holding, and Production Requirements 
A pawnbroker permittee shall comply with all property reporting, holding, and production requirements as specified in Division 8 of the Financial Code regarding pawnbroker regulations, and Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, or successor provisions regarding secondhand goods, as applicable. 
i 
Charges and Loan Contract Requirements 
A pawnbroker permittee shall comply with all rates, charges, and loan contract requirements as specified in Division 8 of the Financial Code, or successor provisions regarding pawnbroker regulations. 
j 
No Transaction with a Minor 
A pawnbroker permittee shall not receive anything in pledge from a minor. 
k 
No Promise of Repurchase 
A pawnbroker permittee shall not promise any person who sells goods to permittee that the seller may repurchase the goods sold. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 2 - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
3521 - SECONDHAND DEALER PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of secondhand dealer without a valid secondhand dealer permit issued by the Director. 
A secondhand dealer operating with a valid pawnbroker permit as provided in Part 1 of this Chapter is exempt from the licensing requirements of this Part only and may engage in any transaction involving tangible personal property as defined herein, for which a secondhand dealer license is required. A secondhand dealer operating under this exemption is required to comply with all other requirements of this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3522 - PREREQUISITES FOR SECONDHAND DEALER PERMIT 
No person who has been convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property, or any other offense involving stolen property, shall be eligible to receive a secondhand dealer permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3523 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file with the Director a list of the names, addresses, and fingerprints of the employees at the location proposed to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3524 - INVESTIGATION 
Upon receiving an application for a secondhand dealer permit, the Director shall cause to be investigated the applicant and his/her employees, the place where the secondhand sales are to take place, the type of secondhand sales proposed, and if the place is suitable for the type of secondhand sales proposed. 
The Director shall approve or conditionally approve the permit for such secondhand sales if the following determinations are made based on the required investigation: 
(1)  The applicant and those persons associated with the applicant in the conduct of the business are of good moral character; 
(2)  The secondhand sales proposed are not unlawful; 
(3)  The place where the secondhand sales are to take place is suitable for the type of secondhand sales proposed; and, 
(4)  The granting of such permit will not be detrimental to the public safety, morals, comfort, and welfare, nor detrimental to adjacent properties or uses. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3525 - SECONDHAND DEALER OPERATIONS 
a 
Employees 
No secondhand dealer permittee shall employ any person in such business who would be disqualified from obtaining a secondhand dealer permit under this Part. A revised list of employees shall be submitted to the Police Department, within ten (10) days of hiring any new employee(s), along with the fingerprints of the new employee(s). Employees of a secondhand dealer permittee shall comply with all provisions of this section. 
b 
Location 
The business shall be carried on only at the location designated on the secondhand dealer permit. Property of the business may be stored at other locations only with written consent of the Director and Chief of Police. 
c 
Display of Permit 
The City's secondhand dealer permit, approved by the City, shall be displayed on the premises in plain view at all times. 
d 
Criminal Activity 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall not attempt to receive stolen property or commit any other criminal offense involving stolen property. 
e 
Advertisement 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall not advertise the secondhand dealer business unless the secondhand dealer permit number is clearly displayed in the advertisement. 
f 
No Transfer or Assignment of Permit 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall not transfer or assign a secondhand dealer permit. 
g 
Property Reporting, Holding, and Production Requirements 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall comply with all property reporting, holding, and production requirements as specified in Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, or successor provisions regarding secondhand goods, as applicable. 
h 
No Transactions with a Minor 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall not engage in any reportable transaction with a minor. 
i 
No Promise of Repurchase 
A secondhand dealer permittee shall not promise any person who sells goods to licensee that the seller may repurchase the goods sold.  
3526 - EMPLOYEE INFORMATION—CONDITIONAL EXEMPTION 
The requirements of Sections 3523 and 3525(a) that names, addresses, and fingerprints of all employees of a licensed secondhand dealer be provided may be waived, in whole or in part, by the Director, in his or her discretion, where the applicant/permittee establishes to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director and Chief of Police that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The buying, selling, trading, or taking in of secondhand goods is not the primary business activity of the business establishment; 
(2)  No sales of secondhand goods take place at the business establishment; 
(3)  The owner and/or operator of the business establishment has obtained a secondhand dealer permit in accordance with this Chapter; and 
(4)  Due to the limited nature of transactions involving secondhand goods occurring at the business establishment and/or the secondhand property handling and reporting procedures employed by the business establishment, there is a reduced risk for the business establishment being utilized as an outlet for the trafficking in stolen property. 
Notwithstanding whether a waiver is wholly or partially granted in accordance with this Section, the secondhand dealer permittee and each employee thereof shall comply with all other requirements of this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1409, Sec. 2, 1-3-12)  
PART 3 - WEAPONS BUSINESSES 
 
3531 - WEAPONS BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of repairing, modifying, customizing, restoring, cleaning, purchasing, selling, leasing or transferring weapons, whether new or used, without first having obtained a weapons business permit therefor from the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3532 - PREREQUISITES FOR WEAPONS BUSINESS PERMIT 
A person shall be disqualified from receiving a permit pursuant to this Part if he or she has been convicted of a felony. 
The applicant shall file the following with the Director: 
(1)  A valid Federal Firearms License (FFL) issued by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. 
(2)  A valid sellers permit issued by the State Board of Equalization. 
(3)  A valid Certificate of Eligibility (COE) issued by the Department of Justice. 
(4)  A statement indicating all criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last five (5) years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4 but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3533 - INVESTIGATION 
Upon receiving an application for a weapons business permit, the Director may cause an investigation of the applicant to be conducted by the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3534 - WEAPONS BUSINESS OPERATIONS 
a 
Location 
The business shall be carried on only at the location designated on the weapons business permit. Property of the business may be stored at other locations only with written consent of the Director and Chief of Police. 
b 
Weapons Storage and Safes 
Weapons shall be stored in accordance with all Federal and State requirements. 
c 
Home Occupations 
Weapons businesses shall not be conducted as, or as part of, a home occupation. 
d 
Display of Permit 
The City's weapons business permit or a copy thereof, approved by the City, shall be displayed on the premises in plain view at all times.  
PART 4 - AUTOBROKERS 
 
3541 - AUTOBROKER PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of autobroker without having a valid Autobroker Permit issued pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3542 - PREREQUISITES FOR AUTOBROKER PERMIT 
No person shall be granted an autobroker permit without having first obtained a valid autobroker endorsement to a dealer license as provided in Article 1 of Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code, Sections 11700 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3543 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to all other information requested on the application form, the applicant shall file with the Director a copy of applicant's valid bond or proof of cash deposit on file with the Department of Motor Vehicles and a copy of the State permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3544 - AUTOBROKER OPERATIONS 
An autobroker permittee shall comply with each of the following: 
a 
Location 
The business shall be carried on only at the location designated on the autobroker permit. No vehicle to be brokered shall remain on the premises. Property of the business may be stored at other approved locations only with written consent of the Director. The Police Department and Community Development Department have the authority to verify the storage of property in compliance with the autobroker permit. 
b 
Display of License 
The City's autobroker permit, approved by the City, shall be displayed on the premises in plain view at all times. 
c 
Advertisement 
The autobroker permit number shall be clearly displayed in any advertisement. 
d 
Consignment and Brokering Agreement Requirements 
An autobroker permittee shall comply with all consignment and brokering agreement requirements as specified in Article 1 of Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code. 
e 
Posting Notices 
An autobroker permittee shall post a Notice of Right to Inspect Vehicle and notice regarding a cooling-off period in the manner required by Article 1 of Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code. 
f 
Property Reporting, Holding, and Production Requirements 
An autobroker permittee shall comply with property reporting, holding, and production requirements as specified in Article 1 of Chapter 4 of the California Vehicle Code regarding autobroker regulations, or successor provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 5 - GARAGE SALES 
 
3551 - PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any property other than personal property accumulated for personal use by the person or persons conducting the garage sale. The sale of craft items manufactured by the property resident, items purchased for resale, and retail sales of new merchandise are prohibited. Garage sales activities may not be conducted on public sidewalks, parkways, streets, alleys, or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3552 - FREQUENCY AND DURATION OF SALE 
Garage sales may be conducted a total of four (4) times in any calendar year at the same address. A single garage sale may extend a maximum of three (3) consecutive days. No City permits or fees are required for garage sales. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3553 - SIGNS 
Signs advertising a proposed garage sale shall not require a City permit but shall comply with Section 9403d11 of the Tustin City Sign Code. Such signs shall not advertise any item, product, or service and shall not be erected more than one (1) day in advance of a proposed sale. Garage sale signs shall be promptly removed by sunset on the last day of the sale. Signs installed in violation of this section or not timely removed as required by this section shall be subject to abatement in accordance with Sections 9405g or 9405h of the Tustin City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3554 - INSPECTION 
All personal property offered for sale shall be available for inspection by any representative of the City of Tustin at the place where the sale is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
CHAPTER 6 - PERSONAL SERVICES  
PART 1 - CHECK CASHING 
 
3611 - CHECK CASHER PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall conduct the business of check casher without a valid check casher permit issued by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3612 - PREREQUISITE FOR CHECK CASHER PERMIT 
No person shall engage in the business of check casher without a valid state check casher permit issued by the California Department of Justice. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3613 - REGULATIONS FOR CHECK CASHERS 
a 
Compliance with State Law 
Check cashers shall comply with all applicable provisions of California Civil Code Section 1789.30 et seq. 
Check cashers shall post a complete, detailed, and unambiguous list of all fees for check cashing services in plain view in clear, legible letters of not less than one-half inch in height. 
A check casher shall post in plain view a list of valid identification which the business will accept for cashing checks in clear legible letters of not less than one-half inch in height. 
A check casher permittee shall not transfer or assign a check casher permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 2 - MASSAGE 
ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section I of Ord. No. 1380, adopted June 15, 2010, repealed Part 2, which consisted of sections 3621—3628, and derived from Ord. No. 1252, adopted June 3, 2002; and Ord. No. 1289, adopted January 3, 2005.  
PART 3 - FORTUNETELLING FOR PAY 
 
3631 - FORTUNETELLING PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of fortunetelling for pay without a valid fortunetelling permit issued by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3632 - PREREQUISITES FOR FORTUNETELLING PERMIT 
No person shall be eligible to receive a fortunetelling permit until such person has obtained a valid conditional use permit for a fortunetelling establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3633 - EXCEPTIONS 
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons at which no questions are answered as part of such entertainment, except to permit all persons present at such place to hear such answers. 
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to a person who is conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium healer, or clairvoyant, hereinafter collectively referred to as minister, from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principals that is recognized by all churches of like faith. A copy of the certificate of ordinance shall be filed with the Director prior to the person practicing fortunetelling. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3634 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to the information required by the City's application form, the applicant shall provide: 
(1)  A list of conviction(s) for violations of law, excluding traffic violations, for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(2)  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by Tustin Police Department; 
(3)  Written statements of at least five (5) persons that the applicant is of good moral character; and, 
(4)  All names used by the applicant during the previous five (5) years in conjunction with a fortunetelling for pay business. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3635 - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 
Each permittee shall post in plain sight on his/her business premises a sign containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name of the fortunetelling practitioner; 
(2)  Each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; 
(3)  The fees charged for each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; 
(4)  The statement "By City law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment, or remuneration beyond these established rates"; and, 
(5)  The statement "Any client wishing to do so may make an audio tape or take written notes during any fortunetelling session or consultation." 
The sign required by this subsection shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortuneteller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least one-half (½) inch in height. 
If the fortunetelling service is provided at a location other than the fortuneteller's permanent place of business, the fortuneteller shall provide the information required by this subsection on eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) inch paper in legible print or type. The paper shall also include the name and permanent address of the person(s) providing the fortunetelling services. No other information or printed matter shall appear on the paper. A true, correct, and complete copy of such paper shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortunetelling services. 
No person shall charge or collect any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortunetelling services in excess of the fees set forth on the sign or paper required by this Section. No person transacting or engaging in any fortunetelling for pay services shall prohibit a client from making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information provided by the fortuneteller. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BOOKING AGENCY 
 
3641 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BOOKING AGENCY PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall establish or continue to operate an existing adult entertainment booking agency without a valid adult entertainment booking agency permit issued pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3642 - PREREQUISITES FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BOOKING AGENCY PERMIT 
No person shall be eligible to receive an adult entertainment booking agency permit until such person has obtained a valid conditional use permit for an adult entertainment booking agency. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3643 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to providing the information required by the City's application form, the applicant shall provide: 
(1)  A detailed description of the operations of the adult entertainment booking agency, including the number of persons engaged or that are estimated to be engaged in providing the entertainment services, whether they are independent contractors or employees, and a description of the types of locations being served in Tustin. 
(2)  Proposed hours of operation. 
(3)  The permit history of the applicant in other jurisdictions, including: the dates and types of licenses or permits issued; whether the applicant has had a license or permit under similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the adult entertainment booking agency for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of a corporation that has been licensed or permitted in another jurisdiction and the license or permit has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of his/her managers, supervisors, or employees have been convicted, within the five (5) years immediately preceding the application, of any offense classified by the State of California as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316, or 647, or any offense outside the State of California that would constitute any of the above-described offenses if committed within the State of California. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of his/her agents, managers, supervisors, employees, or independent contractors have been convicted within the five (5) years immediately preceding the application of any offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or the possession for sale and/or possession of a controlled substance, as specified above. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 5 - BODY ART 
 
3651 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
No person shall engage in the business of applying body art without obtaining a body art permit issued by the Director of Finance. No person shall engage in the business of applying body art except at a duly-licensed body art facility specified in the County health permit registration form and in the City body art permit as required herein. 
This Part does not restrict the activities of any physician or surgeon licensed under Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 2000) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1324, Sec. IV, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 1407, Sec. IV, 11-15-11)  
3652 - PREREQUISITES TO OBTAINING PERMIT 
No person shall be eligible to receive a body art permit until such person has obtained a valid County health permit for a body art facility or until such person is employed by a body art facility with a valid County health permit. 
Any person who wishes to obtain a body art permit to engage in the business of applying body art shall provide proof of: 
(1)  Registration with the Health Officer; 
(2)  Payment of an annual County inspection fee; and 
(3)  Address(es) where the business is to be conducted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 119303. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1324, Sec. IV, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 1407, Sec. IV, 11-15-11)  
3653 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENT 
In addition to providing the information required on the City's application form, the applicant shall provide evidence that a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant was taken through the Livescan service. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. IV, 11-15-11)  
3654 - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 
Every body art facility shall be open for inspection by any officer of the City of Tustin at all times during which body art services are being provided. 
A permittee shall not: 
(1)  Do business at any location not specified in the County's registration form or City permit; or 
(2)  Violate the sterilization, sanitation, and safety standards adopted by the State Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1324, Sec. IV, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 1407, Sec. IV, 11-15-11)  
PART 6 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. II of Ord. No. 1462, adopted Nov. 3, 2015, amended and restated Part 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Part 6 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of sections 3661—3669.2, and derived from Sec. II of Ord. No. 1380, adopted June 15, 2010. 
 
3661 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
It is the purpose and intent of this Part to regulate the operation of massage establishments in the City for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its operators, massage technicians, employees, clients, and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3662 - DEFINITIONS 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of the following words and phrases used in this Part: 
Acupressure means the act of applying manual pressure to parts of the body with the intention of treating illness and/or disease or relieving pain. 
California Massage Therapy Council or CAMTC means the non-profit organization formed pursuant to the Massage Therapy Act to regulate massage professionals, businesses, training, practices, and techniques. 
Certified massage technician means any individual certified by CAMTC as a certified massage therapist or as a certified massage practitioner pursuant to the Massage Therapy Act. 
Manager means the person or persons designated by the owner or operator of a massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner or operator in managing the day-to-day operations of the massage establishment. 
Massage or massage services means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, hygienic, relation, or any other reason or purpose, in exchange for compensation, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, acupressure, or other manner of touching external parts of the body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, ointment, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person or combination of persons engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massages or health treatments involving massage. Except as provided in Section 3665, any type of business or establishment at which massage is provided shall be considered a massage establishment for purposes of this Part, regardless if the business holds itself out as something other than a massage establishment and/or also offers or provides other types of products or services. The residence or business office of a sole provider who only engages in out-call massage and does not provide massage services at such residence or business office shall not be considered a massage establishment. 
Massage Therapy Act means the California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
Operator means the individual who actively manages the massage establishment. Evidence of active management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire, schedule, and dismiss employees and independent contractors, control hours of operation, and create policy or rules. An operator may also be an owner, however, an owner is only the "operator" for purposes of this Part if the owner actively manages and is regularly present at the location of the massage establishment. For purposes of enforcement of the requirements of this Part, "operator" refers to the individual identified as the operator in the most recently issued massage establishment permit. 
Out-Call Massage means the performance of massage services at a location other than a massage establishment. Such locations may include, but are not limited to, hotel rooms, offices, or patron residences. 
Owner means the person or persons who owns the massage establishment as identified on the City of Tustin massage establishment permit. 
Permittee means a person that has been issued a massage establishment permit by the City pursuant to this Part. 
Sole provider means any legal form of business organization where the business owner owns one hundred (100) percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for that business pursuant to a valid and current State certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors. 
State certification or State certificate means a valid and current certificate issued by CAMTC pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3663 - STATE CERTIFICATE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any individual to provide massage services in or upon any premises within the City of Tustin unless that individual has a valid and current State certificate. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or any other person in charge of or in control of a massage establishment to employ, retain, or permit an individual to provide massage services at a massage establishment within the City of Tustin who does not possess a valid and current State certificate. Each owner, operator, and manager of a massage establishment shall have a continuing obligation to verify that all individuals providing massage services hold the State certification required by this Part. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to commence or to continue to operate a massage establishment within the City of Tustin without having a valid massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this Part. It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment at any time while a massage establishment permit is expired, cancelled, suspended or otherwise invalid. 
(d)  No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the Director, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). A massage establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued or sold, transferred, or assigned. Except as expressly provided herein, a massage establishment may not be operated under a new owner or new operator until a new massage establishment permit is issued by the City of Tustin identifying both the new owner and new operator. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3664 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Prior to commencing operation of a massage establishment, the owner and operator desiring to operate the massage establishment shall apply for and obtain a massage establishment permit. The permit shall be valid for the period of time set forth for massage establishment permits in Section 3713. The application for the massage establishment permit for each massage establishment shall be made jointly by, and shall be signed by, both the owner and operator of that massage establishment. 
(b)  All applicants for massage establishment permits shall provide the following relevant information about the owner, operator and establishment: 
(1)  Information regarding the type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether the business is owned by individual, partnership, limited liability company (LLC), corporation, or otherwise: 
a.  If the establishment is owned by a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the state and date of incorporation and the name, residence address, and a copy of a valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government shall be provided for each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of that corporation. 
b.  If the establishment is owned by a partnership or limited partnership, the application shall set forth the name, residence address, and include a copy of a valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government for each of the partners, including limited partners, if any. In addition, if the establishment is owned by a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Secretary of State. In addition, if one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation or LLC, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations and LLCs shall apply. 
c.  If the establishment is owned by an LLC, the application shall set forth the name, residence address, and include a copy of a valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government for each manager and of each member. In addition, if the establishment is owned by an LLC, it shall furnish a copy of its articles of organization filed with the State. In addition, if one (1) or more of the members is a corporation or limited partnership, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations and partnership shall apply. 
d.  If the establishment is owned by an individual, the application shall set forth the full name, residence address of the owner, including all aliases. 
(2)  If the establishment is owned by a corporation, partnership, LLC, or other entity (other than individual ownership), that entity shall designate one (1) of its officers (in the case of a corporation), general partners (in the case of partnerships) or managers (in the case of an LLP) to act as its responsible managing officer. Such responsible managing officer shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this Part. 
(3)  The precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted. 
(4)  The complete address and telephone numbers of the massage establishment. 
(5)  A complete current list of the names, all aliases, and current residence addresses of: 
a.  The operator; 
b.  All certified massage technicians who will perform massages at the massage establishment, whether as employees or independent contractors of the massage establishment; 
c.  All other proposed employees, inclusive of independent contractors, in the massage establishment; 
d.  If the massage establishment will be managed in part by individuals other than the owner or operator, then the list shall include the name(s), all aliases, and current residence address(es) of all such manager(s). 
(6)  Copies of a valid and current State certificate and CAMTC-issued identification card for each certified massage technician who will perform massage at the massage establishment. 
(7)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or within which the business is to be conducted. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a signed acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his/her property, and that the massage establishment shall be subject to this Part. 
(8)  A statement signed by the owner and operator that each shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business, whether or not the owner or operator is aware of such conduct, and acknowledging that any violation of the Massage Therapy Act, any local, state or federal law, or the provisions of this Part may result in the revocation of the massage establishment permit and civil, administrative, or criminal penalties. 
(9)  If the massage establishment is owned by a corporation, LLC, partnership or other entity (other than an individual), the application shall include a description of any other business owned or operated by the owner, whether located on the same premises, or elsewhere within the State of California. 
(10)  The application shall include all of the following information concerning the owner (individual owners who are certified by CAMTC are required to obtain a massage establishment permit, but are not required to provide the information required in subsection j. below): 
a.  Full complete name and all aliases used by the owner; 
b.  All residential addresses for eight (8) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
c.  A description (including name, type of business, address and phone numbers) of any other business owned or operated by the owner, whether located on the same premises, or elsewhere within the State of California; 
d.  A valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government, evidencing proof of the owner's date of birth; 
e.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex of the owner; 
f.  Two (2) front-facing portrait color photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size; 
g.  The owner's complete business, occupation, and employment history for eight (8) years preceding the date of application; 
h.  The complete massage permit history of the owner; whether the owner has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license was denied, revoked, or suspended; or if a vocational professional license or permit was denied, revoked, or suspended; and the reason therefor; 
i.  All criminal convictions of the owner, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last five (5) years, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations; 
j.  Evidence that a complete set of fingerprints of the owner was taken through the Livescan service; and 
k.  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
(11)  The application shall include all of the following information concerning the operator (individual operators who are certified by CAMTC are required to obtain a massage establishment permit, but are not required to provide the information required in subsection j. below): 
a.  Full complete name and all aliases used by the operator; 
b.  All residential addresses for eight (8) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
c.  A description (including name, type of business, address and phone numbers) of any other business owned or operated by the operator, whether located on the same premises, or elsewhere within the State of California; 
d.  A valid and current driver's license and/or identification card issued by a state or federal government agency or other photographic identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government, evidencing proof of the operator's date of birth; 
e.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex of the operator; 
f.  Two (2) front-facing portrait color photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size; 
g.  The operator's complete business, occupation, and employment history for eight (8) years preceding the date of application; 
h.  The complete massage permit history of the operator; whether the operator has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license was denied, revoked, or suspended; or if a vocational professional license or permit was denied, revoked, or suspended; and the reason therefor; 
i.  All criminal convictions of the operator, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last five (5) years, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations; 
j.  Evidence that a complete set of fingerprints of the operator was taken through the Livescan service; and 
k.  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application. 
(c)  The massage establishment permit application shall be accompanied with an application fee in such amount as the City Council may establish by Resolution or Ordinance. 
(d)  In addition to a massage establishment permit, a massage establishment shall maintain a City business license and pay any business license tax when due. 
(e)  The application for the massage business license does not authorize operation of a massage establishment or performing massage services until the massage establishment permit is issued. 
(f)  The owner and/or operator must provide written notification to the City at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to renaming or conveying the massage establishment business (or any portion thereof) to another person. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 3668, if, during the term of a massage establishment permit, there is any change to the information submitted on the original or renewal application, the owner and/or operator shall notify the Director in writing of any such change within ten (10) calendar days thereafter. 
(h)  The Director shall not process or issue a new massage establishment permit where, within a twenty-four-month period prior to the submittal of an application, the location of the proposed massage establishment, inclusive of the parcel within which the proposed massage establishment would be located, (i) has been the site of a violation of this Part, or any similar criminal or civil ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of the State of California or any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments, or (ii) has been the site of a massage establishment that was closed due to criminal activity. For purposes of this subsection, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of a massage establishment after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3665 - EXEMPTIONS 
(a)  This Part does not apply to certified massage technicians who perform chair massages on fully clothed persons in the view of the public. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, the provisions of this Part shall not apply to individuals within the following professional categories while engaged in or performing the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Healing arts professionals licensed by the State under Division 2 (Commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code, including without limitation, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists. 
(2)  Registered or licensed vocational nurses duly registered by the State of California. 
(3)  Licensed employees of hospitals, nursing homes, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California when acting within the scope of their licenses. 
(4)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses. 
(5)  Coaches and trainers employed by accredited high schools and colleges, therein while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(6)  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional, or professional athlete or athletic team. 
(7)  Physical therapist students, and massage therapist and massage practitioner students earning practical hours for school/education, and who are currently enrolled in a licensed program for physical therapy or massage services through a recognized school/education center, provided such students work under the direct supervision of an exempted professional as defined in this section. Direct supervision means that an exempted professional, as defined in this section, must be present at all times when a student is performing massages. 
(c)  An exempted professional listed in subsection (b) above may himself/herself perform massages without a State certification or massage establishment permit. However, it shall be unlawful for any employee or independent contractor of an exempted professional listed in subsection (b) above to perform massages unless either: 
(1)  All such employees and independent contractors performing massages are independently exempted professionals pursuant to subsection (b) above (in which event no massage establishment permit is required); or 
(2)  If any one (1) or more of the employees or independent contractors performing massages is not an exempted professional listed in subsection (b), the establishment is operated subject to a valid massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this Part. If a massage establishment permit is required under this paragraph, then the applicant for the massage establishment permit shall provide, as to each individual who performs massage services at the establishment, either of the following: 
i.  The documents and information required by subsection 3664(b)(6), or 
ii.  Documentary evidence that such individual is an exempted professional listed in subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3666 - OUT-CALL MASSAGE 
(a)  No person shall perform an out-call massage in the City of Tustin without possessing a valid and current State certificate. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part, the owner or operator of a massage establishment with a fixed place of business providing out-call massage shall obtain a massage establishment permit in accordance with the requirements set forth in this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3667 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT—FACILITIES 
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  Sign: Subject to applicable provisions of the City's Codes, a recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the business as a massage establishment. 
(b)  Lighting: Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Electrical Code adopted by the City and, in addition, at least one (1) artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons and shall be activated at all times while a patron is in such room or enclosure. 
(c)  Equipment: Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(d)  Water: Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(e)  Linen storage: Closed cabinets shall be provided and utilized for storage of clean linen, and approved receptacles shall be provided for the deposit of soiled linen. 
(f)  Separation of sexes: If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the massage establishment, a separate massage room or rooms and separate dressing, bathing and toilet facilities (if provided) shall be provided and utilized for male and female patrons. Each separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such. 
(g)  Massage table pads: Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in a professional manner with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to Orange County Health Care Agency. 
(h)  Steam rooms and sauna facilities: Where steam rooms or sauna baths are provided, if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate steam rooms or sauna rooms shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3668 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT—OPERATIONS 
Every massage establishment shall comply with the following operating requirements: 
(a)  After obtaining a massage establishment permit, and prior to conducting business on the massage establishment premises, the owner or operator shall provide the Director with a complete roster of the names, job titles and residence addresses of all employees and independent contractors for the massage establishment, including, but not limited to, massage technicians and managers, and the date the employee or independent contractor was hired. The owner or operator shall also provide the Director with copies of a State certificate and CAMTC-issued identification card for all individuals providing massage services for the massage establishment. The owner or operator shall report to the Director any change of employees or independent contractors, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination and provide an updated roster and documentation evidencing State certification as appropriate. No such newly hired or renewed employee or independent contractor shall be present at the massage establishment prior to such time as the owner or operator provides the Director with the updated roster and State certification documentation required by this section. The owner or operator shall provide the updated roster within five (5) calendar days following the date of termination of any employee or independent contractor. The roster, and copies of a State certificate and CAMTC-issued identification card for all individuals providing massage, shall be kept at the premises and be available for inspection by officials charged with enforcement of this Part. 
(b)  The massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this Part shall be displayed in an accessible and conspicuous place, visible from the entrance and/or reception and waiting area of the massage establishment. 
(c)  Massage services shall be carried on and the premises shall be open only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. No person may provide massage on the premises after 10:00 p.m. 
(d)  A list of services shall be posted in an open, public place on the premises, and shall be described in readily understood language. No owner, operator, or manager shall permit, and no massage technician, or any other massage establishment employee or independent contractor, shall offer to perform any services other than those posted. 
(e)  The following notice shall be posted in an open, public place on the premises: 
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS: THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY AUTHORIZED CITY OF TUSTIN PERSONNEL WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
(f)  The following notice, measuring at least eight and one-half (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches in size, written in 16-point font, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment in clear view of the public and employees, and displayed in English, Vietnamese, Mandarin, Spanish, Cantonese, Korean: 
If you or someone you know is being forced to engage in any activity and cannot leave—whether it is commercial sex, housework, farm work, construction, factory, retail, or restaurant work, or any other activity—Call the National Human Trafficking Resource Center at 1-888-373-7888 or the California Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST) at 1-888-KEY-2-FRE(EDOM) or 1-888-539-2373 to access help and services. 
Victims of slavery and human trafficking are protected under United States and California law. The hotlines are: 
•  Available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
•  Toll-free 
•  Operated by nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations 
•  Anonymous and confidential 
•  Accessible in more than 160 languages 
•  Able to provide help, referral to services, training, and general information 
(g)  No massage establishment shall be open for business without having at least one (1) certified massage technician on the premises, and on duty. 
(h)  An owner, operator or manager shall be at the massage establishment at all times when the massage establishment is open for business. 
(i)  Each massage technician shall, at all times while on the premises, wear and display their original CAMTC-issued identification card on their outer clothing and in plain view. 
(j)  Front doors used for patron access, and internal doors leading into an area where massages are being performed, shall remain unlocked during business hours, unless the massage establishment is a business entity owned by one (1) individual with one (1) or no employees or independent contractors. Internal doors shall not be equipped with a "peep hole" or any other device that allows anyone to see into or out of a room when the door is closed. 
(k)  Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one (1) patron unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one (1) patron. Separate closed cabinets or containers shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be plainly marked: "clean linen," "soiled linen." 
(l)  Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, shower rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the Health Department. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(m)  Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one (1) patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilizing methods. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided which are approved by the department or agency designated by the City Manager to make inspections for compliance with health standards. 
(n)  Where a covering is furnished by the massage establishment, it shall not be used by more than one (1) patron until it has first been laundered and disinfected. 
(o)  Every massage establishment shall keep a written record of the date and hour of each treatment administered, the name and address of each patron, the name of the massage technician administering treatment, and the type of treatment administered, to be recorded on a patron release form. Such written record shall be open to inspection by officials charged with enforcement of this Part. Such records shall be kept on the premises of the massage establishment for a period of two (2) years. In the event the massage establishment relocates, the records shall be retained at the new location. 
(p)  No part of the massage establishment shall be used for residential or sleeping purposes. 
(q)  Only professional massage tables may be placed in massage rooms and utilized for massage services. The tables must have a minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. Beds, mattresses, waterbeds, futons, sofa beds, or any type of portable or convertible beds are not permitted on the premises. 
(r)  No massage establishment shall simultaneously operate as a school of massage, or share facilities with a school of massage. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3669 - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 
(a)  No massage technician, or any other massage establishment employee, inclusive of independent contractors, shall violate the provisions of Section 647(a) and (b) of the California Penal Code, or any other state law involving a crime of moral turpitude, and such practices shall not be allowed or permitted by anyone. 
(b)  No massage technician, or any other massage establishment employee or independent contractor, shall expose their genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or breast(s) below the point immediately above the top of the aureole to the view of a massage establishment patron. 
(c)  No massage technician while engaged in the practice of massage, or while visible to patrons of the massage establishment, shall dress in: attire that is transparent, see-through, or substantially exposes the massage technician's undergarments; swim attire, if not providing a water-based modality approved by CAMTC; a manner that exposes the massage technician's breast, buttocks, or genitals; or a manner that constitutes indecent exposure in violation of Section 314 of the California Penal Code. 
(d)  Except as expressly permitted herein, a massage technician shall not massage a patron of one (1) sex within the view of a patron of the opposite sex, and such practices shall not be allowed or permitted by anyone unless all parties expressly consent to the treatment, location, and presence of the patron of the opposite sex. 
(1)  This subsection shall not apply if all involved patrons are fully clothed, excluding socks or stockings. 
(2)  No more than one (1) male and one (1) female may consent to be massaged in the same treatment room. 
(3)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) may consent to a massage in the presence of another unless the other patron present is the minor's parent or legal guardian, and the parent or legal guardian consents. 
(e)  No person(s) other than an owner, operator, manager, employee, independent contractor or patron shall be allowed beyond the reception and waiting area during the hours of operation. Any other person(s) found beyond the reception and waiting area including, but not limited to, hallways, massage rooms, offices, lounge areas, or dressing rooms will be in violation of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following persons may be permitted beyond the reception area, and present in massage rooms while massage services are provided without violating this subsection: 
(1)  The parents or guardian of a patron who is a minor child; 
(2)  A minor child of a patron; or 
(3)  The conservator, aide, or other caretaker of a patron. 
(f)  No more than two (2) members of the same sex may consent to be massaged in the same treatment room unless all involved patrons are fully clothed, excluding socks or stockings. 
(g)  No massage technician, or any other massage establishment employee, inclusive of independent contractors, shall engage in any form of "unprofessional conduct" as defined by Section 4609(a)(1) of the Massage Therapy Act, including: 
(1)  Engaging in any form of sexual activity on the premises of the massage establishment. 
(2)  Engaging in sexual activity while providing massage services for compensation. 
(3)  Providing massage of the genitals or anal region. 
(4)  Providing massage of female breasts without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider. 
(h)  A massage establishment patron's genitals, anus, and in the case of a female, her breasts (except as expressly permitted by subsection (g) above), must be fully covered at all times while a massage technician or any other massage establishment employee, inclusive of independent contractors, is present in the same room as the patron. 
(i)  No person shall enter, be, or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in the possession of, consuming, or using any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug. Legal over-the-counter drugs and prescription drugs are permitted, provided the individual in possession of the prescription drug is the individual identified on the prescription label. The owner, operator, manager or any other massage establishment employee or independent contractor shall not permit any person in possession of illegal drugs to enter or remain upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3669.1 - RESPONSIBILITY 
The owner, operator, and manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees, inclusive of independent contractors, working on the premises of the massage establishment, whether or not the owner, operator, or manager is aware of such conduct. Any act or omission of any employee or independent contractor constituting a violation of the provisions of this Part shall be deemed an act or omission of each owner, operator and manager for purposes of determining (a) compliance with this Part, and (b) whether the massage establishment permit shall be revoked, denied, or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3669.2 - INSPECTION BY CITY OFFICIALS 
Any duly authorized official of the City, including, but not limited to, the City police, designated representatives, code enforcement officers, health officials and building and fire inspectors, shall have the right to enter any massage establishment premises from time to time during regular business hours prior to the issuance of a massage establishment permit and subsequently thereafter for the purposes of making reasonable inspections to ensure compliance with this Part, with applicable laws, and with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health and safety regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3669.3 - VIOLATION—PENALTY 
In addition to any other penalty or remedy set forth in the Tustin City Code (including all remedies available under Chapter 1 of Article 1 of the Tustin City Code) or set forth under State or Federal law, any person violating this Part shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or portion thereof that a person permits a violation of this Part to continue shall constitute a separate and subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
3669.4 - UNLAWFUL OPERATION DECLARED NUISANCE 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Part shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as shall abate or remove such massage establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this Part. 
(Ord. No. 1462, Sec. II, 11-3-15)  
CHAPTER 7 - PERMIT PROCEDURES  
PART 1 - ISSUANCE OF PERMITS/TERM/ANNUAL UPDATE/RENEWAL 
 
3711 - GENERAL 
Applicants for City permits required by this Article shall obtain an application form from the Director and shall pay any applicable application fee. The fee shall be as provided by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of processing and investigation. Upon determining that the application is complete, the Director shall make such investigation and review to determine the fitness and qualifications of the applicant and the effect, if any, of the application on the public peace, safety, welfare, and safety of the City. The Director may issue a permit with conditions necessary to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the City or deny a permit. Alternatively, the Director may report the results of the investigation to the Planning Commission and request the Planning Commission to hold a hearing and make the permit decision. All permit issuance decisions shall be in writing with reasons given for a denial. An appeal may be filed on the Director's or the Planning Commission's decision in accordance with Part 3 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3712 - DENIAL 
An application for a permit, including renewal of a permit, may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant has made material misrepresentations of fact or omitted material information required by the application; 
(2)  The applicant does not meet the prerequisites for a permit as specified in this Article. The Director or the Planning Commission has the discretion to evaluate information presented to satisfy prerequisites and to determine its credibility or reliability; 
(3)  In the case of a renewal, the permit may be also denied if the permittee has failed to abide by the operational regulations specified in this code or the conditions of the permit. The proposed denial of the renewal of a permit for these reasons shall be heard and decided by the Director or the Planning Commission; 
(4)  In the case of an adult entertainment booking agency, massage establishment, or mobile ice cream vendor, if the applicant or any of his/her manages, supervisors, or employees have been convicted within the last five (5) years of any offense classified by the State of California as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316, or 647, or any offense outside the State of California that would constitute any of the above-described offenses if committed within the State of California, or if the applicant or any of his/her agents, managers, supervisors, employees, or independent contractors have been convicted within the five (5) years immediately preceding the application of any offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or the possession for sale and/or possession of a controlled substance, as specified above, or been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state; 
(5)  Any applicant has engaged in conduct in the City or in another jurisdiction which, if it had occurred within the City, would constitute grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation under any Part under this Article; 
(6)  Any applicant has been convicted within the five (5) years immediately preceding the application of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the permittee; 
(7)  The application does not contain all of the information required by the Part applicable to the permit application; 
(8)  In the case of a massage establishment: 
(a)  The applicant has had a massage establishment permit, MTO certificate, massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended, revoked, or refused to be renewed for cause by a permitting authority or by any city, county, or state; or 
(b)  The massage establishment as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; or 
(c)  The applicant, or any of the applicant's employees or independent contractors, has violated a provision of Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4613. 
Denial of permits, including renewals of permits, may be appealed in accordance with Part 3 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. III, 6-15-10)  
3713 - TERM 
Unless a different term is specified in this Article, permits shall be valid from the date of issuance until revoked or abandoned. Massage establishment permits shall be valid from the date of approval by the City until June 30 of the following calendar year, and shall be renewed annually on or before June 30. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. III, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 1467, § I, 7-5-16)  
3714 - ANNUAL UPDATE 
Information required on the application for the original permit shall be updated and corrected by the applicant as appropriate on an annual basis, or as otherwise required by conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. III, 6-15-10)  
3715 - RENEWAL 
An application for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the Director by the applicant at least thirty (30) days prior to the permit expiration date. Information required on the application for the original permit shall be updated and corrected as appropriate in the renewal application. Renewal decisions of the Director or the Planning Commission may be appealed in accordance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 2 - REVOCATION OF PERMITS 
 
3721 - GENERAL 
The Director or Planning Commission may revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the Director or the Planning Commission has found and determined that the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare demand revocation or suspension of the permit; 
(2)  Where the permittee has violated any provisions of the Tustin City Code, or Statutes of the State of California, or of the United States of America; 
(3)  Where a permit has been issued on false statements in an application; 
(4)  Where the permittee has violated any of the terms and conditions of the permit; 
(5)  Where the use or activity for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for one (1) year or more; 
(6)  Where the permittee no longer meets the prerequisites or requirements of the permit; and, 
(7)  Failure to provide County, State, and/or Federal mandated licensing certificates on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
3722 - HEARING 
No permit shall be revoked until the Director or the Planning Commission holds a hearing on the matter. Written notice of the proposed revocation, the reasons therefor, and of the hearing before the Director or the Planning Commission shall be provided to the permittee at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the hearing. 
The permittee shall be entitled to present all pertinent and relevant evidence pertaining to the proposed revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
PART 3 - APPEAL 
 
3731 - GENERAL 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 1289, Sec. 7, 1-3-05; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 3, 11-17-09)  
PART 4 - REAPPLICATION 
 
3741 - REAPPLICATION 
If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial or revocation of a permit and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances that would eliminate the reasons for denial or correct the reasons for revocation, the application shall be rejected by the Director. The Director's decision may be appealed in accordance with Part 3 of this Chapter 7. 
(Ord. No. 1252, Sec. II, 6-3-02)  
CHAPTER 8 - FORTUNE-TELLING 
(Repealed by Ordinance No. 1252, adopted June 3, 2002)  
CHAPTER 9 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
3910 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Chapter is: (1) to establish reasonable time, place and manner regulations for sexually oriented businesses within the legal framework of the First Amendment; (2) to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Tustin from the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City; and, (3) to eliminate the adverse secondary effects caused by sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation, restriction or unconstitutional prior restraint on the content of any communicative materials or activities, related to sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 2, 10-5-98)  
3911 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
(a)  "Sexually oriented businesses" are those businesses defined as follows: 
(1)  "Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  "Adult bookstore," "adult novelty store," or "adult video store" means a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental for any form of consideration, of any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
c.  An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one (1) of the principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
(3)  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant "bottle club", juice bar or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: (a) persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nude; (b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". 
(4)  "Adult motel" means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its business and offers the following: (a) public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or, (b) a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or, (c) a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours. 
(5)  "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
(6)  "Adult stripper or dancer" means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or persons and who strips or dances in the nude or semi-nude for such person(s). 
(7)  "Adult tanning salon or parlor" means a business establishment where: patrons receive tanning services in groups of two (2) or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas; or, a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas; or, the employees thereof are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. 
(8)  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specific anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
(9)  "Nude model studio" means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or displays specified anatomical areas in exchange for money or any form of consideration and is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured or photographed by patrons. This includes a business establishment where lingerie which displays specified anatomical areas is modeled. Except, a nude model studio does not include a modeling class as described in Section 3912(b)(5). 
(10)  "Sex supermarket/sex mini-mall" means the establishment or operation of more than one (1) type of sexually oriented business or use as defined in this Chapter within the same building. 
(11)  "Sexual encounter establishment" means a business or commercial establishment, that as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. This definition shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
(b)  "Employee" means a person who works for or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
(c)  "Establishment" or "establish" with regard to a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this Chapter; 
(3)  The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this Chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any such sexually oriented business. 
(d)  "Nudity or state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part or the nipple, or showing the covered genitals in a discernable or turgid state. 
(e)  "Operator" means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
(f)  "Permitted or licensed premises" means sexually oriented business that requires a license and/or permit to operate. 
(g)  "Permittee and or licensee" means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, and individuals listed as applicants on the application for a permit and/or license. 
(h)  "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
(i)  "Public building" means any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the State, the County, the City, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the State or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes. 
(j)  "Public park" or "recreation area" means land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path or trail, open space, wilderness area, or similar public land within the City which is under the control, operation, or management of the City Park and Recreation authorities. 
(k)  "Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
(l)  "Residential district or use" means property zoned for residential uses or occupied with attached and detached single-family residences, duplexes, townhouses, multiple-family residences, mobile parks, patio homes, apartments, condominiums, stock cooperative projects, and planned developments. 
(m)  "School" means any public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidental to a school. 
(n)  "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. Semi-nude shall also include a person with partial clothing to include lingerie or similar clothing where specified anatomical areas are exposed. 
(o)  "Sexually oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult tanning salon, adult theater, adult stripper or dancer, sexual encounter establishment, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall or nude model studio. 
(p)  "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(3)  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection 1 or 2 above. 
(q)  "Specified criminal act" means: (1) a misdemeanor or felony offense involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (h) of Penal Code Section 647, Penal Code Section 674 or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution, lewd conduct; sex crimes against children, rape, distributing harmful matter to minors, and distributing obscenity; or (2) a felony offense involving the possession or sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11057, or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(r)  "Specified sexual activities", as used in this Chapter, means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subdivisions 1 through 4 of this subsection; 
(6)  The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon himself/herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification of release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh region, genitals, buttocks, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast. 
(s)  "Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business" means increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen (15) percent as the floor area existed on February 17, 1998. 
(t)  "Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 3, 10-5-98)  
3912 - PERMITTED LOCATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
(a)  The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in the specified PCMU, PC-C, PCC, M, and PC-IND zoning districts, and shall be subject to the following restrictions. No person shall cause or permit the establishment of a sexually oriented business, as defined in this Chapter, within five hundred (500) feet of any religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club or other youth organization, or public park or public building or within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district or use, or within five hundred (500) feet of an existing sexually oriented business. 
(b)  Permits for sexually oriented businesses are required and are governed by the procedures and policies specified in Section 3916. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following prohibitions: 
(1)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor, if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business except as provided in this Chapter. 
(2)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he or she establishes or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business except as provided in this Chapter within five hundred (500) feet of: 
a.  Any religious institution 
b.  Any school 
c.  Any residential district or use 
d.  A public park 
e.  A public building 
f.  A boy's club, girls' club, or other youth organization 
(3)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she establishes or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within five hundred (500) feet of another sexually oriented business, except as provided in this Chapter. 
(4)  A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(5)  It is a defense to prosecution under (1), (2), (3), or (4) above if a person appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of California; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
c.  In a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
2.  Where to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 4, 10-5-98)  
3913 - MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE 
(a)  The distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures from the closest exterior structural walls of each business. 
(b)  The distance between any sexually oriented business and any religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park or public building or any residential district or use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of any residential district or use, a religious institution, school, boys' club, girls' club or similar existing youth organization, public park or public building. Such uses are hereinafter referred to as "sensitive uses or use". 
(c)  The distance shall be calculated at the time of the application of the sexually oriented business for a permit under this Chapter. For the limited purpose of determining allowable distance for a proposed application under this Chapter an "existing" sexually oriented business is one that has a valid permit or one whose application has preceded the application in question and is seeking approval. The subsequent establishment or permit application of a sensitive use as defined in paragraph (b) above or sexually oriented business to locate within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed sexually oriented business shall not be considered. 
(Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 5, 10-5-98)  
3914 - REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
(a)  Any lawfully established sexually oriented business lawfully operating on or before February 17, 1998, that is in violation of Sections 3912 and/or 3913, shall be deemed legal nonconforming uses. A legal nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period of one (1) year, with a possible extension of one (1) year to be granted by the Planning Commission. Said extension may only be granted if the Planning Commission finds that an extreme financial hardship exists, which is defined as the recovery of the initial financial investment in the legal nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such legal nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within five hundred (500) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first lawfully established and continually operating at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is legal nonconforming. 
(b)  A lawfully established sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a legal nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, public building, residential district, or residential lot within five hundred (500) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. 
(c)  Any sexually oriented business subject to the provisions of this Section shall apply for the permit provided for by Section 3916, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 1204, and shall comply with all applicable regulations contained within thirty (30) days of the effective date of such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 6, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 3, 11-15-11)  
3915 - CIVIL INJUNCTION/MISDEMEANOR 
A person who operates or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business in violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or thirty (30) days imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment. If an injunction must be sought, attorney's fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against such person. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 7, 10-5-98)  
3916 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 3914, no person shall establish a sexually oriented business without a valid City sexually oriented business permit. 
(b)  The Community Development Director or designee shall be responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, or canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. The Community Development Director or designee shall determine if a proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being sought complies with all locational requirements of this Chapter and all development and performance standards under this Chapter and the respective zoning district in which the business is located. 
(c)  The Tustin Police Department shall be responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period set forth in Section 3918. 
(d)  The City's Code Enforcement and/or Police Department staff shall be responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or non-permitted sexually oriented business to ascertain if said business is in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and applicable statutes and City Codes. 
(e)  An application for a permit must be made on a City provided form. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the City an original and two (2) copies of a permit application signed under penalty of perjury. The required signatures shall be notarized. 
(f)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  The applicant(s)' name and permanent address and the person(s) residing with the applicant. If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the application shall include: 
a.  The sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and 
b.  The required City of Tustin business license application documents. 
(3)  If the applicant or any of the other individuals required to be listed pursuant to this Section has, within the two (2) or five (5) year period as specified in Section 3918 immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. As used in this Chapter, a conviction includes a plea of nolo contendre. 
(4)  If the applicant or any of the other individuals required to be listed in an application pursuant to this Section has had a permit under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another City or County denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation and if the applicant or any other individuals listed in the application pursuant to this Section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose sexually oriented business permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked and the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(5)  If the applicant or any other individual required to be listed pursuant to this Section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another City or County and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(6)  A detailed description of the proposed entertainment, services, and/or use. 
(7)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s). 
(8)  The applicant(s) recent photograph(s). 
(9)  The applicant(s)' driver's license numbers, social security numbers and or state or federally issued tax identification numbers. 
(10)  A detailed site plan showing the configuration of the premises and buildings, including the total floor space proposed to be occupied by the business. The site plan shall be drawn to scale at a minimum of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet. 
(11)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a California registered land surveyor or engineer depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing valid sensitive use as defined in Section 3913(b) or sexually oriented business within five hundred (500) feet of the property proposed to be occupied by a sexually oriented business to be certified. See Section 3913 for measurement of distances. 
(12)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater ownership interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. The legal owner(s) of the real property shall also sign and indicate consent to the application. Said application and signatures shall be notarized and signed under penalty of perjury. 
(13)  If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which exhibits on the premises films, video cassettes, or other video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated in Section 3919. 
(g)  Applicants for a permit under this Section shall have a continuing duty to supplement application information required by this Section if said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the Community Development Director or his/her designee shall be grounds for suspension of a permit. 
(h)  If the Community Development Director or designee determines that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business or finds that a submitted application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified and shall have ten (10) days to complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to complete the application.) 
(i)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this Chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with zoning, health, fire and building codes and other applicable laws. 
(j)  The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable application fee at the time of filing an application under this Section of this Chapter. 
(k)  Prior to investigating an application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business, and as part of any application for a permit under this Section, the applicant shall obtain City certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the locational and distancing requirements of this Chapter. 
(l)  The fact that a person possesses other types of State or City permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. 
(m)  By applying for a permit under this Chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this Chapter and to the exercise by the Community Development Director or designee, the Tustin Police Department and all other agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the City. 
(n)  The applicant shall be required to provide the City with the names of any and all employees, independent contractors or other persons who are required to be licensed pursuant to Section 3926. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 8, 10-5-98)  
3917 - INVESTIGATION OF PERMIT APPLICATION 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a sexually oriented business permit and payment of the non-refundable application fee, the Community Development Director shall stamp the application as received and shall thereafter transmit the application to the Tustin Police Department and any other agencies responsible for enforcement of zoning, health, fire, and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this Chapter. All investigations shall be completed within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application by the Community Development Director. 
(b)  Within ten (10) business days of receipt of the completed application, the Community Development Director shall issue a temporary thirty (30) day permit. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 9, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 1231, Sec. 1, 10-16-00)  
3918 - ISSUANCE OF PERMIT/CONDITIONAL GRANT 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall grant, grant upon condition, or deny an application for a permit within thirty (30) days from the date the application is deemed complete. The applicant shall be notified by the Community Development Director of such grant, conditional grant or denial of the application and shall state the reasons for denial. A permit may be conditionally granted only when the City has not timely received fingerprint information to verify that the applicant has not been convicted of specified criminal acts within the timeframes described in subsection (c)(1)(i). Such conditional grant shall not constitute a vested right to operate under this permit. 
If the Community Development Director neither grants nor denies the application within thirty (30) days after the complete application is stamped received (except as provided in Section 3916(h), the application shall be deemed to be approved as of the thirty-first day and the applicant may begin operating the sexually oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 3912 of this Code. 
(b)  Grant of application for permit 
(1)  The Community Development Director or designee, shall grant the permit or grant upon condition unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (c) below is present, except that a conditional grant issued shall be null and void upon the City's receipt of disqualifying information and subsequent denial. 
(2)  The permit, if granted, shall state the name of the person(s) to whom the permit is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted by the permittee in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  Denial of application for permit 
(1)  The Community Development Director or designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  An applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been denied a permit to operate a sexually oriented business within the City within the preceding twelve (12) months, or the applicant is residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business within the City has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide required information in the application or has provided false or misleading information in the application. 
d.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved as being in compliance with zoning, health, fire and building codes by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance. If a variance from such codes is permitted by the Tustin City Code, the applicant shall be permitted to apply for a variance and if the variance is granted, the applicant may reapply for the sexually oriented business permit. If the variance request is approved, the application fee shall be waived or reduced by the Community Development Director or designee, if no further or minimal investigation is required. All application information shall be updated by the applicant. 
e.  The application or permit fees required by this Chapter have not been paid. 
f.  An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this Chapter including but not limited to the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business under Sections 3911, 3913 and 3914. 
g.  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order. 
h.  The applicant has a permit under this Chapter which has been suspended or revoked. 
i.  An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal" act for which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense to a "specified criminal act". 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for a "specified criminal act." 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction(s) or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for "specified criminal acts". 
4.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant; 
5.  An applicant who has been convicted of "specified criminal acts" within the above-described time periods may qualify and apply for a sexually oriented business permit when the time period(s) has elapsed. 
j.  An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in Section 3926. 
(2)  If the Community Development Director or designee, denies the application, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial. The applicant shall have the right to appeal in accordance with Section 3924. Pending a final decision on the appeal, the applicant shall not have the right to operate or establish a sexually oriented business in the City. 
(3)  If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 10, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 1231, Sec. 2, 10-16-00)  
3919 - ANNUAL APPLICATION/PERMIT FEE 
The annual application/permit fee deposit for a sexually oriented business permit is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), respectively. If the City's actual costs are less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to review, investigate, or conduct an annual inspection, respectively, for a sexually oriented business, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. If the City's review, investigation, and annual inspections, respectively, exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the applicant shall pay the increase prior to the issuance of a permit to operate. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 11, 10-5-98)  
3920 - INSPECTION 
(a)  An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the community development department, code enforcement division, the county health department, and the fire authority to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a person or his/her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this Chapter, if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time the business is occupied or open for business. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 12, 10-5-98)  
3921 - EXPIRATION OF PERMIT 
(a)  Each permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 3916 (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this Chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. When application for renewal is filed less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration date shall not be stayed. 
(b)  When the Community Development Director or designee, denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this Chapter for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Community Development Director or designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the denial date. An applicant for renewal of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council pursuant to Section 3924 and unless their previous permit had been suspended or revoked at the time the previous permit expired, the applicant may operate pending final City Council action. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 13, 10-5-98)  
3922 - GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF PERMIT 
a 
Suspension 
The Community Development Director or designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the Director determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any Section of this Chapter; or 
(2)  Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or a controlled substance while working in the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this Chapter; or 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local said determination being based on investigation by the department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute code, ordinance or regulation violation, the City shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven (7) day period, the City shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension; or 
(6)  Engaged in permit transfer contrary to Section 3925 of this Chapter. If a permit is suspended on the grounds that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to Section 3925 of this Chapter, the Community Development Director or designee shall forthwith notify the permittee of the suspension; or 
(7)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation set forth in Section 3930; or 
(8)  Knowingly employed a person who does not have a valid license as required in Section 3926 of this Chapter. 
b 
Revocation 
The Community Development Director or designee shall revoke a permit if a basis for suspension described in subsection (a) of this Chapter occurs, and the permit has previously been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. In addition, the Community Development Director or designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the application material submitted during the application process; or 
(2)  A permittee or a management employee of permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; or 
(3)  A permittee or a management employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or 
(4)  A permittee or management employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; or 
(5)  A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" during the time period of the permits; or 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit; or 
(7)  A permittee or a management employee has knowingly allowed an act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises. 
(8)  A permittee has been operating more than one (1) sexually oriented business under a single roof. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 14, 10-5-98)  
3923 - NOTICE AND HEARING ON PROPOSED SUSPENSION/REVOCATION 
(a)  On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the Community Development Director shall furnish written Notice of the Proposed Suspension or Revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, certified, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Community Development Director, but at a minimum shall include the following: 
All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this Section may be continued by the Community Development Director for good cause. The community development decision may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 3924. 
(b)  The decision of the Community Development Director shall be in writing, and if the decision is to suspend or revoke the permit, a notice of suspension or notice of revocation shall be delivered to the permittee. If personally delivered, or by facsimile, delivery shall be complete upon the day of delivery. If delivered by any other means, delivery shall be complete upon the date of signed receipt. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 15, 10-5-98)  
3924 - APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL/SUSPENSION/REVOCATION 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 16, 10-5-98; Ord. No. 1231, Secs. 3, 4, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 4, 11-17-09)  
3925 - UNAUTHORIZED OPERATION/TRANSFER OF PERMIT 
(a)  A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application for permit. 
(b)  A permittee shall not transfer a permit to another person unless and until such other person has applied and been approved for issuance of a permit under this ordinance and pays a transfer fee of twenty (20) percent of the annual permit fee. 
(c)  No permit may be transferred after the Community Development Director or designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee in that a removal of a permit has been denied, until the permit in question is reestablished in good standing. 
(d)  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this Section is hereby declared void. 
(Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 17, 10-5-98)  
3926 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED SERVICE PROVIDERS LICENSE 
(a)  Each individual who provides services of any kind whether or not an employee, independent contractor, or sole proprietor in a sexually oriented business, except for the permittee(s) holding a permit under Section 3918 of this ordinance, shall be required to obtain a Sexually Oriented Service Providers License. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of forty dollars ($40.00). Said fee is to cover reasonable investigative administrative costs of the licensing application process. 
(b)  Before any applicant may be issued a Sexually Oriented Business Service Providers License, the applicant shall submit on a City provided form under penalty of perjury, the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name or any other names (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual; 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(4)  Current residence address and telephone number; 
(5)  Current business address and telephone number; 
(6)  State driver's license or identification number; 
(7)  Social security number; 
(8)  Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(9)  Attached to the application form as provided above, a color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Tustin Police Department. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(10)  A statement detailing the applicant's sexually oriented business license or permit history for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a license, permit or authorization for a sexually oriented business denied, revoked or suspended or had any applicable professional or vocational license permit denied, revoked or suspended. If any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the date, name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application; and 
(11)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal" act as defined in this Chapter. This information shall include the date, place and nature of each conviction and identifying the convicting jurisdiction, and, 
(12)  The Community Development Director or designee shall refer the Sexually Oriented Business Service Providers License Application to the Tustin Police Department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within five (5) business days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the Community Development Director or designee shall issue a license unless the report from the Tustin Police Department finds that one (1) or more of the following findings is true: 
a.  That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the Police Department or other City department or agency; 
b.  That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
c.  That the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" as defined in this Chapter within the last five (5) years. 
d.  That the Sexually Oriented Business Service Provider License is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this Chapter; 
e.  That the applicant has had a Sexually Oriented Business Service Provider License revoked by the City within two (2) years of the date of the current application. 
f.  The license fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(c)  Renewal of license 
(1)  A license granted pursuant to this Section shall be subject to annual renewal by the Community Development Director or designee upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Community Development Director or designee and the Tustin Police Department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal act as defined in this Chapter within the last five (5) years or the applicant has committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application; or the applicant has not violated any provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00). 
(d)  Appeals: A denial of an application, or a renewal, or the suspension or revocation of a license shall be processed by the City and shall be subject to appeal in the same manner as permits for a sexually oriented business. See Sections 3923 and 3924. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 18, 10-5-98)  
3927 - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued to said business under this Chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a detailed site and building plan specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each site and building plan shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a scale not less that one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet. The Community Development Director or designee, may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a site and building plan that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. The applicant(s)' and owner(s)' signatures shall be notarized. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without prior City approval. 
(4)  The owners and operator of the premises shall insure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employee present on the premises to insure that the view area specified in subsection 5 remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or person at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A. of this Section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes", shall be allowed in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room or restroom. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two (2.0) foot candle as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1) through (9) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 19, 10-5-98)  
3928 - PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
A person is prohibited from and is guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this Chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer, or allow: 
(a)  Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian; 
(b)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian; 
(c)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or guardian; or 
(d)  A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the business premises as an employee. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 20, 10-5-98)  
3929 - ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence, name, or location of such sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The interior premises of a sexually oriented business shall not be visible from outside the premises. 
(d)  All off-street parking areas and premise entries of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1.0) foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. A lighting plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Director or designee. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this Section shall relieve the operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of this Chapter, zoning, building, health and fire codes as may be amended form time to time or any subsequently enacted City ordinances or regulations. 
(f)  The regulations contained in this Section apply regardless of whether a person has a valid permit under this ordinance. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 21, 10-5-98)  
3930 - HOURS OF OPERATION 
These regulations apply regardless of whether a person has a valid permit under this ordinance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, and allows such business to remain open for business or to permit any service provider in the business to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a person is guilty of a misdemeanor if, working as a service provider in a sexually oriented business, the service provider engages and performs, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 22, 10-5-98)  
3931 - PARKING 
Sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in the respective zoning district and the City of Tustin Parking Design Standards and Landscape and Irrigation Guidelines. The number of parking spaces provided shall be the equivalent of that required for new construction, regardless of the status of the legal nonconforming parking rights of the previous use. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 23, 10-5-98)  
3932 - SECURITY 
Each sexually oriented business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas serving the use. All indoor areas of the business shall be open to public view at all times with exception of restroom facilities. "Accessible to the public" shall include those areas which are only accessible to members of the public who pay a fee and/or join a private club or organization. Further, the sexually oriented business shall provide security guards, who are state licensed, armed, uniformed and approved by the City of Tustin Police Department, during all hours of operation. The number of such guards so required shall be determined by the Chief of Police, and such number may be increased, at the Chief's discretion, if such increase is necessary to protect the public peace and the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 24, 10-5-98)  
3933 - REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE ENTERTAINMENT 
These regulations apply regardless of whether a sexually oriented business has a valid permit to operate. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, "live entertainment" is defined as a person who appears nude, semi-nude or a performance which is characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". 
(b)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) of a sexually oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten (10) feet from the nearest area occupied by patron(s). No patron shall be permitted within ten (10) feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. 
(c)  The sexually oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers. 
(d)  The sexually oriented business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum four (4) foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and performers. 
(e)  No entertainer, either before, during or after a performance, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a performance. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the premises of the establishment. 
(f)  Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this Section. 
(g)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. 
(h)  No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment shall cause or allow a performer to contract or engage in any entertainment such as a "couch" or a "straddle" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. No performer shall contract to or engage in a "couch" or "straddle" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, "couch" or "straddle" dance is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming within ten (10) feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area", or any "specified sexual activity". For purposes of this subsection, "employee" is defined as it is in Section 3911(b). 
(i)  This Section shall not apply to an employee of a sexually oriented business who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender, comes within ten (10) feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity or display or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or bartender. 
(j)  Compliance with this Section: 
(1)  No sexually oriented business shall be deemed in compliance with this Section until the City's designated agent(s) have inspected and approved compliance. The City shall have ten (10) days from the date it receives written notice from the operator that the business is ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of compliance required by this Section. Failure of the City to approve or disapprove compliance within ten (10) days shall constitute a finding of compliance under this Section. 
(2)  The operator of a sexually oriented business, that has been providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit, shall have the time periods listed below in which to bring the establishment into compliance with this Section. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live entertainment shall cause the establishment's permit to be suspended under this Chapter. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment is approved by the City's designated agent(s) as being in full compliance with this Section. 
(3)  The operator of an existing sexually oriented business operating under a valid permit who wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a second sexually oriented business permit for the live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this Section, all other applicable requirements of this Chapter, and the City zoning, building, health, and fire codes. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 25, 10-5-98)  
3934 - OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT 
(a)  In addition to the criminal provisions found in other Sections of this Chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to sexually oriented businesses. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this Chapter, and said person knows or should know that: 
(1)  The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under this Chapter; 
(2)  The business has a suspended permit; 
(3)  The sexually oriented business permit has been revoked; or 
(4)  The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 26, 10-5-98)  
3935 - CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 
(a)  In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the Tustin City Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, such person upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as provided by law or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days in the City jail, or both, in the discretion of the Court. Each violation or non-compliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or non-compliance shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the City from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or non-compliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. 
(c)  Further, nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the City from prosecuting any violation of this Chapter by means established pursuant to the authority as provided by the laws of the City of Tustin. 
(d)  All remedies and penalties provided for in this Section shall be cumulative and independently available to the City and the City shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this Section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. No. 1204, Sec. 27, 10-5-98)  
ARTICLE 4 - HEALTH AND SANITATION  
CHAPTER 1 - HEALTH CODE  
PART 1 - FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1992, repealed Part 1, Food and food establishments, 4110 through 4118, and enacted a new Part 1 to read as set forth, 4110 through 4117. Prior to repeal former Part 1 was derived from Ord. No. 593; and Ord. No. 821. 
 
4110 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms used in this part shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991: 
(a)  "Certified farmers' market" shall be as defined in section 27512 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  "Commissary" shall be as defined in section 27513 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(c)  "Food establishment" shall be as defined in section 27520 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(d)  "Food facility" shall be as defined in section 27521 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(e)  "Food processing establishment" shall be as defined in section 28280.1 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(f)  "Health Department" or "department" shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
(g)  "Health officer" shall mean, the County Health Officer or his or her deputy. 
(h)  "Inspector" shall mean an Environmental Health Specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code section 517, employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any Deputy Health Officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this article. 
(i)  "Mobile food preparation unit" shall be as defined in section 27526 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(j)  "Open-air barbecue facility" shall be as defined in section 27528.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(k)  "Person" shall be as defined in section 27530 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(l)  "Premises" shall include land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises. 
(m)  "Produce stand" shall be as defined in section 27533 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(n)  "Restricted food service transient occupancy establishment" shall be as defined in section 27535.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(o)  "Satellite food distribution facility" shall be as defined in section 27536.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(p)  "Temporary food facility" shall be as defined in section 27538 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(q)  "Vehicle" shall be as defined in section 27540 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(r)  "Vending machine" shall be as defined in section 27541 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(s)  "Vending machine business" shall mean the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4111 - PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS AND TERMS 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this part, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the Health Department under the provisions of this part. 
(b)  Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the Health Department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this part and such other information as the Health Department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three (3) service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop. 
(c)  A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated. 
(d)  Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. 
Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this part, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued. 
(e)  Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4112 - CONSTRUCTION, CONVERSION AND ALTERATION 
A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this part, shall submit three (3) copies of the complete plans and specifications to the Department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The Health Officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4113 - MOBILE FOOD PREPARATION UNITS GENERALLY 
In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this part, mobile food preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements: 
(a)  Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit. 
(b)  All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn. 
(c)  All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges. 
(d)  All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the Health Officer. 
(e)  Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the Health Officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least one hundred eight-eight (188) centimeters (seventy-six (76) inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area. 
(f)  High voltage (110-120 v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding one hundred eight-three (183) centimeters (six (6) feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover. 
(g)  Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least thirty-five and five-tenths (35.5) centimeters by thirty-five and five-tenths (35.5) centimeters (fourteen (14) inches by fourteen (14) inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three (3) requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(h)  A First-Aid kit approved by the Health Officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case. 
(i)  All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows: 
(1)  The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use. 
(2)  Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body. 
(3)  Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition. 
(4)  When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met: 
a.  All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit. 
b.  The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward. 
c.  The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment. 
d.  The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas. 
(5)  Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials. 
(6)  Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing. 
(7)  Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance. 
(8)  ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout. 
(9)  Protective "thread" caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves. 
(10)  Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished. 
(j)  A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver's door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4114 - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE FOOD PREPARATION UNITS OPERATING IN MULTI-LOCATIONS IN ANY DAY 
In addition to the requirements specified in section 4113 above, mobile food preparation units which operate at more than one (1) location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(a)  Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges. 
(b)  Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(c)  Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(d)  An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of sixty-one (61) centimeters by ninety-two (92) centimeters (twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled "Safety Exit" in contrasting colors with at least two and fifty-four one-hundredths (2.54) centimeters (one (1) inch) high letters. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4115 - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 
a 
Suspension of Permits 
A permit issued under this part or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this part for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of State law; 
(2)  Violation of this Code; 
(3)  Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this part; or 
(4)  Upon recommendation by the Health Officer. 
b 
Notice of Violation 
When any laws, this part, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled one "Notice of Violation," specifying: 
(1)  The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged. 
(2)  The provision or provisions violated thereby. 
(3)  The corrective steps required. 
(4)  The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor. 
(5)  That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled. 
(6)  That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the Health Department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date specified under subsection b(4) above, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. 
c 
Hearing 
The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified Environmental Health Specialist as defined in section 517 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in section 529 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken. 
(1)  The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process. 
(2)  The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five (5) working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked. 
(4)  The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
d 
Suspension for Refusal of Entry 
It shall be a violation of this part for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in section 4111 above, or any portion thereof; and in such vent the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. 
e 
Summary Suspension 
(1)  If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. "Immediate danger to the public health and safety" means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease. 
(2)  Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing. 
(3)  At any time within fifteen (15) calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection b, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4116 - SUPERVISION OF CLOSING DOWN PREMISES 
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 1, 8-3-92)  
4117 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
a 
Administration 
The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this part including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to: 
(1)  Forms for applications, permits and notices. 
(2)  Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits. 
(3)  Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. 
b 
Penalty 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this part shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
c 
Preemption 
This part shall not apply to any matter to which it is preempted by State law.  
PART 2 - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES, PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT AND CITY-OWNED, OPERATED OR LEASED FACILITIES 
 
4120 - PURPOSE 
Because smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant, is a positive danger to health and a cause of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present, because the increasingly frequent use of electronic cigarettes, which emit a smoke-like vapor similar in appearance to the exhaled smoke from cigarettes and other conventional tobacco products, is largely unregulated by the federal and state governments, and in order to serve public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this Part 2 is to prohibit the smoking of tobacco, or any other weed or plant, in certain public places and places of employment, except in designated smoking areas, and to prohibit smoking in City parks and in City-owned, operated or leased facilities. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4121 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this part, the following words and terms shall have the meaning: 
(a)  "Bar" shall mean any area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
(b)  "Smoke" or "smoking" shall mean the inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product (including cannabis) intended for inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or form. Smoking includes the use of an electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking. 
(c)  "Public place" shall mean any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, other than the ones enumerated in Section 4126 and City-owned, operated, and leased facilities, including, but not limited to, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail stores and retail service establishments, elevators, restaurants, theaters, waiting rooms, reception areas, educational facilities, health facilities and public transportation facilities. A private residence is not a public place. 
(d)  "Public park" shall mean any park operated by the City or any park situated on privately owned property within the City that is generally open for public use, and shall include all sidewalks or other public rights-of-way which are located immediately adjacent to any public park. A park shall be deemed generally open for public use if it is open to any person{s) other than the owner of the privately owned property upon which the park is situated, including, but not limited to, tenants, guests, or customers. 
(e)  "Place of employment" shall mean any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer except the City and the places enumerated in Section 4126, which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment. 
(f)  "Tobacco product" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  A product, containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, or snuff. 
(2)  An electronic device that delivers nicotine or other vaporized liquids to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, pipe, or hookah. 
(3)  Any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. 
"Tobacco product" does not include a nicotine replacement product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4122 - PROHIBITIONS 
(a)  No person shall smoke or use a tobacco product in a public place, or place of employment, except in designated smoking areas. 
(b)  No person shall smoke or use a tobacco product in any City-owned building or facility leased or operated by the City. 
(c)  No person shall smoke or use a tobacco product in any public park. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 979, Sec. 1, 12-1-86; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4123 - DESIGNATION OF SMOKING AND NONSMOKING AREAS 
(a)  Except where smoking is prohibited by a proprietor, smoking and nonsmoking areas shall be designated in public places and places of employment by proprietors or other persons in charge and signs shall be posted. Where smoking areas are designated, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the toxic effect of smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas. However, employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing smoking and nonsmoking areas. Restaurants covered by the provisions of this part shall designate an adequate amount of seating capacity to meet the demands of nonsmokers and shall inform all patrons that a no smoking section is provided. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, no area of a public park shall be designated as a "smoking area." 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4124 - OPTIONAL PROHIBITION 
All managers and owners of any establishments serving or doing business with the public may at their discretion post "No Smoking" signs within all areas of their businesses, and utilize the full rights of the provisions of this part. No public place other than the ones enumerated in Section 4126 shall be designated as a smoking area in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4125 - POSTING OF SIGNS 
(a)  Signs which designate smoking or no smoking areas shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place so covered by this part. No smoking signs shall be specifically placed in retail food production and marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets open to the public, retail sales and retail service establishments so they are clearly visible to persons upon entering the store, clearly visible to persons in checkout lines, and clearly visible to persons at meat and produce counters. The manner of such posting, including the wording, size, color, design and place of posting whether on the walls, doors, tables, counters, stands or elsewhere shall be at the discretion of the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such room, building or other place so long as clarity, sufficiency and conspicuousness are apparent in communicating the intent of this part. 
(b)  "No Smoking" signs, with letters of not less than one (1) inch in height which read "Smoking and Use of Tobacco Products is Prohibited", along with a depiction of the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it) shall be posted in all public parks. The location and number of signs to be posted at each public park within the City shall be at the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation. The owner of any private property upon which a public park is located shall be responsible for ensuring that "No Smoking" signs are posted and maintained on that property in a manner acceptable to the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4126 - EXCEPTIONS 
(a)  Nonsmoking areas are not required to be designated in individual private offices, hotel and motel meeting and assembly rooms rented to guests, areas and rooms while in use for private social functions, private hospital rooms, psychiatric facilities, jails, bars, private residences, restaurants with a seating capacity of less than twenty (20) persons, and establishments devoted to the exclusive sale of tobacco and tobacco related products. 
(b)  Restaurants with a seating capacity of less than twenty (20) persons shall have the options of designating smoking and nonsmoking sections, allowing smoking, or prohibiting smoking throughout the establishment. 
(c)  Any owner or manager of a business or other establishment subject to this part may apply to the City Council for an exemption or modification of the provisions of this part due to unique or unusual circumstances or conditions. 
(d)  Nothing in this Part shall be deemed to authorize the smoking of cannabis in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4127 - ENFORCEMENT 
(a)  The Director of Community Services shall be responsible for compliance with this part when facilities owned, operated or leased by the City of Tustin are involved. The Director of Community Development shall provide business license applicants with copies of this part. 
(b)  The owner, operator or manager of any facility, business or agency within the purview of this part, and not exempt under Section 4126 shall comply with the requirements to designate smoking and nonsmoking areas and to post signs. Such owner, operator or manager may refuse service to any person who violates this part by smoking in a posted "No Smoking" area. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
4128 - PENALTIES 
Any person who violates a provision of this part shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one (1) year, and a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this part within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 949, Sec. 1, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1134, Sec. 1, 8-1-94; Ord. No. 1485, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
PART 3 - HEALTH SERVICES FEE 
 
4130 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms used in the part shall have the meaning indicated below: 
(a)  "Health Department" or "department" shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
(b)  "Health Officer" shall mean the County Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(c)  "Person" shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
(d)  "Receipt" shall mean a County public health services fee receipt. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4131 - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 
The purpose of this part is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer in enforcing State statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this part is contained in section 510 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4132 - AREA OF APPLICATION 
This part shall be enforceable within the territory in which the Health Officer enforces any State statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any State office or department relating to public health, within the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4133 - VIOLATION 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this part without a valid receipt. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4134 - SEPARATE ACTIVITIES 
If a person shall conduct more than one (1) of the activities for which a receipt is required, he must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4135 - APPLICATIONS 
Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the Health Department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the Health Officer with any information requested by him or her. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4136 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The Health Officer shall administer this part and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
4137 - FEES 
The County may, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the County Health Officer and retained by the County as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1095, Sec. 2, 8-3-92)  
PART 4 - BODY ART FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. II of Ord. No. 1407, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, amended Part 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Part 4 pertained to Permanent Cosmetics Facilities, consisted of Sections 4140.010—4140.220, and derived from Ord. No. 1324, adopted Mar. 20, 2007. 
 
4140.010 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
(a)  "Antiseptic" means a liquid or semiliquid substance that is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as indicated on the label, to reduce the number of microorganisms present on the skin and on mucosal surfaces. 
(b)  "Bloodborne pathogen(s)" means disease causing microorganisms that, when present in the blood, can be transmitted to humans. These microorganisms include, but are not limited to, Hepatitis B Virus (HBV), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). 
(c)  "Body art" means the practice of physical body adornment including, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing or application of permanent cosmetics. 
(d)  "Body art facility" means the area within a building or other location in which a practitioner performs body piercing, tattooing or application of permanent cosmetics, including the preparation and procedure area, as defined in this Chapter. 
(e)  "Body piercing" means the creation of an opening in the human body for the purpose of inserting jewelry or decorative objects. This includes, but is not limited to, piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose, belly button, cheek, forehead or eyebrow. Body piercing does not, for the purpose of this Chapter, include piercing the leading edge or earlobe of the ear with a sterile, disposable, single-use stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
(f)  "Client" means any individual who receives a body piercing, tattoo or application of permanent cosmetics from a practitioner as defined in this Chapter. 
(g)  "Disinfectant" means a product that is approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as indicated on the label, to reduce or eliminate the presence of disease-causing microorganisms. 
(h)  "Health Officer" means the Orange County Health Officer or designee. 
(i)  "Instrument" means any tattooing, body piercing or permanent cosmetics equipment or device that comes into contact with intact skin, nonintact skin, or mucosal surfaces. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, needles, needle bars, needle tubes, forceps, hemostats, tweezers, razors, razor blades, or other tools and devices used to insert pigment or pierce the skin or mucosal surfaces of the human body. Such equipment also includes studs, hoops, rings or other decorative jewelry, materials or apparatuses inserted into any part of the body for the intended purpose of placement in a hole resulting from the piercing. 
(j)  "Permanent cosmetics" means the application of pigments inserted into or under the surface of human skin for the purpose of permanently changing the color or appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eye shadow, or lip color. 
(k)  "Permanent cosmetics facility" means the area within a building in which a practitioner performs the application of permanent cosmetics, including the preparation and procedure area, as defined in this Chapter. 
(l)  "Practitioner" means an individual who performs tattooing, body piercing, or who applies permanent cosmetics as defined in this Chapter. 
(m)  "Preparation area" means a room or a designated portion of a room that is used to clean and sterilize reusable instruments that are used for tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. 
(n)  "Procedure area" means a room or a designated portion of a room where tattooing, body piercing or the application of permanent cosmetics is performed. 
(o)  "Proprietor" means the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a body art facility, or the person operating such establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business. 
(p)  "Purchased pre-sterilized equipment" means any individually packaged, single-use instruments, devices and/or needles that are obtained after processing to render them free of all microbial life forms. Each package shall have the manufacturer's processing identification number and date of expiration. 
(q)  "Sharps waste" means any instrument or object, including, but not limited to, needles or razor blades, that has been used to penetrate the skin or mucosa to perform tattooing, body piercing or the application of permanent cosmetics, or otherwise contaminated by coming into contact with blood or surfaces that have not been disinfected or sterilized. 
(r)  "Sterilization" means the complete destruction of all microbial life forms, including spores. 
(s)  "Tattooing" means to pierce or puncture the human skin with a needle or other instrument for the purpose of the application of pigments or the inserting of pigment under the surface of the skin; the application of pigments or inks inserted into or under the skin for the purpose of producing a mark or by production of scars. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.020 - EXPOSURE CONTROL TRAINING 
(a)  Prior to registration as a body art practitioner with the Orange County Health Care Agency, all body art practitioners shall complete and submit proof of completion to the Health Officer of an Exposure Control Training Program that meets or exceeds the requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  The person conducting the training shall be knowledgeable in the subject matter covered by the elements defined in section 4140.020(d). 
(c)  The organization providing the Exposure Control Training shall provide appropriate written training materials to each trainee. 
(d)  The content of the Exposure Control Training Program shall include: 
(1)  California Occupational Safety and Health Administration Bloodborne Pathogens Standard and other applicable standards and regulations with pertinent explanations. 
(2)  The causes, control, and symptoms of the diseases caused by bloodborne pathogens. 
(3)  The modes of transmission of bloodborne pathogens. 
(4)  A discussion of risks involved in the application of body art and how they may lead to exposure to bloodborne pathogens for the client or body art practitioner. 
(5)  The use of personal protective equipment, such as disposable gloves, and an explanation of the limitations of the equipment. 
(6)  The importance of hand washing and a demonstration of the hand-washing process, as described in Section 4140.090. 
(7)  The types, proper technique and order of tasks before and after putting on and removing gloves to avoid cross-contamination. 
(8)  Activities that compromise a disinfected work area, an aseptic procedure site, inks and pigments, sterile instruments and clean skin area. 
(9)  Choosing, using and storing disinfectants and antiseptics. 
(10)  Signs required for contaminated materials and the importance of labeling chemicals and supplies. 
(11)  Information on Hepatitis B vaccine, including its efficacy, safety and method of administration. 
(12)  What constitutes a bloodborne pathogen exposure incident, including: 
a.  How the exposure occurred and what actions are to be taken to prevent or minimize future exposures. 
b.  Risk of infection following a bloodborne pathogen exposure incident. 
c.  Procedures to be followed after an exposure incident, including medical follow-up. 
d.  Opportunity for interactive questions and answers with the instructor. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.030 - INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN 
(a)  Each proprietor shall establish, maintain and follow, at each body art facility, a written Infection Prevention and Control Plan. 
(b)  The Infection Prevention and Control Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Procedures for cleaning and disinfection of surfaces in the preparation and procedure areas. 
(2)  Procedures for maintaining the sterility or integrity of instruments, equipment and other material used during tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. 
(3)  Procedures for cleaning, packaging, sterilizing, and storing reusable instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Procedures for safe handling and disposal of sharps waste. 
(5)  Inventory (names, manufacturers, container size) of all chemicals and disinfectants and their intended use. 
(c)  The Infection Prevention and Control Plan shall be revised by the proprietor whenever changes in practices or procedures are made, within thirty (30) days of a change in practices or procedures. 
(d)  The proprietor shall be responsible for ensuring that the Infection Prevention and Control Plan is followed. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.040 - BODY ART FACILITIES 
(a)  The health permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the lobby of the body art facility. 
(b)  Body art facilities shall not be used as a food establishment, for human habitation or any other use which may cause contamination of instruments or equipment used for body art activities. 
(c)  The floors, furnishings and equipment of body art facilities shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times during business hours. 
(d)  Adequate lighting and ventilation shall be provided in the preparation and procedure areas. 
(e)  Adequate toilet facilities, as required by the Tustin City Code, shall be available. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used for the storage of instruments, or other supplies used for body art activities, and shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
(f)  Rooms used for tattooing, body piercing or permanent cosmetic procedures shall be separated by a wall or partition from those areas used for nail, hair and other activities. 
(g)  All sinks shall be supplied with hot (one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit minimum) and cold running water. 
(h)  A sink that is readily accessible to the body art practitioner shall be provided and equipped with liquid soap and single-use paper towels dispensed from wall-mounted dispensers that protect the supply from contamination. 
(i)  Pets or other animals shall not be allowed in the body art facility, except for trained guide or assistance animals for the disabled. No trained guide or assistance animal shall be allowed in the procedure or preparation area. 
(j)  No person shall utilize or maintain in a body art facility equipment that does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(k)  The proprietor shall maintain the body art facility and the general premises under the control of the proprietor in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(l)  All solid surfaces and objects in the procedure area, preparation area, and the decontamination and sterilization area that have come into contact with the client or the materials used in performing the body art, including, but not limited to, chairs, armrests, tables, countertops, and trays, shall be immediately cleaned and disinfected after each use with an appropriate bleach solution or other disinfectant. Manufacturer's instructions for concentration, contact time, and disposal requirements for all disinfectants must be observed. 
(m)  The practitioner shall wear disposable gloves on both hands when touching, cleaning or handling a surface or object soiled or potentially soiled with blood. Disposable gloves worn by the body art practitioner shall be promptly removed, and hands immediately washed whenever the practitioner leaves a procedure or preparation area. 
(n)  Each procedure and preparation area shall have waste receptacles which are lined with plastic bags manufactured for use in waste containers that fold over the top margin of the waste container. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.050 - PREEMPTION 
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement applicable State Law and to be in addition to, and not in conflict with, such laws. Each provision shall remain in effect until the enactment of State Laws or the promulgation of State regulations that conflict with or otherwise preempt the authority of the County of Orange or the City of Tustin to control the conduct described in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.060 - CLEANING, STERILIZATION, AND HOUSEKEEPING 
(a)  Instruments that pierce the skin or touch nonintact skin that will be reused shall be cleaned, packaged in appropriately labeled sterilizer pouches and sterilized prior to reuse. 
(b)  Used instruments that will be sterilized and reused shall be transported dry and then placed in a container of water, disinfectant or enzymatic soaking product until cleaned and sterilized. Used instruments must be kept physically separated from sterilized or unused disposable instruments. Disposable instruments must be disposed of directly into a sharps container or into the appropriate trash receptacle after use and shall be disposed of as required herein. 
(c)  Ultrasonic cleaners shall be available, maintained and operated according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(d)  Clean instruments to be sterilized shall be first placed in sterilizer pouches that contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator. Each pack shall contain instruments for not more than one (1) client. The outside of the pack shall be labeled with the name of the instrument, date sterilized and initials of the person operating the equipment. 
(e)  Instruments must be repackaged and re-sterilized if the pouch is torn or otherwise compromised, if the indicator shows that adequate temperature was not reached or if the item is not used within six (6) months of the date of sterilization. 
(f)  Sterilized instruments must be maintained and stored in sterilized pouches until use. 
(g)  Sterilizers shall be operated according to manufacturer's instructions. If manufacturer's instructions cannot be obtained, steam sterilization shall be accomplished in an autoclave with at least fifteen (15) pounds of pressure per square inch at a temperature of two hundred fifty (250) degrees Fahrenheit for at least thirty (30) minutes or as instructed by the local Health Officer should the standards for sterilization change from time to time. 
(h)  Liquid sterilants shall not be used to sterilize instruments. 
(i)  Sterilized instruments shall be placed in clean, dry, labeled containers or stored in a labeled cabinet that is protected from dust and water contamination. 
(j)  Sterilization equipment shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Only sterilizers intended for medical instruments shall be used. Sterilization equipment shall be cleaned, and maintained according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(2)  Sterilization equipment shall be tested after the initial installation, after any major repair, and at the frequency recommended by the manufacturer. If no manufacturer's recommendation can be found, then the unit shall be tested at least weekly utilizing a biological monitoring system appropriate for the sterilizer type. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on site and available for review for a period of two (2) years subsequent to the date of the results. 
(k)  A written log of each sterilization cycle shall be maintained on site and available for review for a period of two (2) years, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Date of load. 
(2)  The contents of the load. 
(3)  The exposure time and temperature. 
(4)  The results of the chemical indicator. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.070 - EQUIPMENT PURCHASED PRE-STERILIZED 
(a)  A practitioner using only purchased, disposable, single-use and pre-sterilized instruments shall not be required to have sterilization equipment. 
(b)  Invoices for the purchase of all pre-sterilized instruments must be maintained on site and available for review for a period of two (2) years after purchase. Required invoices include, but are not limited to, combo couplers, needle chambers, barrels, casings, tips and needles. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.080 - CLIENTS 
(a)  No body art procedure shall be performed on skin surface areas containing any rash, pimples, boils, or infection or otherwise manifesting any evidence of unhealthy conditions including, but not limited to, any evidence of inflammation, such as redness, swelling, infection, or open or draining lesions. 
(b)  Prior to receiving a tattoo, body piercing or permanent cosmetics, the client shall read, sign and receive a copy of an informed consent form and post-procedure instructions appropriate to the procedure. 
(c)  A copy of the signed informed consent form and post-procedure instructions for all body art procedures must be maintained on site and available for review for a period of two (2) years after the procedure is performed. 
(d)  The consent form and post-procedure instructions shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Record of information from the client's picture identification showing the name, date of birth, gender, address of client, and driver's license or identification card number. 
(2)  A summary, including the date, location and description of the procedure. 
(3)  What to expect following the procedure, including any medical complications that may occur as a result of the procedure. 
(4)  A statement regarding the permanent nature of body piercing, tattooing or permanent cosmetics. 
(5)  A questionnaire regarding a client history of herpes, diabetes, allergic reactions to latex or antibiotics, hemophilia or any other bleeding disorder or the use of anticoagulants, which may prevent the healing of the site where the tattoo or permanent cosmetics were applied, and of cardiac valve disease or of being prescribed antibiotics prior to dental or surgical procedures. 
(6)  Post-procedure instructions on the care of the site of the tattoo, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. 
(7)  Post-procedure restrictions on activities such as bathing, swimming, gardening or contact with animals. 
(8)  Information regarding signs and symptoms of infection and to immediately consult a physician if any of the listed signs and symptoms of infection occur. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.090 - PRACTITIONER 
(a)  No body art operation shall be performed unless the practitioner is free of pustular skin lesions and any communicable diseases that could be transmitted in the normal practice of body art. 
(b)  No practitioner shall eat, drink or smoke while performing a body art procedure. 
(c)  No practitioner shall perform a body art procedure with unclean hands. For purposes of this section, hands shall not be considered clean unless they have been thoroughly washed with soap from a single-service dispenser and warm water, vigorously rubbing all surfaces of lathered hands for at least ten (10) seconds, followed by thorough rinsing under a stream of water. Hands shall be dried using single-service towels from a sanitary dispenser or hot air blower. Practitioners shall wear new, disposable exam gloves for every client during the procedure. Gloves shall be discarded between each client, and hands shall be washed each time gloves are changed. If a glove is pierced, torn, or contaminated by coming into contact with any other person, or contaminated surface, both gloves shall be removed and discarded. A single pair of gloves shall not be used on more than one (1) person. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.100 - SKIN PREPARATION 
No body art operation shall be performed unless the skin is adequately prepared prior to the operation. For purposes of this section, skin shall be considered properly prepared if it is thoroughly cleaned with an antiseptic according to manufacturer's instructions. If necessary, the skin shall be shaved with a new, single-use disposable razor. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.110 - TATTOO AND PERMANENT COSMETICS APPLICATION 
(a)  All inks, pigments, petroleum jellies, soaps, and other reusable products used in a procedure shall be dispensed from containers in a manner to prevent contamination of the original container and its contents. 
(b)  Pigments shall be placed into clean single-use cups or caps that shall be disposed of immediately in an appropriate waste receptacle upon completion of the procedure. 
(c)  Only single-use rinse cups shall be used with procedures, and they shall be disposed of immediately upon completion of the procedure. 
(d)  All inks, dyes or pigments used shall be commercially manufactured for the procedure and shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions. 
(e)  All products applied to the skin, including stencils, shall be single-use and disposed of into a waste receptacle after the procedure. 
(f)  Needles and needle bars shall be sterilized prior to tattooing or the application of permanent cosmetics or shall be purchased pre-sterilized. Needles shall be used only once and then disposed of in a sharps container. 
(g)  If a rotary pen, or traditional coil machine that reuses components, is used, then the use of sterilization equipment shall be required for sterilization of the reusable parts that make contact with the client or blood. 
(h)  All rotary pens and other devices used to apply pigments must be designed and used to prevent backflow of pigments into the machine. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.120 - BODY PIERCING 
(a)  All jewelry or other objects to be placed in newly pierced skin shall be sterilized, or purchased pre-sterilized, be in good condition, and be designed and manufactured for insertion into the intended body part. 
(b)  Only jewelry or other objects made of ASTM F138, ISO 5832-1, and AISI 316L or AISI 316LVM implant grade stainless steel, solid 14K through 18K gold, niobium, ASTM F 136 6A4V titanium, platinum or other materials determined to be equally biocompatible shall be placed in newly pierced skin. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.130 - SHARPS DISPOSAL 
(a)  Each procedure area shall have a container for the disposal of sharps (needles, razor blades, etc.) waste that is rigid, puncture resistant, leakproof and that is closeable and sealable so that when sealed the container cannot be reopened without great difficulty. The container must be labeled with the words "sharps waste" or with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD." 
(b)  All sharps waste produced during the process of tattooing, body piercing and permanent cosmetics shall be disposed of by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Steam sterilized on site and disposed of as solid waste. If this method is utilized a chemical indicator strip or tape that indicates that the container has been treated must be affixed prior to sterilization, and shall stay affixed to the container when it is disposed. 
(2)  Treated on site by a method approved by the Health Officer, and disposed of as solid waste. 
(3)  Removal and disposal through use of a Registered Medical Waste Hauler in accordance with the provisions of the California Medical Waste Management Act. Tracking documents must be maintained on site and be available for review for a period of two (2) years from the date of removal from the body art facility. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.140 - TEMPORARY BODY ART FACILITIES 
Temporary body art facilities shall be prohibited in the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.150 - MOBILE BODY ART FACILITIES 
Mobile body art facilities shall be prohibited in the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.160 - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY 
The Health Officer or his or her designee is charged with the enforcement of this Chapter, except for Sections 4140.210, 4140.220 and 4140.230. The City of Tustin Police Department and the City of Tustin Code Enforcement Officer are also authorized to enforce this ordinance [Part]. The Health Officer may, during the establishment's hours of operation and other reasonable times, enter, inspect, search and secure samples, photographs, or other evidence from any body art facility, or any location suspected of being a body art facility, for the purpose of enforcing this Chapter. It is a violation of this Chapter for any person to refuse to permit entry or inspection, the taking of samples or other evidence, or access to the facility in order to copy any record as authorized by this Chapter, or to conceal any samples or evidence, or withhold evidence concerning them. A written report of the inspection shall be made and a copy shall be supplied or mailed to the proprietor or practitioner of the body art facility. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.170 - REGISTRATION 
(a)  Every practitioner as defined in this Chapter shall register with the Health Officer and shall have on display, so as to be readily visible to the public, proof that shows that the practitioner has registered, as specified in Health and Safety Code, Section 119303. 
(b)  Registration of all practitioners is required every three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.180 - PERMIT AND FEE REQUIREMENTS 
A body art facility shall not be open for business without: 
(1)  At least one (1) valid body art permit issued by the Director of Community Development to a practitioner practicing body art at that location during operating hours; 
(2)  A valid City business license; and 
(3)  A valid County health permit. 
The Health Officer shall issue a health permit when inspection has determined that the proposed body art facility and its method of operation will conform to the requirements of this Chapter. A health permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A health permit shall be valid only for the proprietor and location approved. The Orange County Board of Supervisors shall adopt fees for the health permit, practitioner registration, and related services. Fees shall be sufficient to cover the actual expenses of administering and enforcing this program. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.190 - PENALTIES 
Violation of any Section of this Chapter by the proprietor or practitioner shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation continues and is not corrected shall be treated as a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.200 - PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 
(a)  Whenever the Health Officer finds that a body art facility is not in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, a written inspection notice shall be issued to the proprietor. If the proprietor fails to comply within the noted timeframe, the Health Officer shall issue to the proprietor a notice of violation setting forth the acts or omissions with which the proprietor is charged. Failure to comply with the Notice of Violation within the noted timeframe may result in health permit suspension. 
(b)  If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, the Health Officer may temporarily suspend the permit and order the body art facility immediately closed. Immediate danger means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that may cause disease transmission, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Unclean or unsanitary floors, furnishings, toilet facilities, and equipment of the body art facility; 
(2)  Inadequate sterilization of equipment; 
(3)  Lack of appropriate disposal receptacles and methods; 
(4)  Sewage contamination; 
(5)  Lack of potable water supply; 
(6)  Or any other condition, which, in the opinion of the Health Officer, causes immediate danger to public health and safety and requires temporary suspension as noted above. 
(c)  Whenever a health permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the Health Officer shall issue to the proprietor a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the proprietor is charged. 
(d)  Any body art facility for which the health permit has been suspended shall close and remain closed until the health permit has been reinstated. 
(e)  Where grounds for denial, suspension, nonrenewal or revocation of a health permit exist, the Orange County Sheriff, Health Officer or Code Enforcement Officer shall serve the applicant or permit holder with a notice which shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the action, and of the right to appeal the action. 
(f)  Appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal setting out the action appealed from, the grounds of the appeal and the facts upon which the appeal is based. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors not more than thirty (30) days after service of the notice of proposed action. A copy of the notice appealed shall be attached to the notice of appeal. Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing on the appeal shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, with proof of service attached, addressed to the address on the permit. 
(g)  Hearing on the appeal shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer who shall preside over the hearing, take evidence on the appeal and determine whether, on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence, the appealed action shall be upheld. The Hearing Officer shall render a written decision not less than forty-five (45) days after the date of the appeal hearing. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.210 - HOURS OF OPERATION 
(a)  No body art facility shall operate except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(b)  The hours of operation shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the lobby of the establishment and in a window or other location visible from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.220 - MANAGEMENT OF OPERATIONS 
(a)  Each body art facility shall have a manager on the premises during all hours of operation who shall be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the facility, for compliance with all licensing requirements and to observe and supervise the actions of all persons on the premises. 
(b)  Each body art facility shall provide a lobby or other seating area where customers and other invitees of the business may be seated while waiting or otherwise not having body art applied. 
(c)  No body art facility shall knowingly permit loud, boisterous, lewd, violent or threatening behavior by clients or staff while in the facility or in any parking lot or other adjacent area under the control of the body art facility. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
4140.230 - NUISANCE 
(a)  No body art facility shall be operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance. 
(b)  Operation of a body art facility in violation of this Chapter or applicable penal or health statute of the State of California shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(c)  A body art facility may be found to be a nuisance on the basis of multiple violations of this Chapter, or any penal or health statute of the State of California or of multiple complaints which have not been resolved against the proprietor. 
(d)  Nuisance determinations and abatement shall be made and performed in the manner set forth in Sections 3-14-2 and following of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. 1407, Sec. II, 11-15-11)  
CHAPTER 2 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, adopted July 17, 2007, amended Ch. 2 of Art. 4 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, adopted May 19, 1980; and as  
PART 1 - COUNTY CODE 
 
4201 - ADOPTION 
Subject to the particular additions, deletions and amendments hereinafter set forth in this Chapter, the rules, regulations and conditions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange: 
(a)  Articles 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 of Division 1 of Title IV; 
(b)  Article 1 of Division 1 of Title V; 
(c)  Subsections (a), (b), (g), (h), (i), (m), and (t) of Section 5-1-29 and Section 5-1-30 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title V; 
(d)  Article 3 of Division 1 of Title V; 
(e)  Division 2 of Title V; and 
(f)  Article 6 of Division 3 of Title V; 
(g)  Sections 5-3-151, 5-3-154, 5-3-156, and 5-3-157 of Article 12 of Division 3 of Title V; 
(h)  Article 14 of Division 3 of Title V; 
(i)  Article 17 of Division 3 of Title V; 
and as may be amended from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange, California, as well as such other regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors concerning animal control, including those which relate to fees, are adopted by reference under the authority of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.9 of the Government Code of the State of California and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein as part of the Tustin Municipal Code and the same are hereby established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions to be observed and followed to govern animal control, welfare and license requirements in the City of Tustin. Three (3) full printed copies of the above-specified provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange are ordered to be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Tustin for public inspection and copies thereof shall be made available for purchase by the public at a price not to exceed the actual cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4202 - AMENDMENTS—GENERALLY 
The following references set forth in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, referred to in Section 9.04.010 of the Tustin Municipal Code, shall be interpreted as follows: "County of Orange" or "Orange County" or "unincorporated area of Orange County" or "unincorporated territory of Orange County" or "unincorporated area of the County of Orange" shall be deemed to mean "City of Tustin." 
(a)  Section 4-1-8 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(b)  Section 4-1-10 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(c)  Section 4-1-70(a) of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(d)  Section 4-1-158 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(e)  Section 4-1-164 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(f)  Section 4-1-167 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(g)  Section 4-1-176 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(h)  Section 4-1-180 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(i)  Section 5-1-30 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(j)  Section 5-1-41 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(k)  Section 5-2-14 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(l)  Section 5-3-83 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange; 
(m)  Section 5-3-185 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4203 - SAME—PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Section 4-1-46 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title IV of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"No person having the charge of any dog, except a blind, deaf or disabled person with his guide dog, signal dog or service dog shall permit said dog to be under any circumstances within public school property or on any public park within the City of Tustin. This section however, does not prohibit the use of dogs on school property for teaching or other uses when approved by the school officials. 
The term "guide dog," "service dog," and "signal dog" in this section shall be given the same meaning as set forth in Penal Code Section 365.5." 
In the event the City Council, by resolution, authorizes dogs to be upon any public park, the provision of this Section shall not be applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4204 - SAME—DOGS TO BE CURBED. 
Subsection 4-1-50(e) of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title IV of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"(e) Any City park." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4205 - SAME—DEFINITIONS. 
Title IV, Division 1, Article 6, Section 4-1-94 paragraph 1 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County, which in part reads, "The keeping or maintenance of such animals shall also conform to the zoning regulations of Orange County," shall be amended to read as follows: 
"The keeping or maintenance of such animals shall also conform to the zoning regulations of the City of Tustin." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4206 - SAME—DEFINITIONS. 
Section 5-1-1 of Article 1 of Division 1 of Title V of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"The following terms as used in this title shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth: 
Animal exhibition means any property where one (1) or more animals are exposed to public view for entertainment, instruction or advertisement, including animal acts. Activities conducted primarily for the instruction or entertainment of the participants for which no public admission is charged, are excluded. 
Animal rental establishment means a place or facility where animals, other than dogs, cats or equines, are kept or maintained for hire. 
Board means the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, practice or profession. 
Commercial means operated or carried on primarily for financial gain. 
Commercial manure dealer means any person, firm or corporation who, for a fee, gathers, collects, hauls, stockpiles, and spreads or sells any manure or manure-like substance. 
Commercial stable means any property where equines are sheltered or fed on a commercial basis. 
County means the County of Orange. 
Established place of business means the place where any person, firm or corporation conducts any retail or other establishment having a permanent address and being regularly open for business from day to day during ordinary business hours. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable refuse or residue from kitchens, canneries, bakeries, restaurants, lunch stands, meat, fish, fruit or vegetable markets and other food handling places, and all household waste or residue that shall result from the preparation or care for or treatment of foodstuffs resulted to be used as food, or shall have resulted from the preparation or handling of food for human consumption or any decayed and unsound meat, fish, fruit and vegetables. 
Grooming parlor means any premises where animals are groomed, brushed, clipped or bathed on a commercial basis. 
Kennel means any property where four (4) or more dogs, or four (4) or more cats, over the age of four (4) months, are kept or maintained for any purpose, except veterinary clinics and hospitals, and except property for which an animal permit has been issued pursuant to section 4-1-76. 
Pecuniary compensation means any commission, fee, gratuity, hire, profit, reward, or any other form of consideration. 
Person means both the singular and the plural, and shall also mean and include person, individual, firm, corporation, co-partnership, association, club, society or any other organization. 
Pet shop means any person or facility engaged in the sale or trade of live animals, including fish, birds and reptiles, on a commercial basis. 
Sheriff or Sheriff-Coroner means the Sheriff-Coroner of the County of Orange or his or her designated representative. 
Show means a carnival, tent show or show in the open air, or in a hall or building not specifically constructed for theatrical purposes, wherein carnivals, circuses, dog or pony shows, dramatic, musical or theatrical performances are given to audiences not exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) persons." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4207 - SAME—LICENSES OR PERMITS REQUIRED 
Section 5-1-29 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title V of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on animal exhibitions, animal rental establishments, commercial stables, grooming parlors, kennels, or pet shops within the City of Tustin for animal care services without first having obtained a permit or license from the County in accordance with Divisions 2 and 3 of this title." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4208 - SAME—ISSUING OFFICER 
Section 5-2-1 of Article 1 of Division 2 of Title V of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"All licenses or permits issued pursuant to this title shall be issued by the issuing officer, who, in the case of license or permits for animal exhibitions, animal rental establishments, kennels, grooming parlors, commercial stables, and pet shops shall be the County Health Officer, and in all other cases shall be the Sheriff, unless otherwise specified." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4209 - SAME—FEES 
Section 5-2-3 of Article 1 of Division 2 of Title V of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be amended to read as follows: 
"The Board of Supervisors shall provide by resolution the amount of each fee to be charged for each application, license or permit. Such fee shall be payable in accordance with the resolution and shall not be refundable." 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4210 - PENALTIES 
(a)  Any person who violates any provisions of this Chapter 2, Article 4 shall be guilty of an infraction, except as otherwise provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) below; 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of Sections 4-1-48, 4-1-51, or 4-1-95 of Division 1 of Title IV the Codified Ordinances of Orange County is guilty of a misdemeanor. Moreover, any person who violates any other provisions of Division 1 of Title IV the Codified Ordinances of Orange County and the violation occurs within one (1) year of the occurrence of two (2) separate violations of this division by that person is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Failure to register as a commercial manure dealer as provided in Article 14 of Division 3 of Title V of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one hundred (100) days imprisonment in the County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  Barking dog civil fines. Fines for violating the provisions of Subarticle 1 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Article IV of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be as follows: 
(i)  Fine for first barking dog violation citation issued (per citation) ..... $250.00 
(ii)  Fine for second barking dog citation within same twelve-month period (per citation) ..... $275.00 
(iii)  Fine for third barking dog citation within same twelve-month period (per citation) ..... $303.00 
(iv)  Fine for fourth barking dog citation within same twelve-month period (per citation) ..... $333.00 
(v)  Fine for fifth barking dog citation within same twelve-month period (per citation) ..... $366.00 
(vi)  Fine for sixth and subsequent barking dog citations issued within same twelve-month period (per citation) ..... $403.00 
In the event that a fine imposed under the authority granted by said Subarticle 1 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Article IV remains unpaid for fifteen (15) days after it is due and payable pursuant to Section 4-1-59.7 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County, an amount equal to the fine shall be added as a late penalty and the late penalty and fine shall become due immediately. If a Hearing Officer upholds the issuance of a citation in an administrative hearing, the late penalty will be assessed if the fine is not paid as required at the conclusion of the hearing, or other time for payment determined by the Hearing Officer. Failure to timely remit payment of a citation fine and/or late penalty authorized pursuant to said Section 4-1-59.7 will result in criminal liability and a warrant may be issued for a violator's arrest. Nonpayment of such fine and/or late penalty shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4211 - CONTINUATION OF PRIOR ORDINANCES 
The repeal of ordinances or parts of ordinances effectuated by the enactment of this Chapter shall not be construed as abating any actions now pending under or by virtue of such ordinances or as discontinuing, abating and modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provisions existing at the time of the passage of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
4212 - FEE SCHEDULE FOR ANIMAL SHELTER AND ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICES 
The fee schedule for animal shelter and animal control services shall be established by resolution of the City Council as adopted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1340, Sec. 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1350, Sec. 1, 5-6-08)  
PART 2 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
4221 - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained on any single parcel of property the following in the City: 
(1)  More than three (3) dogs or more than three (3) common house cats, except those under three (3) months of age, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  More than ten (10) birds, fowl, hamsters, white rats, mice, squirrels, chipmunks, nonpoisonous snakes, insects or rabbits or any combination thereof. No crowing type birds or fowl are authorized with the exception of roosters which are permitted pursuant to regulations contained in subsections (a)(3) and (b). 
(3)  More than one (1) rooster on R-1 (single-family) District lots within the Cultural Resources Overlay District that are a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size. The keeping of roosters is prohibited elsewhere in the City. 
(4)  More than one (1) beehive or colony. No occupied beehive shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent residential structure or street or highway. 
(5)  Any animal, bird, fowl, insect, serpent, or rodent not permitted under any of the preceding subsections. 
(b)  No bird, fowl or rabbit shall be maintained outside a residence any closer than fifty (50) feet from any neighboring residence. Roosters as authorized by this section shall be subject to all regulations contained in this subsection as well as more restrictive regulations contained in subsection (b)(3). 
(1)  Such poultry and animals shall under no circumstances be permitted to run at large, but shall be at all times confined within a suitable house or coop with an enclosed runway. 
(2)  Such house or coop runway shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall at all times be free of offensive odors. 
(3)  A rooster shall be maintained, a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling structure, and as close as possible to the rear property line, in a house or coop which is fully enclosed with solid construction material restricting light from entering the coop roosting area from sunset to sunrise and acting to dampen or muffle the noise impacts of any crowing. Any house or coop in which a rooster is maintained shall also be screened from view of any neighboring residential property. Screening shall consist of a fence, hedge or wall and shall be in keeping with all requirements of the Tustin City Code. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to keep animals or fowl for commercial purposes in any residential zone other than the R-A District or authorized Planned Community District (PC). 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the keeping of animals in authorized pet shops and kennels. (Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, 5-19-80; Ord. No. 1090, Sec. 2, 7-6-92)  
4222 - PERMIT REQUIRED FOR LIVESTOCK 
It shall be unlawful to keep any equine, bovine, swine, sheep or goat within the corporate city limits, except in the R-A District and, where authorized by development guidelines, PC Districts. A use permit shall be required for the keeping of such animals within these districts. (Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, 5-19-80)  
4223 - WILD ANIMALS 
a 
Wild Animals Defined 
The term "wild animal" means and includes any animal, reptile, fowl, or fish which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition or which is known to be vicious and or dangerous to the health or safety of people who might come in contact with it, and which must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate power of the owner. 
b 
Wild Animals Not Permitted in the City; Exceptions 
It is unlawful for any person to keep and maintain any wild animal within the City. This section shall not prohibit the keeping of: 
(1)  Wild animals in a bona fide zoo; 
(2)  Wild animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary hospital for treatment; 
(3)  Wild animals in any entertainment establishment provided by conditional use permit, specifically providing for such use; 
(4)  Wild animals in a bona fide educational institution for the purpose of instruction, provided such animals are securely confined and are properly cared for in a manner satisfactory to the Orange County Pound Master; 
(5)  Any hamster, guinea pig, white rat and or mouse, turtle, salamander, newt, chameleon, kangaroo rat; any nonpoisonous reptile (not exceeding six (6) feet in length or three (3) in number); and nonpoisonous toad, lizard or spider. (Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, 5-19-80)  
4224 - ANIMALS NOT TO BECOME NUISANCE; NUISANCES NOT AUTHORIZED BY ARTICLE 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain, or permit on any lot, parcel of land, or premises under his control, any animal which by sound or cry disturbs the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood or interferes with any person in the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Nor, shall any person maintain any animals in such a manner as to cause a breeding of flies or the creation of obnoxious odors, or in any manner which becomes or is a nuisance or health hazard. Nothing in this article nor compliances with the regulations or conditions provided herein, shall be construed to grant anyone the right to maintain a nuisance. (Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, 5-19-80)  
4225 - ANIMALS WITHIN PARKS 
(a)  No person shall bring into any park any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind, unless such animal is, at all times, physically restrained and controlled by leash, tether, cage or other device. Nor shall any person bring into any public park any animal that constitutes a safety hazard or detriment to the enjoyment of the area by the public. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person having charge of any such animal to remove any defecation emanating from the animal and to dispose of same in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  Animals are not permitted in areas of parks which are delineated by playground equipment, sandboxes or recreational court facilities specifically designed for such sports as basketball, handball, tennis or volleyball. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of seeing eye dogs by the visually handicapped, provided that the dog is at all times kept under control and does not constitute a danger to others. 
(e)  This section shall not prevent the City or its lessees from holding public events in City parks in which animals participate or from completely prohibiting animals in parks where appropriate signs are posted. Upon obtaining a permit from the City, animals may be brought into parks for the purpose of animal shows, exhibits, fairs and the like. In these situations, animals shall be kept under control by their handlers at all times, either through restraint or command. (Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, 5-19-80; Ord. No. 1121, Sec. 1, 2-22-94)  
4226 - RESERVED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1121, Sec. 2, adopted Feb. 22, 1994, provided for the deletion of section 4226, animals within parks, as derived from Ord. No. 826, Sec. 1, adopted May 19, 1980.  
CHAPTER 3 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
CHAPTER 3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1325, adopted Feb. 5, 2007, amended chapter 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 540; Ord. No. 570; Ord. No. 1014, adopted Jan. 3, 1989; and Ord. No. 1130, adopted Nov. 8, 1994. 
 
PART 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
4310 - DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND SEVERABILITY 
a.  The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate solid waste handling in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to meet the City's obligations under the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code Sections 40,000 et seq.) (Hereinafter "AB 939"). 
b.  Pursuant to the California Constitution, the City is authorized to enact ordinances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 40059, aspects of solid waste handling of local concern include, but are not limited to, the frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of service, charges and fees, and whether solid waste services are to be provided by means of non-exclusive, partially exclusive, or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license or permit, and the terms and conditions of such franchise, license or permit. 
c.  If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The City Council of the City of Tustin declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each section, subsection, clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional, and would have passed and adopted the same even though any parts, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases that may be held invalid had been omitted therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4311 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows: 
"AB 939" or "Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time and as implemented by the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or its successor. 
"Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, remodeling or demolition project within the City. 
"C&D" means "construction and demolition." 
"City" shall mean the City of Tustin. 
"Construction and demolition debris" or "C&D debris" shall mean used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, residential building, commercial or industrial building, or other structure and shall include, but is not limited to concrete, asphalt paving, asphalt roofing, lumber, gypsum board, rock, soil and metal. 
"Construction, remodeling or demolition project" means the erection or demolition of or the making of changes to any building, structure or landscaping which generates C&D debris. 
"Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor's license of any type under the laws of the State of California, or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor or owner-builder) any construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the City of Tustin. 
"Covered project" has the meaning set forth in subsection 4351(a)(1). 
"Diversion requirement" means the amount of waste collected by the franchisee and the amount of C&D debris for each project that must be diverted from landfills. 
"Divert" means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
"Franchise" means the right or privilege conferred by the City on one (1) or more private entities for the collection, transportation or other handling of solid waste. 
"Franchisee" means a solid waste enterprise having a solid waste franchise agreement with the City. 
"Green waste" means vegetative cuttings, shrubs, stumps, brush, tree trimmings, grasses, and related materials that have been separated from other solid waste. Green waste does not include stumps or branches with a diameter exceeding eighteen (18) inches or a length exceeding four (4) feet. 
"Hazardous waste" means any substance, waste or mixture of wastes defined as "hazardous substance" or "hazardous waste" pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("CERCLA"), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, and all substances defined as hazardous waste, acutely hazardous waste, or extremely hazardous waste by the State of California in Health and Safety Code Sections 25110.02, 25115, and 25117 or in the future amendments to or recodifications of such statutes or identified and listed as hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term "hazardous waste" shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition. 
"Person" shall mean any solid waste enterprise, individual, partnership, joint venture, firm, corporation, nonprofit corporation, association, organization, unincorporated private or public organization, or any other combination or entity. 
"Premises" means any building, dwelling, or site in any zone within the City from which any activity is conducted, including, without limitation, residential, service, nonprofit, governmental, institutional, educational, industrial, commercial or agricultural uses. 
"Project" means any activity that requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the City. 
"Public Works Director" shall mean the Public Works Director or his/her designee. 
"Recyclable solid waste" shall mean all solid waste which can be recycled and which is separated from other solid waste for the purpose of being recycled such as, but not limited to, aluminum, cardboard, glass, grass, and yard cuttings, metal, newspaper, paper, and plastic. 
"Recycle" or "recycling" shall mean the process of collecting, transferring, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products that meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
"Remodel" means any change, addition, or modification to an existing structure. 
"Reuse" means further or repeated use of C&D debris or other types of solid waste. 
"Roll-off box" means a container used for solid waste collection, usually ten (10) to fifty (50) cubic yards in size, which is removed from the premises and transported to a recycling or disposal site for solid waste removal. Roll-off boxes are typically used for C&D debris, other temporary solid waste collection needs, and for large solid waste generators. 
"Salvage" means the controlled removal of C&D debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
"Scavenging" means the unauthorized removal of solid waste from containers or bins of City franchisees. Scavenging is prohibited by this Chapter. 
"Solid waste container" shall mean any bin, roll-off box, cart, receptacle, or other container used to hold solid waste for collection and disposal or processing. 
"Solid waste" means all discarded putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, green waste, recyclable materials, bulky goods, discarded home and industrial appliances, C&D debris, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include: 
(a)  Hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Section 25800) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code; 
(b)  Medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Chapter 6.1 (commencing with Section 25015) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code); or 
(c)  Abandoned vehicles or parts thereof. 
"Solid waste handling services" shall mean the transportation, storage, transfer, processing, disposal or collection (whether from the curbside, bins, roll-off box or any other type of solid waste container or location) of solid waste for residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or any other originators, users or customers. 
"Waste reduction and recycling plan" or "WRRP" means a completed form submitted by an applicant for any covered project approved by the City for the purpose of compliance with Part 5 of this Chapter. The first portion of the form is submitted when applying for a permit, and the second portion when the project is completed. 
"WRRP" means "Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan." 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4312 - SOLID WASTE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR GENERATOR 
a.  Collection arrangements required: Unauthorized accumulation prohibited and declared a public nuisance. 
1.  In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to prevent the spread of vectors, the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for any premises in the City shall arrange with a franchisee for the collection of solid waste, as set forth in this Chapter. 
2.  It is unlawful for the person having control or possession of any premises in the City to fail or neglect to provide for the removal of solid waste. Each day's violation of this section shall be treated and considered as a separate and distinct offense. 
3.  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any property or premises is hereby declared a public nuisance and is hereby prohibited. 
b.  Frequency of solid waste collection: 
1.  Solid waste created, produced or accumulated in or about premises in the City shall be removed from premises at a minimum of: 
(a)  Every four (4) days for putrescible waste; 
(b)  Once each week for non-putrescible waste. 
2.  The following materials may be collected less frequently unless the City deems otherwise: 
(a)  Temporary solid waste containers on construction or demolition sites containing no food waste, food wrappers, yard waste, or any form of organic waste; 
(b)  Recyclables containers containing no food waste, food wrappers, yard waste, or any form of organic waste; 
3.  If conditions warrant, the County Health Officer or the City may require a greater frequency of removal. 
c.  Recyclable solid waste collection: 
1.  Ownership of recyclable solid waste. Upon placement of recyclable solid waste at a designated recycling collection location, such recyclable solid waste shall become the property of the Franchisee engaged to collect such material. 
2.  Collection by persons other than an authorized Franchisee prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, except for the permitted Franchisee engaged to provide such service, to collect recyclable solid waste from a designated recycling collection container. The City may, at its option, arrange for collection in the event of health and safety issues or of a dispute between the Franchisee, the customer and the City. 
3.  Generator's right to recycle. Nothing in this Chapter limits the right of any person to sell, donate, or otherwise divert their own recyclables from landfilling, except that recyclables deposited into containers provided by a Franchisee and placed for collection shall become solid waste and the property of the Franchisee as provided in subsection 1. above. 
d.  Containerization of solid waste. 
1.  All solid waste shall be placed for collection in containers provided by Franchisees, except when special collections are authorized by this Chapter or the City's franchise agreement. Special collection items, such as bulky items, holiday trees, bundled residential green waste, and household hazardous waste placed for curbside collection, must be placed for collection in accordance with the terms of this Chapter or the City's franchise agreement. 
2.  Placement of solid waste containers for collection. Residential solid waste containers shall be placed curbside or in the gutter, not earlier than twenty-four (24) hours before collection is scheduled and removed not later than twenty-four (24) hours after collection. 
3.  Solid waste container storage enclosures. 
(a)  All solid waste containers, for both residential and commercial customers, must be shielded from view within a building or area enclosed by a wall not less than six (6) feet in height. No solid waste container storage shall be within fifty (50) feet of any residential or open space planning areas unless it is fully enclosed. 
(b)  All new construction of residences and businesses must include sufficient storage area for both solid waste and recycling containers. The City may require that sufficient storage area for both solid waste and recycling containers be built when an existing facility is being renovated. City will review plans to ensure that adequate space will be provided prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4313 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SCHEDULES 
a.  Collection hours. No collection of solid waste, or delivery or removal of containers by a Franchisee, shall be made from within two hundred (200) feet of any residence in the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day unless prior written approval has been obtained from the Public Works Director or designee. 
b.  Holiday schedule. Franchisees may only postpone collection for the following holidays: January 1st, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Service due on the holiday, and on each day during the remainder of the holiday week, shall be delayed no more than one (1) day. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4314 - ENCROACHMENT PERMIT FOR SOLID WASTE CONTAINER PLACEMENT IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
a.  Except for curbside collection or storage enclosure collection pursuant to Section 4312d, prior to placement of a solid waste collection container in the public right-of-way, the person placing the container must obtain an encroachment permit from the City. A performance bond or letter of credit may be required prior to issuance of the encroachment permit. Only a Franchisee authorized by franchise, or customer hiring such a Franchisee, may obtain an encroachment permit for a temporary collection bin. Applications for such permit shall be on forms supplied by the City and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and business telephone; 
(2)  Evidence of solid waste franchise or permit; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of person or persons who will have the responsibility for the placement, servicing, and removal of the temporary solid waste collection bin(s), as described above. 
b.  Applications shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set by resolution of the City Council. Encroachment permits shall be issued for a time certain, and are revocable at any time by the City, if the holder of the encroachment permit violates City ordinances or State law, any term of the permit, or if the encroachment is deemed to constitute a traffic hazard or public nuisance. A holder of an encroachment permit shall promptly remove or cause the removal of the container(s) if the permit is revoked. All decisions of the City regarding the issuance and revocation of encroachment permits are final and are not appealable. 
c.  Encroachment permits are not transferable by assignment, sale, or other means without the express written permission of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4315 - MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS 
a.  Noise. A Franchisee shall so conduct its operations as to offer the least possible disruption to the existing noise levels of the area within which collections are made, but in no event exceed the City's Noise Ordinance. 
b.  Trespass. No person authorized to collect or transport solid waste or recyclables shall enter private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid waste or recyclables placed for collection. 
c.  Scavenging. It is unlawful for any person, other than a Franchisee, the City, or the owner thereof, to remove solid waste, including recyclable solid waste, from containers placed for collection, including temporary containers. 
d.  Transfer of solid waste on City streets. Under no circumstances may solid waste be transferred between vehicles or otherwise in the public right-of-way. 
e.  Prohibited disposal methods. 
1.  Burning. It shall be unlawful at anytime for any person, including Franchisees, to burn any solid waste or recyclables within the City. 
2.  Illegal dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person, including Franchisees, to cast, place, sweep, deposit, or dump solid waste upon any private or public property in the City, except as provided for in this Code. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump hazardous waste, medical waste, or abandoned vehicles, or parts thereof, upon any private or public real property in the City. 
3.  Unauthorized disposal. No unauthorized person shall cause the placement of solid waste, originating from other premises, within a waste container designated to serve the premises for which the container has been assigned. 
f.  Sanitary transportation of solid waste. No person shall convey or transport solid waste upon or along any public street in the City unless such solid waste is contained and/or covered or otherwise secured to prevent it from leaking, dripping, falling, blowing, or scattering from the vehicle in which it is being conveyed or transported. All vehicles and equipment used in the transport of any form of solid waste shall be kept clean. No person shall drain the liquid from any such vehicle upon any road or highway or upon any other land in the City. Persons hauling solid waste on City streets shall completely empty the solid wastes from their vehicles and/or containers at the disposal site, or recover them if they are not completely emptied, in order to prevent the scattering of residue on the return trip. 
g.  Hazardous solid waste. 
1.  Disposition. Generators, owners, and/or possessors of hazardous solid waste shall dispose of all hazardous solid waste that they generate, own, or possess in accordance with all local, state and federal laws. 
2.  Regulation. The County Health Official and the City may promulgate regulations regarding the handling, transportation, and/or disposal of hazardous solid waste within the City. 
3.  Collection. It is unlawful for City Franchisees to perform solid waste handling services for hazardous solid waste, unless they are properly permitted and meet all local, State and Federal regulations regarding the handling of such materials. 
4.  Placement in containers for collection. It is unlawful for any person to place hazardous solid waste in containers for regular collection by a Franchisee or at a designated recycling collection location. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4316 - REGULATION OF AREAS FOR COLLECTING AND LOADING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 
a 
Purpose 
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations and guidelines regarding areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials and recyclable materials for transportation to a mixed-waste processing or material recovery facility. 
b 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
"Development project" means any of the following: 
(1)  A project for which a building permit is required for a new commercial, industrial or institutional building, or residential building having five (5) or more living units where solid waste is collected and loaded, or any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five (5) or more living units. 
(2)  Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements to that part of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste. 
(3)  Any alteration or alterations to an existing commercial, industrial, or public facility project where the existing floor area of the subject building is expanded by fifty (50) percent or more. 
"Improvement" means a physical change which adds to the value of a facility, prolongs its useful life, or adapts it to new uses, excluding repairs. Repairs keep facilities in good operating condition, do not materially add to the value of the facility, and do not substantially extend the life of the facility. 
"Public facility" means any building, structure, or outdoor recreation area owned by a local agency. 
"Recycling area (areas for recycling)" means any space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. 
c 
Applicability 
(1)  The City of Tustin's contract with its hauler requires the provision of a recycling bin and/or toter to each business and multifamily account in the City. In addition, all areas of the City of Tustin that are served by the collection of commingled solid waste and recyclable materials for transportation to a mixed-waste processing or material recovery facility are exempt from the provisions contained herein. Provided that the material recovery facility meets California state regulations on the efficiency of recyclable recovery, the City will consider granting an exemption of a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  In the event that the aforementioned exemption does not apply, all development projects for which a building permit is issued on or after September 1, 1993, shall be required to provide adequate, accessible, and convenient recycling areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. 
(3)  Where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five (5) or more residential living units, recycling areas are only required to serve the needs of the living units which utilize the solid waste collection and loading area. 
d 
Guidelines 
The following guidelines shall be used in evaluating all recycling areas required by this subsection: 
(1)  An adequate number and capacity of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development shall be located within the recycling areas of development projects. Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of collection in the area in which the project is to be located. 
(2)  Any development that generates large amounts of organic waste such as pre- and post-consumer food waste and/or landscaping waste shall provide adequate room in the enclosure to house organic collection containers in addition to trash and recycling containers. 
(3)  The design and construction of recycling areas shall be compatible with surrounding land uses, structures, topography and vegetation. Developments and public right-of-way adjacent to recycling areas should be adequately protected against any adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors, or glare through measures including, but not limited to, maintaining adequate separation, fencing, and landscaping. 
(4)  Recycling areas shall have a solid roof or awning and shall be enclosed by masonry wall with access which effectively obscures the contents placed within the enclosure. 
(5)  Recycling areas shall be secured to prevent the theft of recyclable materials by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal of materials. 
(6)  Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein shall provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. 
(7)  Driveways or travel aisles shall be unobstructed and provide access for the City's franchised solid waste hauler's collection vehicles and shall provide minimum clearance for vehicles utilized by the City's franchised solid waste hauler. 
(8)  The design and construction of recycling areas shall meet all applicable zoning setback and yard requirements and shall not be located in any area required to be constructed or maintained unencumbered, according to any applicable federal, state, or local laws relating to fire, access, building, transportation, circulation, or safety. 
(9)  Any recycling area(s) shall be located to be convenient to persons who deposit, collect, and load the recyclable materials. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials should be adjacent to, or developed in conjunction with, the solid waste collection areas. 
(10)  A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein should be posted adjacent to all points of direct access to the recycling area. 
(11)  All areas for loading and collecting recyclable materials are subject to design review by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No 1429, Sec. I.1, 5-21-13)  
PART 2 - SOLID WASTE FRANCHISES 
 
4320 - AUTHORIZATION TO ISSUE FRANCHISES FOR SOLID WASTE HANDLING SERVICES 
a.  At the General Municipal Elections in November 2006, the voters approved Initiative Ordinance No. 2006-01, which authorizes the City Council to issue competitively bid contracts as follows: "The Council may enter into contracts for the collection and disposal of solid waste material, and may establish such rules for the regulation thereof as it may from time to time deem best and necessary. The terms, as set forth in Part 4 [now this Part 2], shall be the minimum terms of any contract approved by the City Council. At least every ten (10) years City contracts for the collection and disposal of solid waste and for the collection of recyclable material shall be competitively bid according to rules and regulations adopted by the City Council and designed to secure the best level of services at the lowest price practicable. This requirement shall apply upon the termination of each City contract for the collection and disposal of solid waste material that is in effect as of the effective date of this Section. The City Council in its sole discretion may extend any contract or franchise in existence on the effective date of this Section for a period of up to three (3) years, to accommodate the completion and implementation of the competitive process required in this Section and/or to ensure a seamless transition between providers as may be necessary or desirable, subject to such conditions as the City Council determines are reasonable or appropriate." 
b.  Each Franchisee providing services within the City shall obtain and maintain all appropriate licenses and all forms of authorization, permit, franchise, or contract as may be required by the City Council. Each Franchisee shall comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, regulations, and requirements governing solid waste. 
c.  No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management enterprise or facility including, but not limited to, a material recovery facility, landfill, composting facility, or buy-back recycling center, or collect any form of solid waste in the City, without first satisfying all applicable City requirements for land use approval, franchises, permits, and any other approvals required under any local, State or Federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4321 - FRANCHISE REQUIRED PRIOR TO CONTAINER DELIVERY 
No person may deliver a roll-off box, bin, or other solid waste container within the City, or collect solid waste from a customer within the City, prior to City approval and issuance of that person's franchise or contract for solid waste services, unless otherwise exempted under this Chapter. Green waste and recyclables are included in the definition of solid waste and collectors of such materials, not otherwise exempted pursuant to this Chapter, must obtain a franchise or contract. The use of compactors for solid waste collection requires the express written approval of the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4322 - FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; RELATION TO CODE 
The franchise agreement will govern requirements placed on the Franchisee(s) for services covered under the franchise. Where the franchise agreement is silent, the applicable requirements of this Chapter will apply. To provide services not covered under the franchise, the Franchisee must obtain a permit and meet all requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4323 - COLLECTION BY PERSONS OTHER THAN CITY FRANCHISEE 
a.  [Written notice.] Except for Franchisee(s) and except for any person described in subsections b., c., d., e., f., g., h. and i. of this Section, it is unlawful for any person to engage in solid waste handling services within the City, and all persons currently engaging in solid waste handling services within the City shall cease such operations immediately upon receiving written notice from the City. 
b.  Actual solid waste generators. The actual producers of solid waste and the owners of property upon which solid waste has accumulated may personally engage in solid waste handling services, but only as to the solid waste which they have actually produced or which has accumulated on their own property, and provided that they comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. Except in accordance with subsection c. and subsection d. below, actual producers and property owners shall not allow any other person, except the City's Franchisees, to perform solid waste handling services for the solid waste which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control. 
c.  Construction contractors. The actual producers of C&D debris and the owners of property upon which C&D debris has accumulated may engage the contractor who produced all or a part of said C&D debris to perform solid waste handling services for all or part of the C&D debris generated during the construction project; provided, that all such contractors comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. Said actual producers and property owners shall not allow any other person, except for the City's Franchisees or the contractor described in this subsection, to perform solid waste handling services for the C&D debris which they have produced, which has accumulated on their property, or which they otherwise own or control. 
d.  Gardeners and landscapers. Gardeners or landscapers may transport green waste or solid waste generated by their work, only if transported by their own employees in the gardener or landscaper's own vehicles to permitted facilities, without obtaining a solid waste collection permit. 
e.  Cleanup services. Any person whose primary business is the cleanup of solid waste on the property of another and who, incidental to such business: 
(1)  Hauls only the solid waste which he cleans up and no other solid waste, 
(2)  Performs cleanup services such as removing junk from businesses, garages, and residential properties, but does not remove solid waste from construction and demolition sites, 
(3)  Uses his/her own vehicle to haul the solid waste which he cleans up, and 
(4)  Does not use a bin, roll-off box or other container, whether or not such bin, roll-off box, or container is left at the cleanup site, to accomplish the cleanup, collection, or transportation of the solid waste, may transport solid waste in accordance with this subsection without a permit or franchise. 
f.  Nonprofit charities. Nonprofit organizations or charities periodically accepting donations of recyclables may transport the recyclables, provided that the organization transport the recyclables to a recycling facility and that organization volunteers and employees comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws. 
g.  Transport only. Any person may haul solid waste generated and collected in other jurisdictions over City streets provided they comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with any other governing laws, and provided further that they do not engage in any solid waste handling services within the City. 
h.  Emergencies. In the event of an emergency, including, but not limited to, the breakdown of equipment or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances, or where in the judgment of the City the particular situation justifies such action, the City may issue limited or temporary contracts to any person to perform solid waste handling services, subject to reasonable fees, charges and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may agree upon; provided that such fees and charges received from or paid to any person under this subsection for any period exceeding fifteen (15) days in duration shall be approved by the City Council. 
i.  Recyclers. Persons purchasing or accepting donations of recyclables shall not be required to obtain a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
PART 3 - RATES AND FEES 
 
4330 - RATES 
Rates charged by Franchisee(s) shall be as set forth in the schedule of rates and charges approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4331 - SOLID WASTE FEES—GENERAL 
In accordance with Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 1 of the Public Resources Code, Section 40000 et seq., and other applicable laws, the City may levy fees within the City for solid waste purposes, including but not limited to, implementation of an integrated Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan; inspection, auditing, review and planning for solid waste or household hazardous waste collection, transfer and disposal; planning related to responses to solid or hazardous waste releases and spills; and franchise fees as permitted by law. Such fees may include, but are not limited to, fees for the costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements, non-disposal facility elements and integrated Waste Reduction and Recycling Plans, and fees for the use and maintenance of public streets, highways, public rights-of-way, and other public property.  
PART 4 - FRANCHISEE OPERATIONS 
 
4340 - OFFICE FOR INQUIRIES AND COMPLAINTS 
a.  Franchisees shall maintain an office at a fixed place and shall maintain a telephone at the office listed in the current telephone directory in the name under which it conducts business in the City, and shall at all times between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturdays, have an employee or agent at the office to receive service request, complaints and inquiries. Each office shall be staffed with a knowledgeable person, trained to respond to customer questions and complaints. An emergency telephone shall be provided to the City for use outside normal business hours. 
b.  The protection of the public health, safety, and welfare require that service complaints be acted on promptly and that a record be maintained in order to permit the City and its Franchisees to identify potential public health and safety problems. During office hours, Franchisees shall record all complaints, including the date, time, complainant's name and address if the complainant is willing to give this information, and date, and manner of resolution of the complaint. This information shall be maintained for the term of the franchise agreement, or longer if indicated in the franchise agreement. The record of service complaints shall be made available for review by representatives of the City during the Franchisee's office hours. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1 2-5-07)  
4341 - HAZARDOUS WASTE INSPECTION AND REPORTING 
a.  Franchisees shall inspect solid waste placed for collection in their respective bins and containers, and shall reject for collection solid waste observed to be contaminated with hazardous waste. Franchisees, as applicable., shall promptly notify the City and all agencies with jurisdiction, if appropriate, including the California Department of Toxic Substances Control, local emergency response providers and the National Response Center of reportable quantities of hazardous waste found or observed in solid waste anywhere within the City. In addition to other required notifications, if a franchisee observes any substances which it or its employees reasonably believe or suspect to contain hazardous waste unlawfully disposed of or released on any City property, including storm drains, streets or other public rights-of-way, the franchisee, as applicable, shall immediately notify the Public Works Director or his or her designee. 
b.  Franchisees shall each maintain records showing the types and quantities, if any, of hazardous waste found in solid waste and which was inadvertently collected from service recipients within the City, but diverted from landfilling. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4342 - EMPLOYEES AND VEHICLES 
a.  Employees. All field employees of a Franchisee shall wear nametags to enable identification while providing public service. 
b.  Franchisees' vehicles. 
1.  Vehicle standards. To protect public health, safety and welfare, any truck used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the City shall be leak-proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover that shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any waste, oil, grease or other substance upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation. No person shall park, or cause to be parked within the City any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free from odor and in a sanitary condition. Franchisees shall comply with all regulations promulgated by all agencies with jurisdiction over the safe, sanitary operation of all of their equipment. 
2.  Displays. Vehicles shall display the name of the franchisee in prominent letters so that the vehicle may be easily identified as belonging to that franchisee. If a franchisee uses a vehicle displaying the name of an affiliated company, the affiliated company's name must be indicated on the franchise, or be approved in advance in writing by the Public Works Director or designee. Improperly identified vehicles may be treated as belonging to non-permitted haulers. 
3.  Noise levels. To protect the public health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the residents of the City, the noise level for the collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels (dB) at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five (5) feet from the horizontal base place of such vehicles. A Franchisee shall submit to City, upon City's request, a certificate of vehicle noise level testing by an independent testing entity of a representative sample of all vehicles. 
4.  Damage to streets. Franchisees shall not damage public or private streets over which their respective collection equipment may be operated and shall obtain all required approvals for operation of its respective collection vehicles on private streets. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4343 - FRANCHISEES' CONTAINERS 
a.  Each Franchisee shall maintain its containers within the City in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread of vectors. 
b.  All bins shall be steam-cleaned or replaced at least once per year by the Franchisee servicing bin. 
c.  Each Franchisee shall remove from its solid waste containers (including carts, bins and roll-off boxes), any exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as "graffiti" or "tagging" within twenty-four (24) hours of either notification by City or customer or the Franchisee's last servicing of the container, whichever is sooner. 
d.  The City has the authority to require a Franchisee to replace promptly any container which, in the City's reasonable discretion, is not in a clean, painted, or serviceable condition. 
e.  Each Franchisee shall post each container with a notice that the container is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste. 
f.  All containers in City, excluding franchisee's residential carts, must carry a label identifying the Franchisee that owns or collects from the container and that Franchisee's phone number. Letters must be at least three (3) inches high. 
g.  All recycling and green waste containers must carry labels, in both English and Spanish, identifying which materials are to be placed in each container. Franchisees are responsible for designing and producing such labels and replacing labels when they become worn. 
h.  The use of compaction containers by the Franchisee for waste collection shall be approved in advance by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4344 - DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS 
Franchisees must divert a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the solid waste collected within the City each calendar year. To count as waste diversion for the purpose of this Chapter, each Franchisee must provide documentation of delivery to a recycling facility and documentation as to the quantity of the delivered waste that was diverted and the quantity of the delivered waste that was landfilled. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
PART 5 - C&D DEBRIS DIVERSION 
 
4350 - DECLARATION OF PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Part is to promote the recycling of C&D debris to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the City's obligations under AB 939. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4351 - WASTE DISPOSAL AND DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND RENOVATION PROJECTS WITHIN THE CITY 
a.  Waste disposal and diversion reporting requirement. 
1.  Covered projects. All construction and renovation projects subject to the requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code shall be required to meet the minimum diversion requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code for all project-related C&D debris. All project contractors shall, upon project completion, provide to the Public Works Director all project-related C&D debris collection, disposal and diversion information in the form prescribed by the Public Works Director. 
2.  [Exemptions.] All exemptions as provided in the California Green Building Standards Code shall be granted. 
b.  Compliance as a condition of approval. Compliance with the provisions of this Part shall be listed as a condition of approval on all discretionary resolutions of approval for development projects, and building or demolition permits. 
c.  Application fee. As part of any application for, and prior to the issuance of, any building or demolition permit that involves the creation of C&D debris, each applicant for covered projects shall pay to the City an application fee in the amount set forth in a Resolution of the City Council sufficient to cover the City's costs of reviewing an application and monitoring compliance with this section and/or the WRRP, or reviewing an application for exemption. 
d.  Security deposit. In addition to the application fee, each applicant shall deposit with the City a security deposit as security for performance. The security deposit is remitted at the same time the permit application is filed. The security deposit may be in the form of cash, cashier's check, personal check, or money order. In addition, the Public Works Director may accept a certificate of deposit or letter of credit in the form approved by the City Attorney. 
(1)  Single-Family Residential. All single-family residential projects shall submit a security deposit in the amount of five (5) percent of the project's valuation as determined by the Building Official, rounded to the nearest thousand. The minimum deposit amount shall by [be] five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the maximum deposit amount shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(2)  Multifamily/Commercial. All multifamily and commercial projects shall submit a security deposit in the amount of five (5) percent of the project's valuation as determined by the Building Official, rounded to the nearest thousand, or two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), whichever is greater. In no event shall a deposit exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07; Ord. No. 1442, Sec. 1, 5-20-14)  
4352 - WASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING PLANS (WRRP) 
a.  WRRP forms. All applicants shall complete and submit a WRRP on a form prescribed by the Public Works Director for this purpose, as part of the application packet for the construction, renovation, or demolition permit. 
b.  Compliance with waste management plan. 
1.  Documentation. Prior to the completion of a project, the applicant shall submit to the Public Works Director documentation that the Diversion Requirement has been met. This documentation shall include all of the following: 
(a)  Receipts from the vendor and facility which collected and received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material. 
(b)  A copy of the previously approved WRRP for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled. 
(c)  Calculations showing multiplication of the total non-source separated tonnage hauled from the project. 
2.  Weighing of wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris, diverted or landfilled, are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed. Regarding C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized Conversion Rates approved by the City for this purpose. 
3.  Determination of compliance and release of security deposit. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or at the completion of the project, the Public Works Director shall review the information pertaining to diversion of C&D debris submitted pursuant this section and shall determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows: 
(a)  Full compliance. If the Public Works Director determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, the Public Works Director shall cause the entire security deposit to be refunded to the applicant without interest. 
(b)  Good faith effort to comply. If the Public Works Director determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this Part. In making this determination, the Public Works Director shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris land filled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. The Public Works Director may authorize a partial refund of a security deposit without interest when less than the minimum diversion requirement is met. The partial refund shall not exceed that portion of the security deposit that is in the same ratio as the demonstrated amount of diverted waste. 
(c)  Noncompliance. If the Public Works Director determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement, then the Public Works Director shall notify the applicant in writing and all or a portion of the security deposit shall be forfeited to the City and shall not be refunded. Forfeited funds shall be used towards the City's recycling efforts pursuant to subsection c. below. 
4.  Other provisions for the refund of a security deposit. 
(a)  The Public Works Director may authorize the refund without interest of any security deposit which was erroneously paid or collected. 
(b)  The Public Works Director may authorize the refund without interest of any security deposit when the permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun. 
(c)  The Public Works Director shall not authorize the refund of any security deposit, or any portion thereof, unless the applicant files a written request for refund and provides documentation satisfactory to the Public Works Director in support of the request. 
c.  Forfeiture and city use of security deposit. 
1.  If the Public Works Director determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this Part, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection e. prior to the expiration of the building or demolition permit, then the deposit is forfeited to the City. 
2.  Forfeited security deposits may be used by the City for solid waste and recycling related purposes, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Plan, implement, or promote solid waste diversion programs. 
(b)  Develop or improve the infrastructure needed to divert waste from landfilling. 
(c)  Educate generators and handlers of solid waste in the City regarding solid waste recycling and disposal alternatives. 
(d)  Review accuracy of Franchisee's reports, Waste Reduction and Recycling Plans and other solid waste records. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4353 - EXEMPTION FROM THE FIFTY PERCENT DIVERSION RATE 
a.  Application. If an applicant experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time the application is submitted. The applicant shall indicate on the application or WRRP the maximum rate of diversion believed feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
b.  Meeting with public works director. The Public Works Director shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the Public Works Director shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement. 
c.  Granting of exemption. If the Public Works Director determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the fifty (50) percent diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, the Public Works Director shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the permit or WRRP submitted by the applicant. The Public Works Director shall issue a permit or return a copy of the WRRP to the applicant marked "Approved for Exemption." 
d.  Denial of exemption. If the Public Works Director determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the Official shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall resubmit an application or WRRP in full compliance with the diversion requirement. If the applicant fails to resubmit the application or WRRP, or if the resubmitted application or WRRP does not comply with the diversion requirement, the Public Works Director shall deny the application or WRRP and the Building Official shall not issue a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4354 - APPEAL 
Upon payment of an appeal fee set forth in a resolution of the City Council, the applicant may appeal to the City Manager, a decision of the Public Works Director to deny an exemption or withhold any portion of a security deposit. Notice of appeal of the decision of the Public Works Director must be filed with the Public Works Director within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language the particular decision or decisions complained of and the reasons why the person feels aggrieved. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the decision(s) of the Public Works Director and such decision shall be final; otherwise, the decision of the City Manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4355 - CERTIFIED RECYCLING FACILITIES 
a.  The City may, but is not required to, approve certified recycling facilities. If such facilities were approved, applicants would have the option to demonstrate that they will meet the fifty (50) percent diversion requirement in their WRRP required under this Part by taking all material generated at the construction, remodeling, or demolition site to a City Certified Recycling Facility. 
b.  For the purposes of this Part, a certified recycling facility means. a recycling, composting, materials recovery, or re-use facility for which the Public Works Director has issued a certification pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Public Works Director. 
c.  The Public Works Director shall approve use of the facilities only if the owner or operator of the facility has submitted or submits documentation satisfactory to the Public Works Director: 
1.  That the facility has obtained all applicable Federal, State, and local permits, and is in full compliance with all applicable regulations; and 
2.  The percentage of incoming waste from construction, demolition, and alteration activities that is diverted from landfill disposal meets a minimum percentage level determined by the City. 
d.  The City shall make available to each applicant an approved list of certified recycling facilities, if such facilities become approved. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4356 - C&D DEBRIS ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT. 
a.  Administrative enforcement. In addition to the penalties provided for in this Chapter and this Code, if violations of the provisions of this Part exist as to a covered project requiring completion of a Waste Reduction and Recycling Plan, the City may use various administrative measures to ensure compliance. Measures available include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Issuance of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for that project may be withheld until all such violations have been corrected; 
2.  Issuance of a stop work notice, until all such violations have been corrected; 
3.  Stopping all inspections on subject project, until all such violations have been corrected; 
4.  Other measures recommended by the City Attorney. 
b.  Civil action. Violation of any provision of this Part may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. The City Council hereby finds that violation of this Section is a public nuisance. In any civil enforcement action, the City shall be entitled to recover its attorneys' fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by a preponderance of the evidence to have violated this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
PART 6 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
4360 - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY, IMPOUNDING OF SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS; CIVIL REMEDIES 
a.  Authority. The Public Works Director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to the Code. 
b.  Impounding of containers. If a solid waste container is not properly identified as belonging to a City-approved Franchisee, or if the terms of the permit, the franchise agreement, or of this Chapter are not complied with, then the solid waste container shall be subject to removal and impound by order of the Public Works Director pursuant to Section 4362. 
c.  Civil remedies. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a City Franchisee or the City to bring a civil action against any person who violates this Chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a City franchisee or the City. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4361 - VIOLATIONS 
a.  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, violations of this Chapter are punishable as set forth in Section 1121 of this Code. 
b.  In addition, in the event any violation of this Chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety or the environment, the Public Works Director may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances created by a disposal of solid or hazardous waste where such disposal creates a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment. 
c.  Violations of this Chapter are deemed public nuisances, which may be abated by administrative, civil, or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this Code and State law. All costs and fees incurred by the City because of any violation of this Chapter, which constitutes a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated, and a personal obligation against the owner. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording. The City attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises. 
d.  The City may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by law to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
4362 - UNLAWFULLY PLACED SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS 
a.  Unauthorized solid waste containers. No person shall place or leave standing a solid waste container on any public or private property within the City except for collection and disposal of solid waste by Franchisees or as otherwise specifically authorized in this Chapter. 
b.  Containers for collection of recyclable solid waste exempted. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the placement of containers for the collection of recyclable solid waste sold or donated by the generator of such solid waste. If, however, the generator of the recyclable solid waste is required to pay monetary or non-monetary consideration for the collection, transportation, transfer, or processing of the recyclable solid waste, or for the use of containers for such solid waste, this exemption shall not apply. The person providing containers for the collection of recyclable solid waste shall have the burden of showing that the recyclable solid waste was sold or donated in compliance with the exemption herein. 
c.  Removal of unlawfully placed solid waste containers. 
1.  The Public Works Director may cause the posting of a notice to remove, in a conspicuous place, on any solid waste container placed on any public or private property within the City in violation of this Chapter. 
2.  Notices to remove posted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the solid waste container must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours or it may be removed and stored by the City, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner of the container. The posting of a notice to remove shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and user of the container of the requirement to remove the solid waste container. 
3.  If the solid waste container is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the notice to remove is posted, the Public Works Director may direct the removal and storage of the solid waste container and the disposal of its contents. 
4.  If the identity of the owner of a solid waste container that has been removed by the City is known to the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director shall promptly cause notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the solid waste container is not claimed within ninety (90) days after removal and notice to the owner, or ninety (90) days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown, the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
5.  After a solid waste container has once been removed by the City pursuant to a notice to remove, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this Chapter, including the prohibition of placement of solid waste containers by any person other than those exempted. In the event of a subsequent placement of a solid waste container owned by the same owner, the Public Works Director may immediately, without the posting of a notice to remove, direct the removal and storage of the unlawfully placed solid waste container and shall, in such case, give notice to the owner to claim the solid waste container. In such event, the owner shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of removal, storage and disposal of its contents, which cost shall be paid by the owner before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. If the solid waste container is unclaimed after notice is mailed to the owner and the expiration of the period set forth in subsection 4. above, the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
6.  The owner of the solid waste container shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of the removal, storage and disposal. All amounts due to the City for the cost of the removal, storage and disposal shall be paid before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. The costs incurred by the City for removal, storage and disposal shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the owner, who shall be liable therefore in an action by the City for the recovery of such amounts. 
(Ord. No. 1325, Sec. 1, 2-5-07)  
CHAPTER 4 - WEED AND LITTER CONTROL  
PART 1 - WEEDS AND RUBBISH 
 
4411 - UNSAFE CONDITION PROHIBITED 
No person, whether the same be the owner, agent or person in control of any lot, piece or parcel of land within the City, shall maintain such premises or allow the same to be maintained or permit the same to be maintained in a condition in which weeds, rubbish or any material exist on such premises which constitute a fire hazard or which may provide a refuge for rats or other vermin, or may produce pollen which is injurious to health, safety or welfare of residents of the vicinity, or which otherwise is dangerous or injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents of the vicinity. The existence of any condition prohibited by this Chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. ;hn0; (TCC-1, Sec. 12-1/Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1.)  
4412 - NOTICE TO ABATE 
Whenever the Director of Community Development or his or her designee shall find that a condition prohibited by Section 4411 exists upon any lot, piece or parcel of land, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such lot, piece or parcel of land, the Director of Community Development shall give or cause to be given, in the manner provided in this Chapter, a notice to remove such weeds, rubbish or other material. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-2/Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1.; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 5, 11-17-09)  
4413 - NOTICE PROCEDURE 
Notice to abate shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place upon or in front of the lot, piece or parcel of land on which or upon the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way adjacent to which such weeds, rubbish or other material may be. The notice shall be headed "Notice to Clean Premises" in letters not less than one inch in height, and the notice, in legible characters, shall direct the removal of weeds, rubbish or other material as the case may be, and refer to this Code for further particulars. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES 
Notice hereby is given that contrary to the provisions of the Code of the City of Tustin, California, noxious and dangerous weeds and/or rubbish, refuse, and dirt are existing upon or in front of the following described property: (give the address, or if posting a whole street, the name of the street). That they constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt. Unless said removal is made within ten (10) calendar days from the date of this notice, the same shall be removed by the City, and the cost of the removal assessed upon the land from which, or in front of which, weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt are removed, and such cost so assessed will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. 
All persons having any objection to the proposed required removal may appeal to the City Council, in writing, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of this notice. 
DATED: This _______ day of _______. 
Director of Community Development, 
City of Tustin, California 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-3/Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1.; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 6, 11-17-09)  
4414 - ALTERNATE METHOD OF GIVING NOTICE TO ABATE 
As an alternate to the posting of notice, the notice to abate required by this Chapter may be given by personal service of a notice similar in substance, by serving the same upon the owner, agent, or person in control of such lot, piece, or parcel of land, or by mailing such notice by depositing such notice in the United States Mail, at Tustin, California, addressed to the owner of such lot, piece or parcel of land, at the address shown by the last equalized assessment roll. 
The notice shall bear the date of posting, personal service, or mailing. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-4; Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1)  
4415 - PROOF OF NOTICE TO ABATE 
Proof of the posting, serving in person or mailing of any notice, order, or determination provided for in this Chapter, shall be by affidavit of the person performing the duty and the affidavit must specify the time when the duty was performed. It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development to keep such affidavits among the official records. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-5; Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1.; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 7, 11-17-09)  
4416 - APPEAL FROM NOTICE TO ABATE 
Within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice to abate, any person may appeal the determination of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-6; Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1.; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 8, 11-17-09)  
4417 - REMOVAL BY CITY 
Unless the weeds, rubbish or other material have been removed from the premises in question or from the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such premises as directed by written notice, the Director of Community Development thereupon shall cause the same to be removed and may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing. 
(TCC-1, Sec. 12-7; Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 9, 11-17-09)  
4418 - ASSESSMENT OF COSTS 
a 
Assessment Procedure 
The Director of Community Development shall keep or cause to be kept a permanent record showing the legal description, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County, of each piece of property or lot from which, or the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such property from which, the weeds, rubbish or other material have been removed under the provisions of this Chapter, and such record book shall show any and all expense incurred by the City in the removal of the weeds, rubbish, or other material as such expense relates to each separate property ownership. Each entry in this record book shall be made upon the completion of work done on each piece of property or lot, or upon the street, alley, parkway, or sidewalk abutting thereon. After such entry has been made in the record book, the same shall constitute an assessment against the parcel of land and thereafter such assessment shall be confirmed by motion or resolution of the City Council and the assessment, after made and confirmed, and upon recordation of such order of the City Council confirming the assessment in the Office of the County Recorder of the County in which the property is situated, shall become a lien upon the parcel. 
b 
Assessment Roll 
The Director of Community Development Staff shall prepare and file with the County Assessor a certified copy of the motion or resolution of the City Council. The County Assessor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
c 
Refund of Erroneous Collection 
Any assessment or any portion of an assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter which herefore or hereafter has been paid more than once, erroneously or illegally collected, paid in excess of the amount chargeable, was not chargeable to the person or the property paying the same under the provisions of this Chapter, by reason of a clerical error of the employees or officials of the City, may be refunded by order of the City Council in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as now or hereafter are provided by the City for refund of payments of general taxes, at any time after the amount of the assessment has been delivered to the County Assessor and entered upon the assessment books. The owner of any property assessed who may claim that the assessment is void in whole or in part may pay the same under protest. Such protest shall be in writing, shall be received by the City Clerk on or before March first after the tax became due and payable, and shall specify whether the whole or any part of the assessment is void and the grounds upon which such claim is founded. Such owner after such payment may recover the same in the manner and under the conditions provided in Section 39585 of the State Government Code. 
(Ord. 720; TCC-1, Sec. 12-12; Ord. No. 155, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 10, 11-17-09)  
PART 2 - LITTER 
 
4421 - LITTER 
No person shall throw, throw out, drop, deposit, place or leave any litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish in, on or upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place, any vacant lot, or any private property other than in any receptacle maintained for trash. 
(Ord. 472)  
4422 - DEPOSITING OF DIRT AND OTHER MATERIAL 
No person shall deposit, place or leave any earth, sand, gravel, rock or other inorganic material upon any property without prior written, express permission of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. No. 472)  
4423 - DEPOSITING OF UNSIGHTLY MATERIAL 
No person shall deposit, place or leave any earth, sand, gravel, rock or other inorganic material upon any property so as to constitute a public nuisance by reason of unsightliness, dust or other threat to public safety, health or well-being. 
(Ord. 472)  
CHAPTER 5 - ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES 
 
4501 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this chapter is to abate and remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private or public property as public nuisances by the authority granted by the State under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4502 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle to which possession, including all rights and title, has been relinquished; or a vehicle which has been left upon public or private property for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours without the express or impled consent of the owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property. 
"Administrative costs" means all costs including but not limited to the actual cost of removing a nuisance vehicle or parts thereof, staff time used to conduct inspections, perform research, prepare notices and letters, prepare documentation, postage, conduct hearings, process appeals, perform collection activities and coordinate towing. 
"Day" means a calendar day unless specified otherwise. 
"Designee" or "designated officer" means any code enforcement officer or other city staff as designated by the Director of Community Development. 
"Dismantled vehicle" means a vehicle which is partly or wholly dismantled in such a way as to render the vehicle unsafe or illegal to operate on any public street. 
"Disposition" or "final disposition" means that a vehicle shall be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler's yard, or other suitable site for processing as scrap. 
"Highway" means a street, way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
"Inoperative vehicle" means a vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power. 
"Property owner" means the owner of land upon which the vehicle is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Public property" means parks, squares, plazas, sidewalks, alleys, and all areas dedicated to public use for public purposes but not including highways. 
"Public nuisance" means a condition which is offensive, annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
"Street" means all that area dedicated to private or public use for private or public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, street or other area, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
"Vehicle owner" means the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle. 
"Wrecked" means any damage sustained to a vehicle which renders it unsafe or illegal to operate on any public street. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4503 - PROHIBITIONS 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof, which are in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private or public property within the city except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner to permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof, which are in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon his or her private property within the City except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4504 - EXCEPTIONS 
This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or parts thereof which are: 
(a)  Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from a street or other public or private property; 
(b)  Enclosed within a solid, view-obscuring fence not less than six (6) feet in height and is not plainly visible from a street, public property, and private property when effectively screened from view. 
(c)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk yard, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4505 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Community Development or designated officers. In the enforcement of this chapter such officers may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof after compliance with sections 4506 through 4510 of this chapter. Prior to entering enclosed private property, enforcement officers shall attempt to obtain the property owner's consent. If consent to enter enclosed private property for purposes of this section has been sought and refused, or facts and circumstances exist to justify a failure to seek such consent, an inspection warrant shall be obtained pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4506 - NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE 
(a)  A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be sent, by registered and/or certified mail, to the property owner and to the vehicle owner, unless the vehicle is in such a condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
(b)  The ten (10) day notice of intention to abate shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the property owner and the vehicle owner. The statement shall include notice that the property owner may appear in person at the hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle upon the subject property, with the reasons for such denial. 
(c)  A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate is not required if: 
(1)  The property owner and the vehicle owner have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof. 
(2)  All of the following apply: 
a.  The inoperable vehicles or parts thereof are located on property which is zoned for agricultural use or is not developed with a residence; 
b.  The vehicle or parts thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed; 
c.  The vehicle or parts thereof is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) by the investigating officer; 
d.  The investigating officer has determined that the vehicle or parts thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; 
e.  The property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
(3)  The motor vehicle is parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on any public property and lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment necessary to operate safely. 
(d)  Prior to final disposition of such a vehicle or parts thereof, the City shall provide notification by registered and/or certified mail to the registered and legal owner of the vehicle owner of intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts. If the vehicle or parts thereof are not claimed and removed from the scrap yard, automobile dismantler's yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, final disposition may proceed. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4507 - REQUEST FOR HEARING 
(a)  If a request for hearing is received from the property owner or vehicle owner within ten (10) days after mailing the notice of intention to abate, the City shall hold an administrative hearing on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof and assessment of costs. A sworn written statement from the property owner denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the subject property, shall serve as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the property owner. If a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing the notice, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a hearing. 
(b)  If a timely request for hearing is received the City shall provide notice of the hearing by registered or certified mail to the property owner and the vehicle owner, if identifiable, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. The owner of the vehicle shall be provided similar notice, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4508 - HEARINGS 
(a)  The Community Development Director or designee shall act as the hearing officer for all administrative hearings under this chapter. The hearing officer shall hear all pertinent facts and testimony which may include information on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(b)  The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as deemed appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter, including delaying the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if justified by the circumstances. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may order the vehicle or parts thereof removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided by the California Vehicle Code. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license plate number of the vehicle, if available. 
(c)  If an interest party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, written notification of the decision of the hearing officer shall be provided to the interested party within five (5) days following the decision. 
(d)  The hearing officer may impose a requirement that the land be posted with signs in such size and number to be determined by the hearing officer prohibiting dumping of vehicles or other material or trespassing on said land. Failure of the property owner to obey an order to post signs shall result in the liability of said property owner for the cost of removal of any vehicles found abandoned on said land after thirty (30) days from the date of any order in writing rendered by the hearing officer requiring the posting of said signs. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4509 - APPEALS 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 11, 11-17-09)  
4510 - ASSESSMENT OF CHARGES 
Charges shall be assessed based on the actual amount of administrative time expended and any cost of materials. 
City personnel or any private contractor authorized to abate the nuisance vehicle shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental and administrative expenses, of abating the nuisance vehicle(s) on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is performed and shall include an itemized accounting in writing to be included in the case file. The term "incidental and administrative expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City, including labor and material, in the preparation of notices, performing inspections, gathering property and vehicle owner information, time and materials expended in conducting an initial hearing or a hearing on appeal to the City Council, cost of legal fees expended in obtaining an inspection warrant or prosecuting a case through the City Attorney's office, costs for film processing, costs for towing, the costs of copying, printing and mailing. 
(a)  All administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle may be charged against the property owner unless an administrative hearing is held, and it is determined that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the property owner and the property owner has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, or with the consent of the property owner but subsequently abandoned without the consent of the property owner. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the property owner are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal, whichever is later, such costs may be sent to a collection agency, to the City Attorney for necessary legal action, or assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. An assessment on the property shall have the same priority as other taxes. 
(b)  If the hearing officer determines that the property owner is not responsible for administrative costs and the cost of removal, said costs may be billed to the vehicle owner. 
If the administrative costs and cost of removal of the vehicle are charged against the vehicle owner, a bill covering the charges shall be sent to the vehicle owner by the City Finance Director. If the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days after mailing, or the final disposition of an appeal, whichever is later, it may be transmitted to a collection agency or to the City Attorney for necessary legal action. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4511 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES 
(a)  An order for abatement and removal of a vehicle shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license plate number, if available. 
(b)  The City may have the vehicle or parts thereof disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler or suitable site for processing as scrap upon the last occurrence of the following: 
(1)  Immediately upon the expiration of the ten-day notice of intention to abate, provided there is no request for a hearing; or 
(2)  Five (5) business days after mailing of notice of an order to abate as determined at the administrative hearing, provided there is no appeal; or 
(3)  Immediately upon a ruling by the City Council to proceed with the abatement. 
(c)  After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4512 - NOTICE TO STATE AGENCIES 
(a)  Prior to the removal of any abandoned vehicle, the City shall give written notice to the nearest office of the California Highway Patrol of the identity of the vehicle and its location. 
(b)  Within five (5) days after removal of the vehicle, the City shall give written notice to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof and any evidence of registration including but not limited to license plates and registration and ownership certificates. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4513 - REGULATION NOT EXCLUSIVE 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City of Tustin. It shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the City of Tustin, the State or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.  
4514 - AUTHORITY TO ENTER PROPERTY FOR REMOVAL 
If the City Council or Police Department has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to perform such services, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
4515 - NO CITY LIABILITY 
Neither the City nor any contractor thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or parts thereof by removal pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1188, Sec. 2, 1-5-98)  
CHAPTER 6 - NOISE CONTROL 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, adopted July 21, 1980, amended Ch. 6 of Art. 4 to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of Section 4611, derived from Ord. No. 9; Ord. No. 239; Ord. No. 450, Secs. 1—3; and Ord. No. 469. 
 
4611 - DECLARATION OF POLICY 
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from incorporated areas of the city, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this chapter. 
It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest, therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to create, maintain or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80)  
4612 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below: 
(1)  "Ambient noise level." The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
(2)  "A-weighted sound level" (dB(A)). A quantity in decibels, read from a standard sound-level meter that is switched to the weighting network labeled "A." The A-weighted network discriminates against the lower frequencies according to a relationship approximating the auditory sensitivity of the human ear at moderate sound levels. 
(3)  "Commercial property." A parcel of real property which is developed and zoned either in part or in whole for commercial purposes, including, but not limited to retail and wholesale businesses, and professional offices, but excluding home occupation uses as authorized by Ordinance No. 330. 
(4)  "CNEL" (community noise equivalent level). A cumulative measure of community noise exposure for a twenty-four-hour day, using the A-weighting sound level and expressed in logarithmic units. This CNEL scale takes into account the single event sound level, single event duration, single event occurrence frequency, and the time of the occurrence of the noise source. Additionally, it applies weighting factors which place greater significance on noise events occurring in the nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) than on those during the evening (7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or daytime (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.), respectively. 
(5)  "Cumulative period." An additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
(6)  "Decibel" (dB). A unit which denotes the ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to power: The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of this ratio. 
(7)  "Dwelling unit." A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(8)  "Emergency machinery," "vehicle," or "work." Any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
(9)  "Fixed noise source." A stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
(10)  "Grading." Any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted at a site to prepare said site for construction or other improvements thereon. 
(11)  "Impact noise." The noise produced by the collision of one (1) mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest. 
(12)  "Industrial property." A parcel of real property which is developed and zoned either in part or in whole for manufacturing purposes, including research and development uses, but excluding home occupation cases as authorized by Ordinance No. 330. 
(13)  "Mixed use property." A parcel of real property which is developed or used for residential purposes and/or commercial purposes (including retail and wholesale businesses and professional offices) and/or manufacturing purposes (including research and development uses). 
(14)  "Mobile noise source." Any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
(15)  "Noise level." The "A" weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals per square meter. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A). 
(16)  "Noise variance board." An administrative board of five (5) members appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange, per Title 4, Division 6, Article 1 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange. 
(17)  "Person." A person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
(18)  "Property maintenance equipment." A mechanical blower, leafblower, lawn vacuum or parking lot sweeper which produces a current of air by mechanical, electrical, or other means to push, propel, or blow dirt, dust, leaves, grass clippings, trimmings, cuttings, refuse, and/or debris or any other appliance intended for the maintenance of landscaping on private property. 
(19)  "Residential property." A parcel of real property which is developed and zoned either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. 
(20)  "Simple tone noise." A noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. 
(21)  "Sound level meter." An instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(22)  "Sound pressure level" of a sound, in decibels, shall mean twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 845, Secs. 1—3, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1156, Sec. 1, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 1277, Sec. 2, 7-7-03)  
4613 - DESIGNATED NOISE ZONES 
The properties hereinafter described are hereby assigned the following noise zones: 
(a)  Noise Zone 1: All residential properties. 
(b)  Noise Zone 2: All commercial properties. 
(c)  Noise Zone 3: All industrial properties. 
(d)  Noise Zone 4: All special properties such as hospitals, convalescent homes, public and institutional schools, libraries and churches. 
(e)  Noise Zone 5: All mixed use properties. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 1277, Sec. 3, 7-7-03)  
4614 - EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
(a)  The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within a designated noise zone: 
EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise Zone 	Noise Level 	Time period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
	50 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.— 7:00 a.m. 
2 	60 dB(A) 	any time 
3 	70 dB(A) 	any time 
4 	55 dB(A) 	any time 
5 	60 dB(A) 	any time 
 
In the event the alleged offensive noise consists of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other property to exceed: 
(1)  The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The noise standard plus five (5) db(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour; or 
(3)  The noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or 
(4)  The noise standard plus fifteen (15) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one (1) minute in any hour; or 
(5)  The noise standard plus twenty (20) dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four (4) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 845, Secs. 4, 5, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1277, Sec. 4, 7-7-03)  
4615 - INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
(a)  The following interior noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all property within a designated noise zone: 
INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
Noise Zone 	Noise Level 	Time Period 
1 	55 dB(A) 	 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
	45 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.— 7:00 a.m. 
5 (residential uses only) 	55 dB(A) 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 
	45 dB(A) 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
 
In the event the alleged offensive noise consists of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property or mixed use property, to exceed: 
(1)  The interior noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour; or 
(2)  The interior noise plus five (5) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one (1) minute in any hour; or 
(3)  The interior noise standard plus ten (10) dB(A) for any period of time. 
(c)  In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two (2) noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 845, Sec. 6, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1277, Sec. 5, 7-7-03)  
4616 - SPECIFIC DISTURBING NOISES PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause to allow to be made or continued for any amount of time the following acts and things which are hereby declared to be unnecessary, excessive and annoying in violation of this article: 
(1)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers used for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in excess of the levels described in sections 4614 and 4615 which sound is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any commercial building or structure. 
(2)  Construction, repairing, remodeling or demolition and grading. The erection, demolition, alteration, repair, excavation, grading, paving or construction of any building or site is prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays and during all hours Sundays and city observed federal holidays. Trucks, vehicles and equipment that are making or are involved with material deliveries, loading or transfer of materials, equipment service, maintenance of any devices or appurtenances to any construction project in the City shall not be operated on or adjacent to said sites outside of the approved hours for construction activity. 
Exception: Construction activities may be permitted outside of those limitations identified in this subsection in the case of urgent necessity or upon a finding that such approval will not adversely impact adjacent properties and the health, safety and welfare of the community if a temporary exception is granted in writing by the Building Official for private property or by the Director of Public Works for public properties or their authorized representatives. All temporary waiver requests shall be made in writing and shall include the specific times, dates and locations requested and a description of the type of activity that is proposed. In granting a temporary exception, conditions may be imposed on construction activities to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. Any approval granted may be summarily revoked by the Building Official or Director of Public Works at the sole discretion of each official. Notice of such revocation shall be provided to the requestor, Police Department and project file. 
(3)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc., the operation of a pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, grading and excavating machinery, paving equipment, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise is prohibited between any and all hours on Sundays and city observed federal holidays, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays. 
Exception: In the case of urgent necessity and upon a finding that such approval will not adversely impact adjacent properties and the public health, safety and welfare of the community, the above regulations may be modified in writing by the Public Works Director for public property and by the Building Official for private property or their respective authorized representatives. All temporary waiver requests shall be made in writing and shall include the specific times, dates and locations requested and a description of the type of activity that is proposed. In granting a temporary exception, conditions may be imposed on construction activities to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. Any approval granted may be summarily revoked by the Building Official or Director of Public Works at the sole discretion of each official. Notice of such revocation shall be provided to the requestor, Police Department and project file. 
(4)  Property maintenance equipment. The use and operation of property maintenance equipment, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, is prohibited in residentially zoned areas any and all hours on Sundays and city observed federal holidays, before 7:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and before 9:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. In commercial and industrially zoned areas, the use of property maintenance equipment is prohibited any and all hours on Sundays and city observed federal holidays, before 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and before 9:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No property owner, lessee, gardener, property maintenance service, contractor, subcontractor, or employer shall permit or allow any person working at their direction to operate property maintenance equipment in violation of the provisions of this section. All debris generated by the use of property maintenance equipment shall be cleaned up and disposed of in accordance with section 4421 of this Code. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Public property maintenance is exempt from the provisions of this subsection (4). 
b.  The use of property maintenance equipment may be permitted outside of those limitations identified in subsection 4616 (4) in the case of necessity or upon a finding that such approval will not adversely impact adjacent properties and the health, safety, and welfare of the community if a temporary exception is granted in writing by the Building Official or the Building Official's authorized representatives. All temporary exception requests shall be made in writing and shall include the specific times and dates and locations requested and a description of the activity that is proposed. In granting a temporary exception, conditions may be imposed on the use of property maintenance equipment to protect the public health and safety. Any approval granted may be summarily revoked by the Building Official at the sole discretion of the Building Official. Notice of such revocation shall be provided to the requestor, Police Department and project file. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 845, Sec. 7, 5-18-81; Ord. No. 1083, Sec. 1, 4-21-92; Ord. No. 1143, Sec. 1, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 1156, Sec. 2, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 1197, Sec. 3, 3-16-98)  
4617 - EXEMPTIONS 
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
(a)  Activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college, public agency, and public utility. 
(b)  Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit (license/permit) issued by the City pursuant to Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Tustin City Code relative to the staging of said events. 
(c)  Activities conducted on any park or playground provided such park or playground is owned and operated by a public entity. 
(d)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work. 
(e)  Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, excluding city observed federal holidays. 
(f)  All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions. 
(g)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or any time on Sunday or a city observed federal holiday. 
(h)  Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application provided that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the Agricultural Commissioner. 
(i)  Noise sources associated with maintenance of real property provided said activities take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or city observed federal holidays, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday or city observed federal holidays. 
(j)  Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. 
(k)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance, repair, remodeling, grading and landscaping of residential real property performed by the owner, provided such activity does take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. This section does not authorize noise sources performed by independent building trades contractors. 
(l)  Noise sources associated with the maintenance and repair of personal property performed by the owner on the owner's residential property, provided such activity takes place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. This section does not authorize noise sources by independent repairmen or technicians. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 1143, Sec. 2, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 1156, Sec. 3, 10-16-95; Ord. No. 1197, Sec. 4, 3-16-98)  
4618 - SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, COURTS AND CHURCHES 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital, court, or church while the same is in use, to exceed the noise limits as specified in section 4614 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital, or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three (3) separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church, court, or hospital. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80)  
4619 - AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION 
During a one-year period following the effective date of Ordinance No. 828 the noise level standards as specified in Sections 4614 and 4615 shall be increased by eight (8) dB(A) where the alleged noise source is an air-conditioning apparatus or refrigeration system, which was installed prior to the effective date of said Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80)  
4620 - NOISE LEVEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA 
Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Section 4612. The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the dwelling unit affected by exterior noise. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four (4) feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the alleged offensive noise source and may be made with the windows of the affected unit open. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80)  
4621 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 1366, adopted Nov. 11, 2009, repealed Section 4621, which pertained to the manner of enforcement; adoption of Title 4, Division 6, Codified Ordinances of Orange County, and derived from Ord. No. 828, adopted July 21, 1980; and Ord. No. 845, adopted May 18, 1981.  
4622 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 1366, adopted Nov. 11, 2009, repealed Section 4622, which pertained to variance procedure, and derived from Ord. No. 828, adopted July 21, 1980.  
4623 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 1366, adopted Nov. 11, 2009, repealed Section 4623, which pertained to the noise variance board, and derived from Ord. No. 828, adopted July 21, 1980.  
4624 - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 1366, adopted Nov. 11, 2009, repealed Section 4624, which pertained to appeals and derived from Ord. No. 828, adopted July 21, 1980.  
4625 - VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANORS 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not prescribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 828, Sec. 1, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 845, Sec. 9, 5-18-81)  
CHAPTER 7 - MOBILE X-RAY UNITS 
 
4711 - REGULATIONS: SCOPE 
All mobile x-ray units shall comply with the requirements of the Radiation Control Law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 1)  
4712 - DEFINITIONS 
"Mobile X-ray Unit" means any x-ray generator which is, or can be, used for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photo-flurographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. 
"Mobile X-ray Operator" means any person, or other entity, who owns or legally possesses, or operates, a mobile x-ray unit. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 2)  
4713 - REGULATIONS: INVESTIGATION 
Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile x-ray unit within the City of Tustin shall make application to the County Health Officer on forms prescribed by him for issuance of a license. The County Health Officer shall cause to be conducted an investigation of said applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information: 
(a)  Whether or not said unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code. 
(b)  Whether or not said applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations, including those relating to the reporting to the Health Officer of abnormal x-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the State Department of Public Health. 
(c)  Whether the proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit. 
(d)  The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by said mobile unit as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Whether the applicant and his specified personnel are qualified by reason of training and experience to operate a mobile x-ray unit in such a manner as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life, and property. 
(f)  Whether the applicant's equipment, facilities, proposed uses and procedures are such as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property. 
(g)  Such other information as shall be required by the County Health Officer. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 3)  
4714 - REGULATIONS: LICENSE 
No license shall be granted, renewed, or reinstated unless the County Health Officer determines, upon completing his investigation, that the mobile x-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees, and the general public and that all operators of mobile x-ray equipment have been certified by the County Health Officer to operate same. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 4)  
4715 - REGULATIONS: DURATION 
License may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 5)  
4716 - REGULATIONS: CONDITIONS 
All mobile x-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the following conditions: 
(a)  No person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be x-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location of the mobile x-ray unit stating that no person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be x-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test. 
(b)  No pregnant women shall be x-rayed in a mobile x-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licenses practitioner of the healing arts. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile x-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be x-rayed. 
(c)  The mobile x-ray operator shall require all persons, before being x-rayed, to complete an information form showing the following: Name, age, sex, address, telephone number, the person's physician's name and address, if a female, whether pregnant, if under fifteen (15) years of age, whether the person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test. 
(d)  All x-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least ten (10) years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile x-ray operator a report of his x-ray findings within thirty (30) days. Every thirty (30) days, the operator shall submit to the Health Officer a report of the total number of x-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month. 
(e)  The mobile x-ray operator shall make x-ray films available for use by the physician of the person x-rayed, provided said person gives his consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such service. 
(f)  A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile x-ray unit stating essentially the following: "A chest x-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year." The County Health Officer shall have the right to determine the location, size, and wording of all required signs. 
(g)  The mobile x-ray operator shall give the County Health Officer notice at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance concerning proposed dates, times, and places of use of the unit. All such information will be forwarded by the County Health Officer to the City of Tustin. 
(h)  The name and address of the mobile x-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three (3) inches high. The name and address of the mobile x-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets, or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statements expressed or implied that the mobile x-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency. 
(i)  The mobile x-ray operation shall comply with all applicable City ordinances and resolutions while operating within the City of Tustin. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 6)  
4717 - REGULATIONS: OPERATION 
No mobile x-ray unit shall be operated unless the operator thereof has been licensed as hereinbefore provided. No mobile x-ray unit shall be operated by any person other than the applicant or the persons specified in his license. (Ord. No. 461, Sec. 7)  
CHAPTER 8 - CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT OF WELLS 
EDITOR'S NOTE: This Chapter was formerly Chapter 6, Article 8, and has been added to Chapter 8, Article 4, by Ordinance No. 770, Sec. 10 
 
4800 - PURPOSE 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to control the construction and reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of this City will not be impaired in quality and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people; and to provide for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances to the end that such wells will not impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this City. (Ord. No. 591)  
4801 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this Section. 
"Abandoned and Abandonment" shall apply to a well which has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner declares in writing, to the Well Standards Advisory Board of the County of Orange his intention to use the well again for supplying water or other associated purpose (such as an observation well or injection well) and receives approval of such declaration from the Board. All such declarations shall be renewed annually and holes and exploratory holes shall be considered abandoned twenty-four hours after construction work has been completed, unless otherwise approved by the Health Officer. 
"Agricultural Well" shall mean a water well used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called stock wells. 
"Cathodic Protection Well" shall mean any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection, electrically, of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as a cathodic protection well or a deep anode. 
"Community Water Supply Well" shall mean a water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part I of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Construct, Reconstruct (Construction, Reconstruction)" shall mean to dig, drive, bore, drill or deepen a well, or to reperforate, remove, replace, or extend a well casing. 
"Destruction" shall mean the proper filling and sealing of a well that is no longer useful so as to assure that the ground water is protected and to eliminate a potential physical hazard. 
"Electrical Grounding Well" shall mean any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet constructed by any method for the purpose of establishing an electrical ground. 
"Health Officer" shall mean the Health Officer or his designee. 
"Individual Domestic Well" shall mean a water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or commercial establishment. 
"Industrial Well" shall mean a water well used to supply an industry on an individual basis. 
"Observation Well" shall mean a well used for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality. 
"Permit" shall mean a written permit issued by the Health Officer permitting the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of a well. 
"Public Nuisance" when applied to a well, shall mean any well which threatens to impair the quality of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health or safety of the public. 
"Salt Water (Hydraulic) Barrier Well" shall mean a well used for extracting water from or injecting water into the underground as a means of preventing the intrusion of salt water into a fresh water bearing aquifer. 
"Test or Exploration Hole" shall mean an excavation used for determining the nature of underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means. 
"Well" shall mean any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, for providing cathodic protection or electrical grounding of equipment, for making tests or observations of underground conditions, or for any other similar purpose. Wells shall include, but shall not be limited to, community water supply wells, individual domestic wells, industrial wells, agricultural wells, cathodic protection wells, electrical grounding wells, test and exploratory holes, observation wells and salt water (hydraulic) barrier wells, as defined herein, and other wells whose regulation is necessary to fulfill the purpose of this Chapter as determined by the Well Standards Advisory Board. Wells shall not include: (a) oil and gas wells, geothermal wells or other wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; (b) wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments; or (c) other wells whose regulation is not necessary to fulfill the purpose of this Chapter as determined by the Well Standards Advisory Board. (Ord. No. 591)  
4802 - PERMITS 
a 
Permit Required 
No person shall, within City, construct or reconstruct any well unless such construction or reconstruction is carried out pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued for that purpose by the Health Officer as provided in this Chapter. 
Nor shall any such person abandon a well unless it has been destroyed pursuant to and in conformance with a written permit issued by the Health Officer. 
Nor shall any such person violate the terms of any order issued by the Well Standards Advisory Board or the Health Officer relative to wells. 
b 
Application for Permits 
Applications for permits shall be made to the Health Officer containing such information as he shall require. 
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established by the Board of Supervisors on the basis of the cost incurred in enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. Fifty percent (50%) of the fee shall be returned to the applicant should the permit be denied or if the permit is cancelled within sixty (60) days after issuance and no work has been done. A permit shall remain in effect for one year from date of issuance. 
Permits may be issued subject to any condition or requirement found by the Health Officer to be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
A permit may be cancelled or the conditions amended by the Health Officer if he determines that to proceed with the work would result in a public nuisance or the permit holder has violated the terms of the permit or this Chapter. 
c 
Completion of Work 
The permittee shall notify the Health Officer in writing upon completion of the work and no work shall be deemed to have been completed until such written notification has been received. A final inspection of the work shall be made by the Health Officer and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this Chapter or his permit until such inspection has been performed. 
d 
Notice of Cancellation or Denial 
In the event a permit is denied or cancelled, the applicant or permit holder shall be given written notice by the Health Officer, which notice shall specify the reasons for his action and shall notify the applicant or permit holder of his right to request a hearing before the Well Standards Advisory Board within ten days. (Ord. No. 591)  
4803 - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
a 
Notice of Public Nuisance 
In the event the Health Officer determines that a well constitutes a public nuisance, he shall mail a written notice to the landowner and the permit holder, if other than the landowner. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the affected property. The notice shall state the specific facts giving rise to such nuisance; the corrective measures deemed necessary; and time, date, and place at which a hearing shall be held by the Well Standards Advisory Board relating thereto, which date shall be not less than ten nor more than thirty days after the date such notice is mailed. The notice shall state that in the event the Board determines that a public nuisance exists a special assessment shall be imposed upon the land for any costs of abatement. 
b 
Immediate Abatement 
If the Health Officer finds that immediate action is necessary to prevent impairment of the ground water or a threat to the health or safety of the public, he may abate the nuisance without giving notice. Within twenty-four (24) hours after initiating such abatement, the Health Officer shall give notice of a hearing before the Well Standards Advisory Board in the manner prescribed in Subsection a above. 
c 
Board Hearing 
At the time fixed for the hearing the Well Standards Advisory Board shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the landowner, and by any other interested person. In the event the Board finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall direct the Health Officer to take any necessary action to protect the ground water or the health and safety of the public unless the situation is corrected by the landowner on or before a date to be specified by the Board. The costs of such corrective work by the Health Officer shall become a special assessment upon the land pursuant to Subsection d. 
If the Board finds that a permit was improperly denied or cancelled, it shall order the Health Officer to issue or reinstate such permit. 
d 
Abatement Costs a Special Assessment 
Upon a finding by the Well Standards Advisory Board that a well constitutes a public nuisance, all cost of abatement carried out under the terms of this Section shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon the parcel of land involved. If such costs are not paid within sixty (60) days, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Section 38773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary County taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes. The County shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (Ord. No. 591)  
4804 - STANDARDS 
Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, Chapter II, and future amendments thereto. Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction, or abandonment of cathodic protection wells shall be the standards recommended in the State Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1. Well standards may be modified by the Health Officer, with the advice and concurrence of the Well Standards Advisory Board, where required to cope with local geological and ground water conditions. (Ord. No. 628)  
CHAPTER 9 - WATER QUALITY CONTROL 
 
4900 - DEFINITIONS 
[As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
(a)  "Authorized inspector" shall mean the Director of Community Development (as used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires and persons designated by and under his/her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter). 
(b)  "City" shall mean the City of Tustin, Orange County, California. 
(c)  "Co-permittee" shall mean the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the twenty-five (25) municipalities, including the City of Tustin, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES Permit. 
(d)  "DAMP" shall mean the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  "Development project guidance" shall mean DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix thereto, entitled Best Management Practices for New Development Including Non-Residential Construction Projects, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(f)  "Discharge" shall mean any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance. 
(g)  "Discharge exception" shall mean the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only: 
Discharges composed entirely of storm water; Discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits, or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed; discharges to the storm water drainage system from potable water line flushing, fire fighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the storm water drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); discharges from potable water sources, passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, and other building roof runoff; agricultural irrigation water runoff; water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, non-commercial vehicle washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; discharges of reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility; public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the City; discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the extent feasible the amount of pollutants in such discharge; and discharges authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations. 
In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception. 
(h)  "Enforcing attorney" shall mean the City Attorney or District Attorney acting as counsel to the City and his/her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the District Attorney and/or City Attorney, or his/her designee, shall act as the Enforcing Attorney. 
(i)  "EPA" shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States. 
(j)  "Hearing officer" shall mean the Director of Public Works or his/her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein. 
(k)  "Invoice for costs" shall mean the actual costs and expenses of the City, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any Inspection conducted pursuant to Section 4903 of this chapter or where a Notice of Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance Order, or other enforcement option under Section 4904 of this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
(l)  "Illicit connection" shall mean any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet, or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the storm water drainage system occurs or may occur. The term illicit connection shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the storm water drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made. 
(m)  "Legal nonconforming connection" shall mean connections to the storm water drainage system existing as of the adoption of this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state, and local rules, regulations, statutes, and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to existing Chapter 9, Article 4 of the Tustin City Code, that is repealed as of the effective date of this chapter. 
(n)  "New development" shall mean all public and private residential (whether single family, multi-unit, or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other non-residential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit is required. 
(o)  "Non-residential plumbing permit" shall mean a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water, or domestic sewage. 
(p)  "NPDES permit" shall mean the currently applicable municipal discharge permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region. 
(q)  "Person" shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity, or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee, or representative of any of the above. 
(r)  "Pollutant" shall mean any liquid, solid, or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including and not limited to: 
1.  Artificial materials (such as floatable plastics, wood products, or metal shavings). 
2.  Household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics; cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers, and other common household equipment). 
3.  Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals, (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus, and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms. 
4.  Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease). 
5.  Animal wastes (such as Discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields). 
6.  Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity, or odor. 
7.  Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes, or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator, or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing). 
8.  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, or total organic carbon. 
9.  Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds. 
10.  Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and 
11.  Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state. 
(s)  "Prohibited discharge" shall mean any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property to: (i) the storm water drainage system; (ii) any upstream flow, which is tributary to the Storm Water Drainage System; (iii) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, or coastal slough; or (iv) any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include Discharges allowable under the discharge exception. 
(t)  "Significant redevelopment" shall mean the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single family, multi-unit, or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other non-residential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit is required. 
(u)  "State general permit" shall mean either the State General Industrial Storm Water Permit or the State General Construction Permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term "state general permit" shall also refer to any EPA administered storm water control program for industrial and construction activities. 
(v)  "Storm water drainage system" shall mean street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet, or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the County-wide storm water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, or any co-permittee City, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of storm water. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4901 - PROHIBITION ON ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Construct, maintain, operate, and/or utilize any illicit connection. 
(2)  Cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(3)  Act, cause, permit, or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(b)  The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following: 
(1)  For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of Discharge to the storm water drainage system, the expiration of five (5) years from the adoption of this chapter. 
(2)  For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the storm water drainage system, the expiration of six (6) months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter. 
(c)  A civil or administrative violation of this Section 4901(a) shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(d)  If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the thirty (30) day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty (30) day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the authorized inspector upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters. 
(2)  The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and 
(3)  The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. 
If a request for an extension of time for the use is denied, the owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection 4904(a)(6)—(10) for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4902 - CONTROL OF URBAN RUNOFF 
(a)  New Development and Significant Redevelopment 
(1)  All new development and significant development within the City shall be undertaken in accordance with: 
(A)  The DAMP, including but not limited to the development project guidance; and 
(B)  Any conditions and requirements established by the City Community Development Department and Public Works Department, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in storm water runoff from the project site. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance by the City of a grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the City Community Development Department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project in accordance with Subsection (a)(1). If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit, or non-residential plumbing permit, the City Community Development Department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project in accordance with Subsection (a)(1) prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the City's discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2), compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of a one (1) single family detached residence unless the City Community Development Department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the storm water drainage system. 
(4)  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter. 
(5)  If the City Community Development Department determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of storm water runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance. 
(6)  The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsection (a)(1) on a new development or significant redevelopment project. 
(i)  Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsection 4902(a)(1) on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  The City Community Development Department may require that the terms, conditions, and requirements imposed pursuant to Subsection 4902(a)(1) be recorded with the County Recorder's office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions, and requirements and a signature on behalf of the City shall not be required for recordation. 
(b)  Cost Recovery 
The City shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the City Community Development Department in the review of new development or significant redevelopment projects for compliance with the DAMP. The City Community Development Department may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4903 - INSPECTIONS 
(a)  Scope of Inspections 
(1)  Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
(2)  Entry to Inspect. The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain, or the storm water drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(3)  Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to: (i) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used, and materials stored on or contained within the property; (ii) identifying point of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems, and pollutants; (iii) investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems; (iv) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; (v) locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; and (vi) investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection. 
(4)  Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck, or other mobile equipment. 
(5)  Records Review. The authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. 
(6)  Sample and Test. The authorized inspector may inspect, sample, and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection, or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
(7)  Monitoring. The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
(8)  Test Results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4904 - ENFORCEMENT 
(a)  Administrative Remedies 
(1)  Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with this Section 4904. 
(A)  The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant, and/or person. 
(B)  The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant, and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed ninety (90) days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional ninety (90) days where good cause exists for the extension. 
(2)  Administrative Compliance Orders 
(A)  The authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection 4904(a)(5) of this chapter. The administrative compliance order may be issued to: 
(1)  The owner or occupant of any property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  The owner of property subject to terms, conditions, or requirements imposed on a project in accordance with Subsection 4902(a)(1) to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions, and requirements. 
(3)  Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge. 
(B)  The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements: 
(1)  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to eliminate an existing prohibited discharge or prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including but not limited to a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding, or storage area. 
(2)  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection. 
(3)  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff. 
(4)  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, State of California, or regional agency. 
(5)  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto. 
(3)  Cease and Desist Orders 
(A)  The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection 4904(a)(5) of this chapter. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to: 
(1)  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the storm water drainage system. 
(2)  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(3)  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter. 
(4)  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
(B)  The authorized inspector may direct by cease and desist order: (1) that the owner of any property or his successor in interest which property is subject to any conditions or requirement issued pursuant to Subsection 4902(a)(1): 
(1)  Immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements issued pursuant to Subsection 4902 (a)(1) of the applicable permit. 
(4)  Recovery of Costs. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee, or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with Subsection 4904(a)(5) of this chapter. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City for the actual costs incurred by the City in issuing and enforcing any notice or order. 
(A)  If any owner or occupant, permittee, or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with Subsection 4904(a)(6), then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings. 
(5)  Delivery of Notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order, or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following: 
(A)  The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in Subsection 4904(a)(6) through Subsection 4904(a)(10) of this chapter. 
(B)  Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: (a) personal service to the recipient; (b) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or (c) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt. 
(C)  Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the City. 
(D)  Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of ten (10) business days. 
(6)  Administrative hearing for notices of noncompliance, administrative compliance orders, invoices for costs, and adverse determinations. Except as set forth in Subsection 4904(a)(8), any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice pursuant to Subsection 4901(d), an invoice for costs, or a decision on a request for extension of legal nonconforming connection, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to court proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter, nor to civil penalties for violations of the Tustin City Code. 
(7)  Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing the notices, orders, invoices, or decisions listed in (6) above shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the Office of the City Clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the hearing officer, the authorized inspector, and the City Attorney. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within forty-five (45) business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted. 
(8)  Administrative Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held by the hearing officer within five (5) business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action. 
(9)  Hearing Proceedings. The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notices and actions described in (6) and (8) above, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. Except as set forth in Section 4901(g), the City shall have the burden of supporting its actions by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case. 
(10)  Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the hearing officer shall issue within ten (10) business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Subsections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety (90) days following issuance of the final decision. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded. 
Notwithstanding this Subsection 4904(a)(10), the final decision of the hearing officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five (5) business days following the conclusion of the hearing. 
(11)  City Abatement. In the event the owner of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee, or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, operator, permittee, or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition, and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to Subsection 4904(b)(4). 
(b)  Nuisance 
Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. 
(1)  Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring. 
(3)  Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the authorized inspector may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance, and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
(A)  An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment. 
(B)  Notwithstanding the authority of the City to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to Subsection 4904(a)(8) hereinabove shall follow the abatement action. 
(4)  Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the City in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses, and all other expenses recoverable under state law, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance. 
(5)  Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. 
At the direction of the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector, the enforcing attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the County Assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5. 
(c)  Criminal Sanctions 
(1)  Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Infractions. Pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 1121, any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the enforcing attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation occurring within one year. 
(3)  Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(d)  Consecutive Violations 
Pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 1121, each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order, or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. 
(e)  Non-exclusive Remedies 
Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Citations/Criminal Complaints 
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the authorized inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Sections 853.5, 853.6, and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the authorized inspector shall refer the matter to the enforcing attorney. 
Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this chapter that were violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least ten (10) business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the enforcing attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited. Upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector, the enforcing attorney may file a criminal complaint and seek an arrest warrant for any person violating any provision of this chapter. 
(g)  Violations of Other Laws 
Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter. 
(h)  Injunctions 
At the request of the Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector, the enforcing attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Order for Reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary, or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation, and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law. 
(i)  Other Civil Remedies 
(1)  The Director of Public Works or the authorized inspector may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: (i) all costs incurred in enforcement of the chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; (ii) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and (iii) damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
(2)  The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the storm water drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination, or harm to the environment, public property, or the storm water drainage system. 
(3)  The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4905 - INTERAGENCY COOPERATION 
(a)  The City intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over storm water discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying storm water regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) are met. 
(b)  The City may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits, and enforcement authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
4906 - MISCELLANEOUS 
Full compliance by any Person or entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into storm water and/or the protection of storm water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1275, Sec. 3, 11-17-03)  
CHAPTER 10 - WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Section 3 of Ord. No. 1477, adopted Mar. 21, 2017, amended Ch. 10 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 10 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of sections 4950—4956, and derived from Ord. 1457, adopted June 2, 2015. 
 
4950 - DECLARATION OF POLICY 
The California Water Code permits public entities which supply water at retail to adopt and enforce a water conservation program to reduce the quantity of water used by the people therein for the purpose of conserving the water supplies of such public entity. The City Council of the City of Tustin hereby establishes a comprehensive Water Conservation Program pursuant to the California Water Code based upon the need to conserve water supplies and to avoid or minimize the effects of any future shortages. This Chapter establishes regulations to be implemented during times of declared water shortages. It establishes four (4) stages of drought response actions to be implemented in times of shortage, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought conditions and decreasing available supplies. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4951 - APPLICATION 
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served by the City of Tustin water service. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4952 - AUTHORIZATION 
The City Manager and his or her designated representatives are hereby authorized and directed to implement the provisions of this Ordinance [Chapter]. Each "Enforcement Officer" as that term is used in Part 6 of Chapter 1 of Article 1 of the Tustin City Code are authorized to enforce this Chapter through administrative citation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1457, Sec. 4, 6-2-15)  
4953 - PERMANENT WATER USE RESTRICTIONS 
No customer of the City shall knowingly make, cause, use, or permit the use of water supplied by the City for residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, manufacturing, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner, or during a period of time, prohibited by this Chapter. AT NO TIME SHALL WATER BE WASTED OR USED UNREASONABLY. The following water use restrictions shall apply at all times except when reclaimed or recycled water is used. 
A.  Between April 1 and October 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be limited to four (4) days a week and is not permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Any high efficiency sprinkler nozzle that qualifies for a rebate from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and drip irrigation or a similar water efficient watering system shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes per irrigation station. All other irrigation is limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per irrigation station. Watering may only occur on Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. 
During the period from November 1 and March 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be further limited to three (3) days a week. Watering may only occur on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. 
B.  Irrigation of landscapes shall not occur during and forty-eight (48) hours following measureable precipitation. "Measureable precipitation" shall mean a one-quarter-inch or more of rainfall falling within the City of Tustin within any twenty-four-hour period. 
C.  No customer of the City shall water or irrigate any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, gutter or ditch. 
D.  Water shall not be used to wash down streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, pool decks, or other paved areas, except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards. Water shall not be used in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private or public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures. 
E.  Washing of autos, trucks, mobile homes, buses, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment shall be limited to quick rinses and be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle. Washing is permitted at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash. Further, such washing is exempted from these regulations where health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
F.  Watering parks, school grounds, public facilities, and recreational fields is not permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
G.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is prohibited unless the foundation or structure internally recycles the water it uses. 
H.  Restaurants shall not serve water to their customers except when specifically requested. 
I.  Hotels and motels must provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily and shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom. 
J.  All water leaks shall be repaired immediately. 
K.  Customers that utilize turf for beneficial public use may apply for an exemption from the permanent four-day watering restriction. A water management plan shall be provided that demonstrates specific actions that will be taken to manage potable water use. Irrigation schedules shall be in accordance with Section 4953A until the City has reviewed and approved the customer water management plan. 
Exemptions shall be revoked if customer does not comply with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4954 - WATER CONSERVATION STAGES 
The following stages of restrictions shall take effect upon declaration as provided in Section 4955: 
A.  STAGE 1 - VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE - WATER WATCH. 
STAGE 1 applies during periods when the City determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. The Declaration and Notice of the reduction required of City customers shall be in accordance with Section 4955. During STAGE 1, all permanent water use restrictions listed in Section 4953 shall remain in effect in addition to, and except as amended by, the following mandatory water conservation measures. These restrictions continue to apply except when reclaimed or recycled water is used. 
1.  Between April 1 and October 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be limited to three (3) days a week and is not permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Any high efficiency sprinkler nozzle that qualifies for a rebate from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and drip irrigation or a similar water efficient watering system shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes per irrigation station. All other irrigation is limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per irrigation station. Watering may only occur on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. 
During the period from November 1 and March 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be further limited to two (2) days. Watering may only occur on Tuesday and Saturday. 
2.  Customers that utilize turf for beneficial public use may apply for an exemption from the designated irrigation day provision of STAGE 1. A conservation plan shall be provided that demonstrates specific actions that will be taken to reduce potable water use. Designated irrigation days shall remain in effect until the City has reviewed and approved the customer conservation plan. 
Exemptions shall be revoked if customer does not comply with the approved plan. 
B.  STAGE 2 - MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER ALERT. 
STAGE 2 applies during periods when the City determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a mandatory consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. The Declaration and Notice of the reduction required of City customers shall be given in accordance with Section 4953. During STAGE 2, all permanent water use restrictions listed in Section 4953 and all provisions of STAGE 1 shall remain in effect or take effect in addition to, and except as amended by, the following mandatory water conservation measures. These restrictions continue to apply except when reclaimed or recycled water is used. 
1.  Between April 1 and October 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be limited to two (2) days a week and is not permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Any high efficiency sprinkler nozzle that qualifies for a rebate from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and drip irrigation or a similar water efficient watering system shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes per irrigation station. All other irrigation is limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per irrigation station. Watering may only occur on Tuesday and Saturday. 
During the period from November 1 and March 31, lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be further limited to one (1) day a week. Watering may only occur on Tuesday. 
2.  Agriculture users and commercial nurseries as defined in the Metropolitan Water District Code are exempt from STAGE 2 irrigations, but will be required to curtail all non-essential water use. 
3.  The "dump and fill" practice of swimming pool maintenance is prohibited. Pools may be topped off to prevent damage to pump and filter equipment. 
4.  Customers that utilize turf for beneficial public use may apply for an exemption from the designated irrigation day provision of STAGE 2. A conservation plan shall be provided that provides specific actions that will be taken to reduce potable water use by the amount required by the State Water Resources Control Board. Designated irrigation days shall remain in effect until the City has reviewed and approved the customer conservation plan. Exemptions shall be revoked if required conservation amounts are not met. 
5.  Exceptions: The restrictions in STAGE 2, subsections 1 through 5 above are not applicable to that use of water necessary for public health and safety or for essential governmental services such as police, fire and other similar emergency services, or when the use is necessary to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a City, state or federal agency. 
C.  STAGE 3 - MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER WARNING. STAGE 3 applies during periods when the City determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a further consumer demand reduction is necessary beyond that which is likely to be achieved through STAGE 2 restrictions, in order to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Declaration and Notice of the reductions required of City customers shall be given in accordance with Section 4955. During STAGE 3, all permanent water use restrictions listed in Section 4953 and all provisions of STAGES 1 and 2 shall remain in effect or take effect in addition to, and except as amended by, the following mandatory water conservation measures. These restrictions continue to apply except when reclaimed or recycled water is used. 
1.  Lawn watering and landscape irrigation will be limited to one (1) day a week and is permitted only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Any high efficiency sprinkler nozzle that qualifies for a rebate from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California and drip irrigation or a similar water efficient watering system shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes per irrigation station. All other irrigation is limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per irrigation station. Watering may only occur on Tuesday. 
2.  Washing of autos, trucks, mobile homes, buses, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. Washing is permitted at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash. The use of water by all types of commercial car washes not using partially reclaimed or recycled water shall be reduced in volume by twenty (20) percent. Further, such washings are exempted from these regulations where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
3.  Agricultural users and commercial nurseries shall use water only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and may be subject to additional restrictions if the state, regional or local agency or jurisdiction deems necessary. The City will make a good faith effort to inform agricultural users and commercial nurseries of any such restrictions. Monetary penalties will be passed through to agricultural customers, if assessed by the State Water Resources Control Board, Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, or Municipal Water District of Orange County. 
4.  The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is prohibited at all times, even when recycled water is used. 
5.  Construction water shall not be used for earthwork or road construction purposes unless authorized as a mitigation or erosion control, compaction or backfilling earthwork or as required by the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) Control Measure F-4. 
6.  The use of water for commercial, industrial, institutional, manufacturing or processing purposes shall be essential use only. All outdoor irrigation is prohibited. 
7.  Filling of uncovered pools is prohibited. 
8.  Customers that utilize turf for beneficial public use may apply for an exemption from the designated irrigation day provision of STAGE 3. A conservation plan shall be provided that demonstrates specific actions that will be taken to reduce potable water use. Designated irrigation days shall remain in effect until the City has reviewed and approved the customer conservation plan. Exemptions shall be revoked if required conservation amounts are not met. 
9.  Exceptions: The restrictions in STAGE 3, subsections 1 through 7 above are not applicable to that use of water necessary for public health and safety or for essential governmental services such as police, fire and other similar emergency services, or when the use is necessary to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a City, state or federal agency. 
D.  STAGE 4 - MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER EMERGENCY. STAGE 4 applies when the City determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a further consumer demand reduction is necessary beyond that which is likely to be achieved through STAGE 3 restrictions, in order to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions, or a major failure of any supply or distribution facility, whether temporary or permanent, occurs in the water distribution system of the State Water Project, Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, Municipal Water District of Orange County, East Orange County Water District or City facilities. Notice of the reduction required of City customers shall be promptly given in accordance with Section 4955. During STAGE 4, all permanent water use restrictions listed in Section 4953 and all provisions of STAGES 1, 2 and 3 shall remain in effect or take effect in addition to, and except as amended by, the following additional mandatory water conservation measures. These restrictions shall continue to apply except when reclaimed or recycled water is used: 
1.  All outdoor irrigation of vegetation is prohibited. 
2.  Washing of autos, trucks, mobile homes, buses, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. Washing is permitted at any time upon the immediate premises of a commercial car wash. The use of water by all types of commercial car washes shall be reduced in volume by fifty (50) percent. Further, such washings are exempted from these regulations where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
3.  Filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes is prohibited. 
4.  Watering of parks, school grounds, public facilities and recreation fields is prohibited with the exception of plant materials classified to be rare, exceptionally valuable, or essential to the wellbeing of rare animals. 
5.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting or related activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
6.  Use of water for agricultural or commercial nursery purposes, except for livestock watering, is prohibited. 
7.  New construction meters or permits for unmetered service will not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes, except to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public or as required by the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) Control Measure F-4. 
8.  The use of water for commercial, industrial, institutional, manufacturing or processing purposes shall be reduced in volume by fifty (50) percent and limited to off-peak hours, whichever is greater. 
9.  No water shall be used for air conditioning purposes. 
10.  Exceptions: The restrictions in STAGE 4 subsections 1 through 9 above are not applicable to that use of water necessary for public health and safety or for essential governmental services such as police, fire and other similar emergency services, or when the use is necessary to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a City, state or federal agency. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4955 - MANDATORY CONSERVATION PHASE IMPLEMENTATION 
A.  The City shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by its customers on a daily basis. 
B.  The City Manager shall determine the extent of the conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation stages in order for the City to prudently plan for the supply water to its customers and/or to comply with regulations and/or restrictions implemented by the State Water Resources Control Board, Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, Municipal Water District of Orange County, or East Orange County Water District. Thereafter, the City Manager may order that the appropriate stage of water conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable provision of this Ordinance. 
C.  The declaration of any STAGE shall be made by public announcement and notice shall be published a minimum of once per week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. The stage designated shall become effective immediately upon announcement. 
D.  The declaration of any STAGE shall be reported to the City Council at its next regular meeting. The City Council shall thereupon ratify the declaration, rescind the declaration, or direct the declaration of a different stage. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4956 - FAILURE TO COMPLY 
A.  Each day a violation of this Chapter occurs is a separate offense subject to a separate fine. 
B.  Following a declaration of a STAGE 1, STAGE 2, STAGE 3 or STAGE 4 condition, administrative citations shall be issued to violators of the applicable restrictions of such STAGE. Administrative citations shall be issued in accordance with the procedures set forth in Part 6 of Chapter 1 of Article 1 of the Tustin City Code. 
C.  The first violation of this Chapter by any violator shall subject the violator to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Upon a second violation of any provision of this Chapter within one (1) year from the date of the first violation, the violator shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Upon a third and each subsequent violation of any provision of this Chapter within one (1) year from the date of the first violation, the violator shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
D.  Upon the fifth violation of any provision of this Chapter within any two-year period, the City may install a flow restricting device in the customer's water service line for a period not less than forty-eight (48) hours and until the customer satisfies the City that the failure to comply will not continue. In addition to demonstrating to the City's satisfaction that the failure to comply will not continue, the customer shall pay all applicable fines prior to removal of the flow restricting device. 
E.  For the sixth and each subsequent violation of any provision of this Chapter within any two-year period, the City may discontinue water service for a period of not less than twenty-four (24) hours and until the customer satisfies the City that the failure to comply will not continue. In addition to demonstrating to the City's satisfaction that the failure to comply will not continue, the customer shall pay all applicable fines and service charges for restoration of service prior to the restoration of water service. 
F.  Nothing herein limits the availability of any other civil or criminal remedy, sanction, penalty, fine, or order, that is authorized, or that may hereafter be authorized, for violation of the Tustin City Code, or for violation of any Federal or State law. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4957 - REGULATORY FINE RECOVERY 
To the extent that a City water customer causes or contributes to causing a regulatory agency to levy a fine against the City resulting from that customer's violations of one (1) or more provisions of this Chapter, the customer shall, within thirty (30) days of mailing of written demand from the City, reimburse the City for the fine, or such portion of the fine as such customer contributed to causing, and associated administrative costs, if any. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
4958 - APPEAL PROCEDURES 
A.  Appeals of any administrative citations or other, fine, penalty, or notice issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in Part 6 of Chapter 1 of Article 1 of the Tustin City Code. 
B.  A declaration of any water conservation STAGE may be appealed by any individual and may be appealed only to the City Council. An appeal of a declaration of water conservation STAGE shall be filed with the City Clerk during normal business hours within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the declaration and shall be accompanied by a deposit or fee as required by City Council resolution or ordinance. Any such appeal shall be made in writing and shall specify the declaration appealed from, the specific action or relief sought by the appellant in the appeal, and the reasons why the declaration should be modified or reversed. Filing of a written appeal shall not stay the effective date of a declaration. A hearing date shall be set within sixty (60) calendar days of filing of the appeal for the City Council to decide whether a sufficient basis exists for the existing declaration of the water conservation STAGE, or if a different STAGE should be declared. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may uphold, modify or reverse the declaration, or may decide to take no further action on the appeal. A decision of the City Council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 3, 3-21-17)  
CHAPTER 11 - UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 
 
4960 - PURPOSE 
The operation of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), commonly known as drones, can at times pose a hazard to full-scale aircraft in flight and to persons and property on the ground. Imposing community-based safety requirements and restrictions on the operation of UAS that do not preempt federal aviation rules or authority, or state law, is necessary to mitigate such risks and to protect the public from the hazards associated with the operation of UAS. 
(Ord. No. 1488, Sec. 11-21-17)  
4961 - DEFINITIONS 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of the following words and phrases used in this chapter. 
Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) or Drone means an aircraft without a human pilot onboard, that is controlled from an operator on the ground, and operates without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or joint venture. 
Visual Line of Sight means that the operator has an unobstructed view of the UAS. The operator must use his or her own natural vision (which includes vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to observe the UAS. People other than the operator may not be used in lieu of the operator for maintaining visual line of sight. The use of vision-enhancing devices, such as binoculars, night vision goggles, powered vision magnifying devices, and goggles or other devices designed to provide a "first-person view" from the UAS do not constitute visual line of sight of the operator. 
Public UAS means a UAS that is used or operated on behalf of any government agency that meets the qualifications as defined in Section 40102 of Title 49 of the United States Code to operate a public aircraft, including, but not limited to, the Tustin Police Department, Orange County Sheriff/Coroner, Orange County Fire Authority, or any other Federal, State and local government agency. 
(Ord. No. 1487, Sec. 1, 11-7-17)  
4962 - PROHIBITED OPERATIONS 
(a)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS outside of the person's visual line of sight, 
(b)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within twenty-five (25) feet of another individual, except the operator or the operator's designee. 
(c)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS on private property without the written or electronic consent of the property owner, if the property owner is a person other than the UAS operator. UAS operators must have on their possession a copy of the written or electronic consent from the owner of the property, or properties, upon which they takeoff or land a UAS. 
(d)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within one hundred (100) feet of any City-permitted and/or City-sponsored public event unless granted written or electronic permission by the City. UAS operators must have on their possession a copy of the written or electronic consent from the City when they takeoff or land a UAS within one hundred (100) feet of any City-permitted and/or City-sponsored public event. 
(e)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within one thousand five hundred (1500) horizontal feet of any aircraft, including any UAS. 
(f)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS that has any type of weapon attached to it. 
(Ord. No. 1487, Sec. 1, 11-7-17)  
4963 - NO RECKLESS ENDANGERMENT 
No person shall takeoff or land a UAS in a reckless manner so as to create a substantial risk of serious physical injury to any person or substantial risk of damage to the property of another. 
(Ord. No. 1487, Sec. 1, 11-7-17)  
4964 - TIME, PLACE AND MANNER RESTRICTIONS 
(a)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any emergency vehicle that is operating with lights and/or sirens. 
(b)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any active law enforcement or emergency response incident. 
(c)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS in violation of any Temporary Flight Restriction or Notice to Airmen issued by the FAA. 
(d)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within one hundred (100) feet of a school facility without prior notification and written or electronic authorization of school officials. UAS operators must have on their possession a copy of the written or electronic authorization from the school when they takeoff or land a UAS within one hundred (100) feet of the school. 
(e)  No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any county or City-owned jails, holding facilities, law enforcement facility, or within one hundred (100) feet of any designated publicly owned building chosen by the City. The designation of publicly-owned buildings subject to this subsection shall be at the discretion of the City Manager. The addresses of all properties described in this subsection shall be available for viewing by the public at the City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 1487, Sec. 1, 11-7-17)  
4965 - EXEMPTION 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to any public UAS. 
(b)  This chapter shall not apply to any UAS weighing less than 0.55 lb.  
4966 - [RESERVED]  
4667 - VIOLATION—PENALTY 
In addition to any other penalty or remedy set forth in the Tustin City Code (including all remedies available under Chapter 1 of Article 1 of the Tustin City Code) or set forth under State or Federal law, any person violating this Part shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or portion thereof that a person permits a violation of this chapter to continue shall constitute a separate and subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 1487, Sec. 1, 11-7-17)  
ARTICLE 5 - PUBLIC SAFETY REPEALED BY SECTION 1 OF ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013  
CHAPTER 2 - DISASTER EMERGENCY SERVICES 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1084, Sec. 1, adopted May 18, 1992, amended Ch. 2 Disaster Emergency Services in its entirety to read as set forth in 5200 through 5209. Prior to amendment, Ch. 2 was derived from Ord. No. 189; Ord. No. 647; and Ord. No. 648. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1235, Sec. 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2001, amended Ch. 2 in its entirety. Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 1436, adopted Aug. 5, 2014, amended Ch. 2 in its entirety. Former Ch. 2 consisted of sections 5200 through 5207. 
 
5200 - PURPOSE 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City of Tustin in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5201 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
"Emergency." Included within the term "emergency" are the three (3) degrees of emergency enumerated in the California Emergency Services Act, Section 8558 of the Government Code. 
a.  "State of war emergency" means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. 
b.  "State of emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a "state of war emergency," which conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat. 
c.  "Local emergency" means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
d.  "Emergency plans" means those official and approved documents which describe the principles and methods to be applied in carrying out emergency operations or rendering mutual aid during emergencies. These plans include such elements as continuity of government, the emergency services of governmental agencies, mobilization of resources, mutual aid, and public information. 
e.  "Emergency services" means the organized preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions for which the City of Tustin would normally be responsible in order to prevent, minimize, or repair the injury and damage resulting from any disaster, actual or threatened, against personnel, land, or buildings, such as extraordinary fire, flood, earthquake, epidemic, riot, major explosion or other similar public calamity. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5202 - DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP 
The Tustin Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
a.  The Mayor, who shall be Chair. 
b.  The Director of Emergency Services who shall be vice chair. 
c.  The Chief of Police. 
d.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with the advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5203 - DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES 
It shall be the duty of the Tustin Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chair or, in his absence, upon call of the Vice Chair. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5204 - DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES 
a.  The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services. 
b.  The Chief of Police shall be the Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5205 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES 
a.  The Director of Emergency Services is empowered to: 
1.  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
5.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, the Director is hereby empowered: 
i.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; 
ii.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and 
iii.  To bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
iv.  To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the County in which the City is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster services workers; 
v.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of City departments or agencies; and 
vi.  To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any ordinance, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
b.  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform duties during an emergency. 
c.  The Assistant Emergency Services Director shall, under the supervision of the Director of Emergency Services and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5206 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 5205(a)(6)(iii) of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5207 - EMERGENCY PLAN 
The Tustin Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Tustin Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5208 - EXPENDITURES 
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Tustin. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
5209 - PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
a.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter. 
b.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
c.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. 
(Ord. No. 1436, § I, 8-5-14)  
CHAPTER 3 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS  
PART 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
5310 - ADOPTION OF 1964 UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 
The Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition, adopted by the League of California Cities, is hereby adopted as herein amended and set forth. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1)  
5311 - DEFINITION OF WORDS AND PHRASES 
The following words and phrases when used in this Chapter shall for the purpose of this Chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Chapter. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
"Central Traffic District" shall mean all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Tustin City Limits. 
"Coach" shall mean any motor bus or motor coach used as a common carrier of passengers. 
"Council" shall mean the Council of the City of Tustin. 
"Curb" shall mean the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights of way of public utility companies. 
"Divisional Island" shall mean an island located in the roadway, delineated by curbs, lines or other markings on the roadway not less than two (2) feet in width, and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
"Holidays" shall mean all legal State Holidays as defined in the Code of the State of California. 
"Loading Zone" shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, and designated by painted curbs or signs. 
"Official Time Standard" shall mean, whenever certain hours are named herein, the standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this City. 
"Parkway" shall mean that portion of right-of-way between the property line and the curb line excluding the paved sidewalk. 
"Parking Meter" shall mean a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
"Passenger Loading Zone" shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers and designated by painted curbs or signs. 
"Peace Officer" shall be defined as outlined in Chapter 4.5 of the California Penal Code. 
"Recreation Vehicle" shall mean all recreation vehicles, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18010. 
"Vehicle" shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
"Vehicle Code" shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 1, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 889, Sec. 1, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 968, Sec. 3, 5-19-86)  
5312 - POLICE ADMINISTRATION 
a 
Traffic Section 
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a traffic section to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the Chief of Police. 
b 
Duty of Traffic Section 
It shall be the duty of the traffic section, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of this City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said section by this Chapter and the traffic ordinances of this City. 
c 
Traffic Accident Studies 
Whenever the traffic accidents or traffic violations at any particular location become numerous, the traffic section shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
d 
Traffic Section to Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report 
The traffic section shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council. Such a report shall contain information on the traffic matters in this City as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the section for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 2, 2-5-79)  
5313 - ENGINEERING ADMINISTRATION 
a 
City Traffic Engineer 
The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The City Traffic Engineer shall be appointed by the City Administrator and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this Chapter and in the traffic ordinances of this City. Whenever the City Traffic Engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
b 
Duties of City Traffic Engineer 
It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City. Whenever, by the provisions of this Chapter a power is granted to the City Traffic Engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1)  
5314 - ADVISORY TRAFFIC COMMITTEE 
a 
Traffic Committee 
There is hereby established an advisory traffic committee, consisting of the City Traffic Engineer, the Chief of Police or his designee, a member of the City Council and a representative each from the City Engineer's Office and such number of other City officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the Mayor. The chairman of the committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and may be removed by him. 
b 
Duties of Traffic Committee 
It shall be the duty of the traffic committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of this City having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and to recommend to the legislative body of this City and to the City Traffic Engineer, the Chief of Police and other City officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 3, 2-5-79)  
5315 - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
a 
Authority of Police and Fire Department Officials 
Officers of the Police Department and such officers or persons as are assigned by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this Chapter or the Vehicle Code. 
b 
Persons Other Than Officials Shall Not Direct Traffic 
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Traffic Engineer. 
c 
Obstruction or Interference with Police or Authorized Officers 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this Chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
d 
Exemption of Certain Vehicles 
(1)  The provisions of this Chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this Section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
(2)  The provisions of this Chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle owned or operated by the United States postal service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
e 
When Vehicles May Be Removed From Streets 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer or other employee or officer of the Police Department of this City designated by separate ordinance may remove or cause to be removed: 
(1)  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours, when properly tagged and marked. 
(2)  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
(3)  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal. 
(4)  Dismantled vehicles [parked or left standing] in excess of twelve (12) hours. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 4, 2-5-79)  
PART 2 - TRAFFIC MOVEMENT 
 
5320 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
a 
Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(3)  The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this Chapter or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. 
b 
Traffic Control Signs Required for Enforcement Purposes 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this Chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
c 
Installation of Traffic Signals 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard in accordance with the uniform standards prescribed by the California Department of Transportation. 
(2)  The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigations, traffic counts, and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any said intersection. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 5, 2-5-79) 
d 
Lane Marking 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 6, 2-5-79) 
e 
Distinctive Roadway Markings 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the California Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 7, 2-5-79) 
f 
Authority to Remove, Relocate and Discontinue Traffic Control Devices 
The Council shall authorize the City Traffic Engineer to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any major traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this Chapter whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 8, 2-5-79) 
g 
Traffic Control Devices: Hours of Operation 
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this Chapter. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 9, 2-5-79) 
h 
Unauthorized Painting of Curbs 
No person, unless authorized, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 10, 2-5-79)  
5321 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
a 
Authority to Place Turning Markers 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers or vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
b 
Authority to Place Restricted Turn Signs 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
c 
Signal Controlled Intersections—Right Turns 
The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this Section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with this safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 12, 2-5-79)  
5322 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1)  
5323 - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 
a 
The City Traffic Engineer to Erect Stop Signs 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one (1) or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs in accordance with the standards of the California Department of Transportation. 
b 
Stop at Through Street or Stop Sign 
(1)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this Section. 
(2)  The provision of this Section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution of the Council. 
c 
Emerging from Alley, Driveway or Building 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 13, 2-5-79)  
5324 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
a 
Driving Through Funeral Procession 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade traffic wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department. 
b 
Clinging to Moving Vehicle 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on, or hold onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
c 
Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on, or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this Section a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one (1) ton. 
d 
Riding or Driving on Sidewalk 
No person shall ride, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area be substantially protected as directed by the City Traffic Engineer, and under conditions directed in writing by the City Traffic Engineer. 
e 
New Pavement and Markings 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
f 
Obedience to Barriers and Signs 
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City. 
g 
No Entrance Into Intersection That Would Obstruct Traffic 
No person shall drive a vehicle into an intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle they are operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians in such intersection or crosswalk notwithstanding any official traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
h 
Limited Access 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 14, 2-5-79)  
5325 - PEDESTRIANS REGULATIONS 
a 
Traffic Engineer to Establish Marked Crosswalks 
Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock and shall be accompanied by a pedestrian activated traffic signal, if determined necessary by the City Traffic Engineer. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 15, 2-5-79) 
b 
When Pedestrians Must Use Crosswalks 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1) 
c 
Pedestrians in Street 
No person shall stand, walk or otherwise be in any roadway, except: 
(1)  When crossing a roadway in a reasonable, direct manner, and not in interference with any vehicle; or 
(2)  While entering or leaving, in a reasonable and direct manner, a vehicle properly parked in a roadway. 
This Section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily in a roadway, in the line of duty. (Ord. No. 449)  
PART 3 - STOPPING AND PARKING 
 
5330 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING IN GENERAL 
a 
Application of Regulations 
The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 16, 2-5-79) 
b 
Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
c 
Traffic Engineer to Maintain No Stopping Zones and No Parking Areas 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this Chapter. 
When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
d 
No Parking Areas 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(2)  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(3)  In any area where the City Traffic Engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(4)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(5)  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(6)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property. 
(7)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(8)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(9)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. 
e 
Leaving Vehicle Parked on Street in Excess of Seventy-Two Hours Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park or store such vehicle upon any public street or dedicated alley for a consecutive period of more than seventy-two (72) hours. The term "store" for purposes of this subsection is defined as the parking or leaving unattended any vehicle in one location for the period described in this Section. The term "one location" shall include any movement or relocation or re-parking of such vehicle within two tenths (.2) of a mile from any prior parking location used within the preceding seventy-two (72) hour period. 
In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or alley in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours and is not moved as required by this section, any member of the Police Department authorized by the Chief of Police may remove the vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of California Vehicle Code Section 22650, et seq. (Ord. No 786, Sec. 17, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 968, Sec. 2, 5-19-86; Ord. No. 1066, Sec. 1, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 1250, Sec. 2, 11-19-01) 
f 
Parking for Demonstration 
No operator of any vehicle shall park shall vehicle upon any street in this City advertising or displaying it for sale, unless authorized by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. No. 370. Sec. 2, 11-6-67) 
g 
Repairing or Greasing Vehicles on Public Streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street, [allowing] one (1) hour for private vehicles and two (2) hours for commercial vehicles. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 18, 2-5-79) 
h 
Washing or Polishing Vehicles 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City, when a charge is made for such service. 
i 
Parking Adjacent to Schools 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(2)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
j 
Use of Streets for Storing Wide Vehicles Prohibited. 
No person shall store any vehicle with a width of eighty (80) inches or more on any public street or dedicated alley. The term "store," for purposes of this subsection, shall mean continuously parking such vehicle on any public street or dedicated alley within the same two (2) mile radius for a consecutive period of more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
Any violation of this subsection shall be deemed an infraction, punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), and a third and subsequent violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 1250, Sec. 3, 11-19-01) 
k 
Nonmotorized Vehicles, Trailers, and Campers 
No person shall at any time park or leave standing any nonmotorized vehicle, trailer, or camper, regardless of width or length, when it has been detached from its motor vehicle on any public street or dedicated alley, except for purposes of loading or unloading and for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. No. 1250, Sec. 4, 11-19-01) 
l 
Unlawful Parking; Peddlers, Vendors 
(1)  (Repealed by Ord. No. 1274) 
(2)  (Repealed by Ord. No. 1274) 
(3)  No persons shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon or other device used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(4)  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this Section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart or other device on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this Section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City Traffic Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 19, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 1274, Sec. 3, 4-21-03) 
m 
Emergency Parking Signs 
(1)  Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic Engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic Engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the City Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(2)  When signs authorized by the provisions of this Section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
n 
Reserved. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 20, 2-5-79)  
5331 - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
a 
Twenty-Four Minute Parking 
Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 24 minutes. 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation thereof. (Ord. No. 570) 
b 
Forty Minute Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than 40 minutes. (Ord. No. 570) 
c 
One Hour Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. No. 570) 
d 
Two Hour Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. No. 570) 
e 
Four Hour Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than four hours. 
f 
Eight Hour Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than eight hours. 
g 
Twelve Hour Parking 
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof and indicating the hours and days when in effect, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for a period of time longer than twelve hours. 
h 
Parking Parallel on One-Way Streets 
(1)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(2)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(3)  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(4)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this Section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
i 
Diagonal Parking 
On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except: 
(1)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
(2)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6) inches of said curb. 
The provisions of this Section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 5331e of this Chapter shall be complied with. 
j 
Parking Space Markings 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
k 
No Stopping Zones 
The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no stopping zones. 
l 
Reserved. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 21, 2-5-79) 
m 
Curb Parking Right-of-Way 
For the purpose of this Section a curb parking space shall be an area open for lawful parking alongside or adjacent to a curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two or more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time. Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at said parking space prior to any vehicle other than his, and who proceeds beyond said space a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet measured at the rear bumper, for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way over any person driving, or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly into such curb parking space, and driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to the driver first arrived at said parking space. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 885, Sec. 1, 5-2-83) 
n 
Parking by Permit Only 
The following area(s) have been designated to require a special parking permit to park vehicles on the streets between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., seven (7) days a week. 
(1)  Heatherfield Drive and Sandwood Place between Mitchell Avenue and Cloverbrook Drive. 
(2)  Rosalie Place and Quent Drive. 
(3)  Cindy Lane and Letty Lane. (Ord. No. 985, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 1131, 7-18-94; Ord. No. 1165, 4-1-96) 
(4)  Cloverbrook Drive. (Ord. No. 1236, 5-21-01) 
(5)  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1494, Sec. II, 3-20-18) 
(6)  Lorelei Lane; and Myrtle Avenue, Medallion Avenue, California Street, Pacific Street, and Corla Avenue, north of McFadden Avenue. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 20, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 1244, 10-1-01; Ord. No. 1247, 11-5-01; Ord. No. 1494, Sec. II, 3-20-18) 
(7)  South side of Mitchell Avenue between Heatherfield Drive and Browning Avenue. (Ord. No. 1266, 3-3-03) 
(8)  Copperfield Drive between Red Hill Avenue and Sandbrook Drive. (Ord. No. 1362, Sec. II, 4-7-09) 
(9)  Sandfield Place between Browning Avenue and Fernbrook Drive. (Ord. No. 1363, Sec. II, 2-16-10) 
(10)  Debusk Lane; Raleigh Place; Walter Avenue; and Del Amo Avenue between Nisson Road and Mitchell Avenue. (Ord. No. 1447, Sec. II, 10-7-14) 
(11)  Carfax Avenue and Utt Drive between Mitchell Avenue and Nisson Road; Charloma Drive and Woodlawn Avenue between Veeh Drive and Nisson Road; North side of Mitchell Avenue between Carfax Avenue and Utt Drive; and Veeh Drive. (Ord. No. 1455, Sec. II, 6-2-15) 
(12)  Almside Drive, Atherton Lane, Birmingham Place, Denbigh Lane, Foresterra Lane, Grassmere Lane, Hamlet Lane, Kipling Lane, Langdale Lane, Penrith Lane, Tenby Lane, Tupelo Lane, Walden Lane, Wildeve Lane, and Windemere Lane. (Ord. No. 1458, Sec. II, 12-1-15) 
(13)  Shadybrook Drive and Fernbrook Drive. (Ord. No. 1464, Sec. II, 12-1-15) 
(14)  Carfax Drive South of Sycamore, Charloma Drive North of Sycamore, Del Amo West of Mear Lane, Drayton Avenue, and Mear Lane. (Ord. No. 1468, Sec. II, 7-5-16) 
(15)  A Street, Myrtle Avenue, and Pasadena Avenue between First Street and Main Street; west side of B Street between First Street and its terminus at Interstate 5; east side of B Street and west side of C Street from Sixth Street to 300 feet north of Sixth Street; California Street; Main Street from State Route 55 to B Street; Pacific Street between First Street and Sixth Street; Second Street between Pasadena Avenue and Myrtle Avenue and between Pacific Street and B Street; Third Street between Myrtle Avenue and B Street; north side of Sixth Street between C Street and its terminus at Interstate 5; and south side of Sixth Street between B Street and 670 feet west of B Street. (Ord. No. 1494, Sec. II, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 1500, Sec. 2, 3-5-19) 
(16)  Birchfield Drive, Sandbrook Drive and Silverbrook Drive. (Ord. No. 1496, Sec. II, 4-17-18) 
o 
Policies and Procedures for Parking by Permit Only 
(1)  The Policies and Procedures for Preferential Permit Parking on Public Streets Within the Old Town Residential Area, as those streets are designated in subsection n(15), are set forth in City Council Resolution No. 19-09, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  The Policies and Procedures for Preferential Permit Parking on Public Streets Outside the Old Town Residential Area, as those streets are designated in subsections n(1) through n(14) and n(16), shall be set forth in City Council Resolution No. 19-10, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 1500, Sec. 3, 3-5-19)  
5332 - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 
a 
Authority to Establish Loading Zones 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(a)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district. 
(b)  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(2)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(3)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(4)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. 
b 
Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
(a)  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(b)  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays (and holidays) for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading the materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(c)  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays (and holidays) and except as follows: 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
(d)  When the City Traffic Engineer as authorized under this Chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this Section. 
(e)  Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four (24) minutes. 
(f)  Blue curb indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 22, 2-5-79) 
c 
Effect of Permission to Load or Unload 
Permission is granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials and shall apply to any vehicle, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary, and, in any event, not more than twenty (20) minutes. (Ord. No. 1094, Sec. 2, 7-20-92) 
d 
Standing for Loading or Unloading Only 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in section 5332c. 
e 
Standing in Passenger Loading Zone 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in section 5332c. 
f 
Standing in Any Alley 
No persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any public or dedicated alley and any private alley as stipulated by special ordinance. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 23, 2-5-79) 
g 
Coach Zones to be Established 
(1)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(2)  Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1) 
h 
Parking for Physically Handicapped Persons—Generally 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any street or portion of a street established by resolution as an area restricted exclusively for use by vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in Section 22511.5 as that section now provides or may hereafter provide and which vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates or distinguishing placard issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code as it now provides or may hereafter provide, when such area is designated by appropriate signs and by blue paint upon the curbed surface adjacent thereto, unless such vehicle is entitled to display and is displaying the license plate or placard described above. (Ord. No. 774, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 808, Sec. 2, 8-20-79) 
i 
Same—Exclusive Use on City Owned or Operated Parking Facilities 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any parking stall or parking area on City owned or operated parking facilities if that stall or area has been designated by resolution as restricted for the exclusive use of vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in Section 22511 of the California Vehicle Code as it now provides or may hereafter provide, which vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates or distinguishing placards issued to such persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code, provided that the parking stall or area is indicated by posting immediately adjacent thereto a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background and by blue paint upon the curb surface immediately adjacent thereto, unless such vehicle is entitled to display and is displaying the license plat or placard described above. (Ord. No. 774, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 808, Sec. 2, 8-20-79) 
j 
Same—Exclusive Use in Any Off-Street Parking Area, Public or Private 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any off-street parking area, public or private, which has been designated by resolution as restricted for the exclusive use of vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in Section 22511 of the California Vehicle Code as it now provides or may hereafter provide which vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates or distinguishing placards issued to such persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code, provided that the parking stall or area is indicated by posting immediately adjacent thereto a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background and by blue paint upon the curb surface immediately adjacent thereto, unless such vehicle is entitled to display and is displaying the license plate or placard described above. The City will only designate such areas on privately owned property upon written request and consent of the property owner and upon installation and maintenance of the required designations at the cost and expense of the property owner. (Ord. No. 774, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 808, Sec. 3, 8-20-79)  
5333 - PARKING PROHIBITED ON DESIGNATED ARTERIAL STREETS 
a  Prohibition. Any other limitation on, or regulation concerning parking contained in this Article to the contrary notwithstanding, it is unlawful at any time to stop, stand, park, or leave standing any vehicle in any of the following segments of the following streets, or any portions thereof: 
1.  Irvine Boulevard between Prospect Avenue and Holt Avenue. 
2.  Newport Avenue between Sycamore Avenue and First Street. 
3.  Red Hill Avenue between Sycamore Avenue and Mitchell Street. 
4.  Red Hill Avenue between San Juan Street and Bryan Avenue. 
b  Posing of Parking Restrictions on Designated Arteries. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, "No Stopping Any Time" signs on the portions of the streets identified in subsection a. 
c  Exemptions. The restrictions in subsection a shall not apply to: 
1.  Any ambulance, or to a law enforcement or fire department vehicle parked or left parked during an emergency; or 
2.  Vehicles parked in compliance with a lawful City encroachment permit, which permit authorizes vehicular parking in that segment or portion of segment of that street at that time. 
d  Penalties. 
1.  Parking a vehicle in violation of this Section shall be an infraction. All persons designated by the Chief of Police are authorized and empowered to remove or cause to be removed all vehicles parked on a street contrary to the provisions of this Section, and to store the vehicles. The owner or operator of any vehicle shall be liable for the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
2.  In addition, this Section may be enforced in any manner provided in Chapter 1 of the Tustin City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1357, Sec. 2, 11-4-08)  
5334 - PARKING RESTRICTED TO FACILITATE STREET SWEEPING 
a  Prohibition. Any other limitation on, or regulation concerning parking contained in this Article to the contrary notwithstanding, it is unlawful to stop, stand, park, or leave standing, any vehicle on any street, highway, or portion thereof, during the hours and on the day or days of the month indicated on signs containing the words "No Parking," which signs have been placed in pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 5334b. 
b  Parking Signs. The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the locations of and to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, signs designating the hours during which, and day or days of the month on which parking is prohibited in order to permit City equipment to sweep streets or highways. 
c  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the restrictions of Section 5334a: 
1.  Ambulance, law enforcement and fire department vehicles; and 
2.  Construction vehicles, dumpsters and other obstructions permitted pursuant to a valid encroachment permit. 
d  Penalties. 
1.  Violation of this Section shall be an infraction. All persons designated by the Chief of Police are authorized and empowered to remove or cause to be removed all vehicles parked on a street contrary to the provisions of this Section, and to store the vehicles. The owner or operator of any such vehicle shall be liable to the reasonable towing and storage charges. 
2.  In addition, this Section may be enforced in any manner provided in Chapter 1 of the Tustin City Code or under California law. 
(Ord. No. 1356, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
PART 4 - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 
 
5340 - RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS 
a 
Advertising Vehicles 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound amplifying or loudspeaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the City limits, except as approved by permit issued by the City Traffic Engineer. 
b 
Truck Routes 
(1)  Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons, the City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs such as "Truck Route" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons. 
(2)  When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this Section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a "Truck Route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
(3)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(4)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1) 
(5)  As an alternative to the establishment of truck routes and the prohibition of the use of all streets other than truck routes by vehicles exceeding a certain weight limit, City may by ordinance or resolution designate the use of any street or portions thereof to be described in the ordinance or resolution upon which it shall be prohibited to operate any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds, provided, however, that there shall be exempted from the prohibitions hereinabove provided the following vehicles: 
(a)  Any passenger stage vehicle certified under Public Utilities Code Sections 1031 through 1036; 
(b)  Any vehicle owned, operated, controlled or used by public utility in connection with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or repair of any public utility facility; 
(c)  Any vehicle of licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility; 
(d)  Any vehicle coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from the restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained; 
(e)  Any ambulance or hearse; 
(f)  Any vehicle being operated in the collection of solid waste within the City of Tustin; 
(g)  Any City vehicle being operated for construction, maintenance or repair or for street tree installation or maintenance. 
Such prohibition shall not be effective until appropriate signs are erected indicating the streets so restricted. (Ord. No. 616) 
c 
Commercial Vehicles Prohibited from Using Certain Streets 
(1)  Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance. 
(2)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. No. 370. Sec. 1) 
d 
Parking of Commercial Vehicles 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle of an unladen weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or over on any public street, highway, thoroughfare or alley for a period of more than two (2) consecutive hours in any part of the City except: 
(a)  while loading or unloading property for such time as is reasonably necessary to complete said work; or 
(b)  when such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked, for a time reasonably necessary to complete such service; provided, however, that there shall be specifically excluded from the provisions of this Section pickup trucks, panel trucks, station wagons and limousines; (See California Vehicle Code Section 390 re weight ratings; see Health and Safety Code, Section 18255 regarding parking of mobile homes); and provided further, however, that upon a showing of special circumstances, the Police Department may grant a special permit for parking for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
(2)  Any commercial vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway in violation of this Section may be removed or caused to be removed by any regularly employed and salaried officer or other employee or officer of the Police Department of this City designated by separate ordinance. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 2, 11-6-67; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 24, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 952, Sec. 1, 12-2-85; Ord. No. 982, Sec. 2, 4-6-87; Ord. No. 1066, Sec. 2, 5-20-91)  
5341 - TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK CROSSINGS 
a 
Generally 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes or as outlined in Section 5341b below, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Ord. No. 370, Sec. 1) 
b 
Walnut Avenue Grade Crossing 
This crossing with the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company shall be restricted to the following: No railroad traffic shall be allowed to obstruct vehicular traffic on Walnut Avenue between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. except for urgency rail operations and then not to exceed a continuous period of more than five (5) minutes. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 25, 2-5-79)  
5342 - TRAFFIC AND PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
a 
Consent of Owner Required 
No person shall park or leave a vehicle in a private or public driveway, or on private property, including any parking lot of a shopping center or store, without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of the property served by such driveway or of such private property, including the parking or leaving of a vehicle in a manner or place thereon not in accordance with the posted signs, painted stripes or curbs indicating no parking or special or limited parking by being painted red (no parking), yellow (commercial vehicle parking only), green (24 minute parking only) or white (passenger loading only). (Ord. No. 652, Sec. 1) 
b 
Application of Traffic Regulations to Private Property 
(1)  Privately owned and maintained parking lots, roads, ways and driveways designated by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, the owners of all of which such properties have consented thereto, shall be subject to the application of the provisions of the Tustin City Code relative to vehicular traffic and parking and to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Division 11, commencing with Section 23100, of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted and maintained by the respective owners of each such property at the entrances to such roads, ways and driveways, which shall not be smaller than forty-five (45) inches by thirty (30) inches, with letters not less than three (3) inches in height, and of such size, shape and color as to be readily legible during daylight hours at a distance of one hundred (100) feet, which shall state: 
TRAFFIC & PARKING REG. BY C.V.C. AND TUSTIN CITY CODE. 
VIOLATING VEHICLES MAY BE CITED AND/OR TOWED AWAY 
Tustin P.D. 544-5424 
All curb markings, signs, designated parking spaces, no parking areas, fire lanes, etc., shall be clearly marked and located so that appropriate enforcement action can be taken, if necessary. (Ord. No. 652, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 26, 2-5-79)  
5343 - REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY, DESIGNATED PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND CITY STREETS 
(a)  Private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in skateboarding on any commercial property in the City in which the owner, lessee, or operator of such property has posted at least one (1) sign stating: 
"SKATEBOARDING IS PROHIBITED ON THIS PROPERTY PURSUANT TO TUSTIN CITY CODE SECTION 5343." 
The size of the sign shall be not less than twenty-two (22) by seventeen (17) inches with lettering not less than one (1) inch in height. The sign shall be posted in plain view in at least one (1) prominent location on the property. 
"Skateboarding" is defined to mean a board of any material which has wheels attached to it and which is propelled or moved by human movement, or mechanical power. "Private commercial property" shall have the same meaning as stated in Tustin City Code section 6350(b). 
(b)  Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in skateboarding in or on any city public parking structure, or on or within the City Civic Center/Library complex property. 
(c)  Streets and public highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard on any City street or public highway within the City. This prohibition shall not extend to include City sidewalks. Skateboards shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at all times. 
(Ord. No. 786, Sec. 27, 2-5-79; Ord. No. 1412, Sec. 3, 5-15-12)  
5344 - USE OF MOTORIZED CYCLES 
(a)  A "motor-driven" cycle for purposes of this Section is any motorcycle, moped, motor scooter or minibike with a motor which produces not in excess of five (5) horsepower, and every bicycle with a motor attached. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor-driven cycle on any public sidewalk, walkway, parkway or in any public park or recreational area or upon any other publicly owned property except City streets and public highways within the City, provided, however, that bicycles with motors attached may be operated on off-street bicycle trails under pedal power and without use of their motors. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 28, 2-5-79)  
5345 - USE OF BICYCLES 
Persons riding a bicycle on a public sidewalk, walkway, parkway, off-street bicycle trail or in any public park, recreational area or upon any other publicly owned property shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at all times. (Ord. No. 786, Sec. 29, 2-5-79) 
CROSS REFERENCE: Bicycle registration, Art. 5, Ch. 4.  
5346 - SLEEPING IN PARKED VEHICLES 
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to sleep in any vehicle parked in any place in the City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the next day. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to or shall prohibit the use of campers, motor coaches, or motor vans for sleeping purposes where the same are parked in an authorized trailer court or camp site within the City. (Ord. No. 1140, Sec. 1, 9-6-94)  
CHAPTER 4 - BICYCLE REGISTRATION 
CROSS REFERENCE: Traffic regulations concerning bicycles, Section 5345. 
 
5400 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings: 
"Bicycle" shall mean and include any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears and which has wheels at least 20 inches in diameter and a frame size of at least 14 inches. 
"Ownership Card" shall mean and include the Ownership Card issued by the Registration Agency upon registration of bicycles as provided in this Chapter. 
"Bicycle Plate" shall mean and include the registration or decal designated by the State of California in accordance with Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code, to be permanently affixed to the bicycle and which bears a unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the State. 
"Registration Agency or Agent" shall mean and include the party or parties designated by the City Council as the official Registration Agency or Agent for bicycles in the City. For purposes of this Chapter, the Chief of Police and his representatives shall be deemed as the Registration Agency. The Chief of Police shall be given the authority to recommend for appointment by the City Council any person or persons to assist this City in the capacity of Bicycle Registration Agents. Each Registration Agency or Agent shall register bicycles for persons residing in this City only; all other bicycle registration applicants shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 30, 2-5-79)  
5401 - BICYCLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED 
No person residing in this City shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, bicycle lane or path, or any other public property, or, have in his possession any bicycle which has not been registered or which does not bear a Bicycle Plate as required by the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 31, 2-5-79)  
5402 - OWNERSHIP CARD/BICYCLE PLATE 
a 
Issuance 
At the time that any person registers a bicycle in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Registration Agency or Agent shall provide him with an Ownership Card bearing the owner's name, address, telephone number, Bicycle Plate number, the bicycle manufacturer, type, model and frame number and any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the Registration Agency, and, provisions for the transfer of ownership of said bicycle. In addition, also at the time of registration, the bicycle owner shall be issued his permanent Bicycle Plate bearing the unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the State. The Bicycle License shall remain in effect for the period designated by the State accordance with Section 39001 of the Vehicle Code. 
b 
Records 
The Registration Agency or Agent shall compile and maintain records of each bicycle registered. Such records shall contain, but not be limited to, the name, address and telephone number of the registrant, the Bicycle Plate number, the frame number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and model. Records shall be maintained during the period of the validity of the registration or until notification that the bicycle no longer is to be operated. (Ord. No. 676; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 32, 2-5-79)  
5403 - SALE OR TRANSFER OF BICYCLE 
Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of, or transfers any bicycle registered pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, he shall endorse upon the Ownership Card previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address, and telephone number of the transferee, the date of transfer, the signature of the transferer, and shall deliver such Ownership Card, so endorsed, to the Registration Agency at time of transfer. the transferee shall, within ten (10) days after such transfer, apply to said Agency for a transfer of the Ownership Card. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 33, 2-5-79)  
5404 - CHANGE OF ADDRESS 
Whenever any bicycle owner changes his place of residence, he shall notify the Registration Agency of such change of address within ten (10) days. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 34, 2-5-79)  
5405 - LOST OR STOLEN OWNERSHIP CARD/BICYCLE PLATE 
In the event that any Ownership Card issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, be lost or stolen, the owner of such bicycle shall immediately notify the Registration Agency, and within ten (10) days after such notification shall apply to said Registration Agency for a duplicate Ownership Card, whereupon said Registration Agency shall issue to such owner a duplicate Ownership Card, upon payment to said Registration Agency of a fee of One Dollar ($1.00). 
In the event that any Bicycle Plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter be lost or stolen, the owner shall immediately notify the Registration Agency of such loss, and shall within ten (10) days apply to said Registration Agency for a new Bicycle Plate; whereupon, said Registration Agency shall issue to such owner a new Bicycle Plate, upon payment to said Registration Agency of a fee of one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 35, 2-5-79)  
5406 - FEES 
The fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter are: 
(a)  For each replacement of Ownership Card or Bicycle Plate, the sum of One Dollar. 
(b)  For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of this Chapter, the sum of Three Dollars. (Ord. No. 649)  
5407 - TAMPERING WITH OWNERSHIP CARD/BICYCLE PLATE PROHIBITED 
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any Ownership Card issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper with any Bicycle Plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 649)  
5408 - BICYCLE DEALERS SALES REPORTS REQUIRED 
Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or trading bicycles within this City is hereby required to prepare and file with the Chief of Police a weekly report setting forth the name, address, and telephone number of all persons with whom or to whom they have either bought, sold or traded a bicycle or bicycles during the preceding week, and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number and bicycle registration number, if any, of each such bicycle. Such report shall be filed each week on a date and to a place designated by the Chief of Police. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 36, 2-5-79)  
5409 - BICYCLE IMPOUNDING FEE 
The Registration Agency shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this Chapter are complied with. A fee of Three Dollars ($3.00) shall be charged for each bicycle so impounded. (Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 786, Sec. 37, 2-5-79)  
5410 - VIOLATION OF CHAPTER 
Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 649)  
5411 - ENFORCEMENT 
The Chief of Police and his representatives shall herewith be granted all authority to enforce and carry out the provisions of this Chapter pursuant to the provisions included in the California Vehicle Code and all other laws of the State of California. (Ord. No. 649)  
CHAPTER 5 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
 
5500 - PURPOSE AND FINDINGS 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the abatement of conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such ways as to constitute a nuisance. The Council finds and determines as follows: 
(a)  The City has a history and reputation for well kept properties and the property values and the general welfare of the community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of private properties. 
(b)  There is a need for further emphasis on property maintenance and sanitation in that certain conditions, as described in this chapter, have been found from place to place throughout the City. 
(c)  The existence of such conditions as described in this chapter, is injurious and inimical to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and contributes substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of neighborhoods. 
(d)  Abatement of such conditions is in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City because maximum use and enjoyment of property in proximity to one another depends upon maintenance of those properties at or above a minimum standard. 
(e)  Unless corrective measures are undertaken to alleviate such existing conditions and assure the avoidance of future problems in this regard, the public health, safety, and general welfare, and specifically the social and economic standards of the community, will be depreciated. 
(f)  The abatement of such conditions will improve the general welfare and image of the City. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5501 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
"Abandoned": In addition to those definitions provided by state codes, local ordinances and case law, the term "abandoned" means and refers to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, will be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned: 
(1)  Present operability and functional utility; 
(2)  The date of last effective use; 
(3)  The condition of disrepair or damage; 
(4)  The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item; 
(5)  The status of registration or licensing of the item; 
(6)  The age and degree of obsolescence; 
(7)  The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the item versus its market value; 
(8)  The nature of the area and location of the item. 
"Abate" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer in his or her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
"Attractive nuisance" shall mean any condition, instrument or machine which is unsafe and unprotected and thereby dangerous to young children by reason of their inability to appreciate the peril therein, and which may be reasonably expected to attract children to a property and thus risk injury by playing with, in or on it. 
"Dismantled" means that from which essential equipment, parts, or contents have been removed or stripped and the outward appearance verifies the removal. 
"Enforcement officer" means the Director of Community Development or any other person or City officer or employee as may be designated by the City Manager to enforce property maintenance, zoning and other nuisance abatement regulations and standards of the City violations. 
"Graffiti" means City unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint, or making of symbols using paint, spray paint, ink, chalk, dye or any other material on public or private structures, buildings, places or other surfaces. 
"Inoperative" means incapable of functioning or producing activity for mechanical or other reasons. 
"Person" means person, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. 
"Property owner" means the person(s) or entity to whom property tax is assessed, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County. 
"Owner" means the registered owner of a vehicle which includes but shall not be limited to the property owner, renter, lessor and/or other residents or guests residing permanently or temporarily on a residential property. 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent streets, sidewalks, parkways and parking strips. 
"Property" means any lot or parcel of land and shall include any alley, sidewalk, parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such lot or parcel of land. 
"Wrecked" means that which has an outward manifestation or appearance of damage to parts and contents which is essential to operation. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 1338, Sec. 2, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 13, 11-17-09)  
5502 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE NUISANCES 
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any property owner or other person in control of said property to keep or maintain said property, including adjacent parkways, sidewalks or streets under fee ownership by said person, in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist: 
(a)  Any abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperable, discarded objects or equipment such as, but not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, appliances, water heaters, refrigerators, furniture, fixtures, miscellaneous machinery and equipments, cans or containers standing or stored on property or on adjacent parkway sidewalks or streets which can be viewed from a public highway, walkway, or from private or public property, or which items are readily accessible from such places, or which are stored on private property in violation of any other law or ordinance; 
(b)  Any condition which exists upon any premises that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health as determined by an appropriate city official; 
(c)  Any alteration of land, the topography or configuration of which in any man-made state, whether as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill or other alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other property which does or may result in erosion, subsidence or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare of any real property; 
(d)  Disposal or presence of oil, grease, other petroleum products, noxious chemicals, pesticides, or any gaseous, liquid or solid waste in such a manner [as] to consist [constitute] a health or fire hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties; 
(e)  Lumber (excluding stacked firewood not visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property for use on the property or lumber for a construction project on the property with a valid permit), junk, trash, salvage materials (including but not limited to auto parts, scrap metals, tires, tin cans and bottles), or packing boxes or other debris stored on premises in excess of seventy-two (72) hours; 
(f)  Any performance of work on motor vehicles, vehicle engines or parts, or household fixtures, on a public right-of-way or performance of such work in yard areas of residential properties so as to be visible from a public right-of-way or neighboring properties other than emergency repairs or minor maintenance being performed by the owner of the vehicle or fixture; 
(g)  Any swimming pool, pond, spa or other body of water or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, or unfiltered; 
(h)  Trailers not within established mobile home parks, dumpsters or similar vehicles or equipment used for sleeping purposes; 
(i)  Accumulations of asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, building materials and fill dirt resulting from excavations on or off the property; 
(j)  Use of a parked or stored vehicle, boat, camper shell, trailer or other similar item as temporary or permanent living space; 
(k)  Any vehicle, boat, camper shell or other similar item parked or stored on an unpaved surface or which blocks access to a required parking space; 
(l)  Presence of graffiti, that is, City unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint, or making of symbols using paint, spray paint, ink, chalk, dye, or similar materials on public or private structures, buildings, or places. 
(m)  Property failing to meet minimum levels of maintenance and care as set forth as follows: 
(1)  Landscaping. All landscaping shall be maintained in a condition free of dead, decayed, overgrown or discarded plant material. During the pendency of any Water Conservation Stage declared pursuant to Chapter 10 of Article 4 of the City Code, it shall be acceptable to allow lawns and other live turf to go dormant, however all other dead decayed, overgrown or discarded plant material shall be removed. All synthetic turf material shall be maintained in accordance with the Synthetic Turf Standards and subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation. Landscape irrigation pipes and sprinkler heads shall be maintained in good working order so as to cover all landscaped areas. During the pendency of any Water Conservation Stage declared pursuant to Chapter 10 of Article 4 of the City Code, landscape irrigation pipes and sprinkler heads shall be maintained to prevent leaks and overspray on to solid surfaces such as streets, sidewalks, driveways, or walkways. 
(3)  Walls, fences and other structures. All walls, fences and trash enclosures and other structures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, warping, missing panels or blocks which either (i) threaten structural integrity, or (ii) result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, partially ruined appearance; 
(4)  Parking and related surfaces. Parking surfaces and pedestrian walkways shall be maintained in a safe condition such that any concrete, asphalt or other driving or walking surfaces are free of potholes, buckled or cracked surfaces or raised areas; 
(5)  Building elevations and roofs. Exterior building surfaces and roofs shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, missing materials, warping, dry rot or blocks, which either (i) threaten structural integrity, or (ii) result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, partially ruined appearance. Any violation of this subsection is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor; 
(6)  Trash and debris. The property shall be maintained free of the accumulation of trash and debris. Trash and debris associated with permitted uses are to be stored solely in designated trash enclosures. 
(n)  Any temporary materials and securing devices including, but not limited to, plywood used to cover building openings, that are not painted to match one of the existing colors of the building on all elevations which are visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 1181, Sec. 2, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 1398, Sec. 2, 8-6-11; Ord. No. 1457, Sec. 5, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 4, 3-21-17)  
5503 - PUBLIC NUISANCE 
a 
Authority to Abate and Impose Sanctions 
Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the enforcement officer in any manner authorized by law. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
Whenever an enforcement officer determines that any condition exists in violation of section 5502, he or she may take enforcement action pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding the public nuisance abatement procedures, criminal and/or civil remedies may be employed as provided under law. 
b 
Written Notice 
Whenever the enforcement officer has inspected the location of the alleged violation and it has been found or determined that conditions constituting a nuisance exist on any property located in the city, the enforcement officer may prepare a notice and order and cause the owner of the property and the person, if other than the landowner occupying or otherwise in charge or control of property to be notified in writing of the existence of said condition and/or require an appearance before the enforcement officer at a stated time and place to show why such condition should not be abated by the City at such person's expense. The notice and order to abate the determined public nuisance shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the property on which the condition exists. 
(2)  A statement that the enforcement officer has determined that a public nuisance is being maintained on the property with a brief description of the conditions which render the property a public nuisance. 
(3)  An order to secure all appropriate permits and to physically commence, within a certain time from the date of service of the notice and order, and to complete within that reasonable and established time and date, the abatement of the described conditions. 
(4)  A statement advising that the disposal of any material involved in public nuisances shall be carried forth in a legal manner. 
(5)  A statement advising that if the required work is not commenced within the time specified, the enforcement officer will proceed to cause the work to be done, and bill the persons named in the notice for the abatement costs and/or assess the costs against the property. 
(6)  A statement advising that any person having any interest or record title in the property may request consideration of the notice and order or any action of the enforcement within ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice and order. 
(7)  A statement advising that the notice and order will be recorded against the property in the Office of the County Recorder. 
c 
Manner of Notice 
The notice and order, and any amended notice and order, shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each person as required pursuant to the provisions of subsection b of this section at the address of the violation as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the County or as known to the enforcement officer. The address of owners shown on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed to be the property address for the purpose of mailing such notice. The failure of the enforcement officer to make or attempt service on any person required in this section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served. Service by mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. The failure of any such person entitled to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this article. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which service was made. At the time the notice and order is served, the enforcement officer shall file in the Office of the County Recorder a certificate legally describing the property and certifying that a public nuisance exists on the property and that the owner has been so notified. The enforcement officer shall file a new certificate with the County Recorder that the nuisance has been abated whenever the corrections ordered shall have been completed so that there no longer exists a public nuisance on the property described in the certificate; or the notice and order is rescinded upon appeal; or whenever the City abates the nuisance and the abatement costs have been paid. 
d 
Extension of Time to Perform Work 
Upon receipt of a written request from any person required to comply with the order, the enforcement officer may grant an extension of time within which to complete said abatement, if the enforcement officer determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The enforcement officer shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions on any such extensions. 
e 
Hearing 
The enforcement officer may set a date, time and place to hear any relevant evidence concerning the existence of the alleged public nuisance and the question of whether the expense of abating said public nuisance, if determined to exist, should be made a lien on the property. 
If, at the conclusion of such hearing, the enforcement officer is satisfied that said condition exists and concludes that it should be abated at the expense of the landowner, he or she shall advise such person in writing in the same manner as provided in subsection c of this section. Such notice shall also inform the landowner of the right of appeal as provided in section 5504. In the event any person given notice of hearing, as shown by the evidence of mailing, should fail to appear at said hearing, then such evidence available to the enforcement officer shall be sufficient evidence of the existence of facts in support of said conclusion. 
f 
Request for Reconsideration 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the enforcement officer in issuing a notice and order pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal in accordance with provisions of section 5504 of this chapter. If no appeal is filed within the time prescribed, the action of the enforcement officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5504 - APPEALS 
Any person may appeal any decision of the enforcement officer in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 14, 11-17-09)  
5505 - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY 
If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner as directed within the abatement period, the City shall immediately cause the same to be abated by City personnel or private contract and such personnel or persons under contract are expressly authorized to enter upon said premises for such purposes. The owner of said premises shall be liable to the City for all costs of such abatement, including all administrative and inspection costs. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5506 - PROCEEDINGS FOR ABATEMENT OF IMMINENTLY DANGEROUS PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that a public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that such condition must be immediately corrected, or isolated, the following procedures may be instituted. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control thereof. In the event contact is made, the enforcement officer shall notify such person, or persons, of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property. 
(b)  In the event the enforcement officer is unable to make contact as hereinabove noted, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the enforcement officer, do not take action as specified by such official, within the time frame requested, then the enforcement officer may, with the approval of the City Manager, take all steps deemed necessary to remove or isolate such dangerous condition, or conditions, with the use of City forces or a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the City in removing or isolating such condition, or conditions. Such costs may be recovered in the same manner that abatement costs are recovered pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5507 - COSTS OF INSPECTION 
Whenever a public nuisance as defined in this chapter is found to exist as a result of said inspection, the reasonable costs for said inspection as set by City Council resolution shall be paid by the landowner. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5508 - ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST PROPERTY 
a 
Cost Assessment 
The enforcement officer, personnel or persons who abate the nuisance shall keep an account of the cost of abatement. Such personnel or persons shall submit an itemized written report showing such costs to the Community Development Department for transmittal to the City Clerk for City Council. 
b 
Hearing on Assessment 
The City Clerk shall thereupon set the report and account for hearing by the City Council at the first regular meeting which will be held at least seven (7) calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of said report and account and notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place in or near the entrance of the Tustin City Hall. The owner who is affected by such report and account shall be sent a notice advising him of the date, time and place of the hearing and said notice shall be served. 
c 
Tax Lien 
The City Council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objections to the report and account. The City Council may modify the report if it is deemed necessary, and shall then confirm the report by motion or resolution. Pursuant to appropriate sections of the Government Code and in particular Section 38773.5 and Section 25845, the total costs of abatement including all administrative costs, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it shall be a lien on the property. 
d 
Cost Report 
After confirmation of the report, a certified copy shall be filed with the Orange County Auditor on or before August 10th of each year and the auditor shall be requested to enter the amounts of the respective assessments on the county tax roll. 
e 
Special Assessment 
Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
f 
Refunds 
The City Council may order refunded all or part of an assessment paid pursuant to this chapter if it finds that all or part of the assessment has been erroneously levied. An assessment or any part thereof shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the City Clerk on or before December 1st after the assessment becomes due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who paid the assessment, or his guardian, executor, or administrator. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5509 - GENERAL PENALTY AND CONTINUING VIOLATIONS 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or mandatory requirement of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the enforcement officer. 
(b)  Each person guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(c)  Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter, for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the enforcement officer. 
(d)  Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative of a City department or with any person who owns or holds an estate or interest in a building which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished or with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter when any of the aforementioned individuals are lawfully engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the enforcement officer. 
(e)  The penalties and procedures provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in this Code or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described herein, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
5510 - SEVERABILITY 
It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter form interrelated regulations for dealing with the problem of property maintenance and public nuisances within the city, but that such sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases are distinct and severable and, in the event that any sections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, clauses or phrases of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1080, Sec. 2, 11-18-91)  
CHAPTER 6 - DISCLOSURE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
5600 - PURPOSE 
(a)  Emergency service personnel in the City have a need to know of the use and dangers of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to potential emergencies and exposure to such materials; 
(b)  Basic information on the location, type and the health risks of hazardous materials used or stored in the City is not now available to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and other emergency response personnel; 
(c)  It is intended that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide that information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and other emergency service personnel in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a fashion that trade secrecy is not abridged; 
(d)  It is further intended that this chapter implement the community's right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the County and provide for an orderly system for the provision of such information. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5601 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this chapter the terms listed in this Section shall be defined as follows; provided, however references to statutes or regulations in existence at the time this section is adopted shall also include references to such statutes or regulations as they may be amended or changed in the future: 
"Carcinogen" refers to a substance which causes cancer. For purposes of this section, carcinogens are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services on its Second Annual Report of Carcinogens. 
"CAS number" means the unique identification name as assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Services to specific chemical substances. 
"Chemical name" means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Services. 
"Common name" means a designation of identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name. 
"Disclosure form" means the written request for information prepared pursuant to Sections 5603 and 5604. 
"Handle" means to generate, treat or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion. 
"Handler" means any person who handles a hazardous substance. 
"Hazardous material" means any substance or hazardous waste defined in this Section, or any material designated pursuant to Section 5602. 
"Hazardous material" means any substance or product: 
(1)  For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; or 
(2)  Listed in Section 25316 of the Health and Safety Code; or 
(3)  Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, Code of Federal Regulations; or 
(4)  Which is listed as a legal carcinogen from the California Administrative Code, Title 8, Subchapter 7, Group 16 and those substances specified in the definition "Carcinogens" in this Section; or 
(5)  Which the Director of the Department of Food and Agriculture classifies as pesticides; or 
(6)  Which the EPA classifies as priority organic pollutants. 
"Hazardous waste" or "extremely hazardous waste" means any material that is identified in: 
(1)  Sections 25115 or 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code and set forth in Sections 66680 and 66684 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code; or 
(2)  The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Sections 261.31—261.33. 
"Health Official" means the Health Officer of the County of Orange or his deputy. 
"MSDS" means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor. 
"Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership or association. 
"Physician" means any person who holds a valid certificate from the State of California to practice the healing arts. 
"SIC code" means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification code to specific types of businesses. 
"Storage" or "storing" means the containment of substances or materials in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such substances or materials. 
"Use" includes the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance. 
"User" means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
[5602 - RESERVED]  
5603 - FILING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DISCLOSURE FORM 
(a)  Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must semi-annually, during the months of January and July, submit a completed disclosure form to the Orange County Fire Department. 
(b)  Any person who, during the calendar year, for the first time becomes a user or handler of any hazardous material must submit a completed disclosure form to the Orange County Fire Department within thirty (30) days of becoming a user or handler. Thereafter any such user or handler shall comply with the provisions of Section 5603(a). 
(c)  The Orange County Fire Department may, upon thirty (30) days' written notice, require the submittal of a disclosure form of any user or handler. 
(d)  Any person required to submit a disclosure form pursuant to this Section shall file with the Fire Department of Orange County an updated disclosure form within fifteen (15) days of any of the following: 
(1)  A change in business address. 
(2)  A change in business ownership. 
(3)  A change of business name. 
(4)  Cessation of business operations. 
(5)  The use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material. 
(6)  A significant change in the use or handling of a hazardous material for which disclosure has been previously made. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5604 - REQUIRED DISCLOSURE FORM 
(a)  The disclosure form shall be developed by the Director of Fire Services, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form as required by the fire department. 
(2)  CAS number as may be required by the fire department. 
(3)  SIC code as may be required by the fire department. 
(4)  U.N. identification number as may be required by the fire department. 
(5)  A listing of the chemical name and any common names of every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form. 
(6)  The maximum amount of each hazardous material which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year. 
(7)  Specific information on how and where the hazardous materials are handled or used by the user so as to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency response plans to potential releases of the hazardous materials. 
(8)  The names and phone numbers of at least two (2) persons representing the business and who would be able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during business and nonbusiness hours. 
(9)  The hazard characteristics of every hazardous material disclosed, including, but not limited to, toxicity, flammability, reactivity, and corrosivity as may be required by the fire department. 
(b)  Upon request all users must provide the following information: 
(1)  To the fire department, any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or the environment. 
(2)  To any physician, where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5605 - EXEMPTIONS FROM DISCLOSURE 
(a)  The following materials or persons are exempt from the disclosure requirements of Section 5603: 
(1)  A material designated as a hazardous material by this chapter solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that a MSDS be submitted with the disclosure form. 
(2)  Hazardous materials or substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic or tobacco products. 
(3)  Any person using or handling less than five hundred (500) pounds or fifty-five (55) gallons per year, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the Fire Chief has provided notice that the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material has been lowered in response to public health concerns or to meet the intent and requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. 
(4)  Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public unless the product is repackaged or altered in any way; provided, however, the manufacture and distribution of these products are not exempt. 
(5)  Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subchapter c, as now in existence or as hereafter amended or changed. 
(6)  Infectious waste generated by hospitals, medical centers, clinics and other health care facilities that are regulated under Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. 
(b)  The exemptions contained in this Section shall not apply to the using or handling of carcinogens, except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes. 
(c)  No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous material for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required, provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within fifteen (15) days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. 
(d)  The Director of Fire Services, upon application by a handler, may exempt a hazardous material from inventory provisions of Section 5604 upon proof that the material(s) does not pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or environment. The administering agency shall specify in writing the basis for any exemption under this section. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5606 - INFORMATION REGARDING HAZARDOUS WASTE 
The Health Officer will make information available to fire departments and emergency response personnel, upon request, regarding hazardous waste, extremely hazardous wastes, and underground tanks, when the information is obtained by the Health Officer. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5607 - IDENTIFICATION OF AREAS 
When required by the Director of Fire Services, work areas in which any person uses or handles hazardous material shall be identified as such by such measures as the Director of Fire Services may specify including, but not limited to, signs, color coding, posting lists of material and MSDS or other notices. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5608 - FEES 
The Board of Supervisors may establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons subject to this Section which is sufficient to cover the costs of administration resulting from this Section. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5609 - TRADE SECRETS 
(a)  A user may designate some, or all, of the information on the disclosure form as a trade secret. Any information designated as a trade secret contained on the disclosure form shall not be disclosed to anyone except: 
(1)  An officer or employee of a governmental entity in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health. 
(2)  Contractors of governmental entities, when in the opinion of the Director of Fire Services, disclosure is necessary and required for the protection of health and the performance of a contract. 
(3)  Any physician where the physician determines and verifies that such information is necessary for the medical treatment of his or her patient. 
(b)  Any officer or employee of the City or the County, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this Section, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be in violation of this Section. For purposes of determining a violation of this Section, a contractor who has been furnished information pursuant to this Section shall be deemed an employee of the city. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to this Section and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses this information, shall be in violation of this Section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection (a) of this Section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of said request by certified mail. The Fire Department shall release the information thirty (30) days after the day of mailing said notice, unless, prior to the expiration of said thirty (30) days, the user institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that said information is prohibiting disclosure of said information to the general public. 
(d)  The provisions of this Section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required to be disclosed pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  A release form shall be utilized by persons requesting information pursuant to this Subsection listing the following information: 
(1)  Specification of the reason for the release of the trade secret information; and 
(2)  Acknowledgement by the person to whom the information is released that further disclosure of the information to an unauthorized or to any person without a similar release form is unlawful. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5610 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
The Director of Fire Services shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this Section, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of a comprehensive list of substances which would be classified as hazardous materials under this Section. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
5611 - VIOLATIONS 
Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 964, Sec. 1, 4-21-86)  
CHAPTER 7 - GRAFFITI/SPRAY PAINT PROGRAM 
 
5700 - PURPOSE AND FINDINGS 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for the elimination of graffiti from both public and private property, to reduce blight and deterioration within the City and to protect the public safety. The City finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  Graffiti on structures located upon public and private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of the property, but also devalues the adjacent and surrounding properties in the community; and 
(2)  It is the City Council's intent to provide for the prohibition of the placement of graffiti on structures located either on public or private property; and 
(3)  Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes a city to enact ordinances to provide for the use of city funds to remove graffiti from public and privately owned structures located within the city; and 
(4)  The City Council finds that graffiti or related inscribed materials is obnoxious and pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes that a program be instituted allowing for the use of City funds to remove graffiti from structures on public and private property; and 
(5)  Government Code Section 53069.5 authorizes a city to offer and pay a reward for information leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of any person who willfully damages property. (Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5701 - DEFINITIONS 
[As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
"Bona fide evidence of majority" means a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, a passport, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces which identifies an individual and provides proof of the age of such individual. 
"Capable of defacing property" means any substance, spray paint, paint, or dye, or any other liquid which when applied to any surface leaves an opaque and insoluble residue which cannot be removed by ordinary application of soap and water. 
"Graffiti" means the unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint, or making symbols using paint, spray paint, ink, chalk, dye or similar materials on public or private structures, buildings or places. 
"Obnoxious graffiti" means graffiti which has any of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Insults or incites hatred or contempt of any racial, religious or ethnic group; 
(2)  Refers to the name of a gang or includes words or symbols associated with a gang or individual; 
(3)  Insults or threatens any identifiable individual or group; 
(4)  Includes obscene or indecent language or depictions; 
(5)  Constitutes an aesthetic blight or eyesore to a neighborhood; 
(6)  Tends to attract more graffiti; 
(7)  Promotes criminal activity or promotes retaliatory action by an individual(s). (Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5702 - SALE OF SPRAY PAINT 
a 
Sale to Minors Prohibited 
No person shall sell or cause to be sold to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any aerosol container of spray paint capable of defacing property. 
b 
Evidence of Sale Subject to Prosecution 
Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent, demanded and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence in a transaction of sale to a minor, shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution thereof. 
c 
Posting of Prohibition Required 
Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein aerosol containers of spray paint capable of defacing property are sold shall conspicuously post a copy of subsection a of this section in such place of business in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high. (Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5703 - POSSESSION OF SPRAY PAINT—PROHIBITION IN PUBLIC PLACES, PARKS AND BUILDINGS 
No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol container of spray paint capable of defacing property while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, or recreation facility, public building or other public place, other than a highway, street or alley, except authorized employees or agents of the City or persons having the authorization of the City Manager or his designees. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the possession of an aerosol container of spray paint capable of defacing property on the property of any school as defined by the Education Code, by a teacher or authorized agent of such a school or any other person under the direct supervision and control of a teacher of such a school. (Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5704 - POSSESSION OF SPRAY PAINT—PROHIBITION BY MINORS IN STREETS OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall have in his or her possession any aerosol container of spray paint capable of defacing property while on any public highway, street, alley or way unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5705 - GRAFFITI PROHIBITED 
No person shall willfully or maliciously use any liquid substance, spray paint, chalk, dye, or other similar substance to paint, mar or deface any public or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned real property within the City, whether such property is occupied, vacated or abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5706 - GRAFFITI TOLERATION 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private property to permit graffiti or other inscribed materials to remain on structures so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, such as a highway, street, road, parkway or alley, providing the City Code Enforcement Officer has given written notice to the owner and occupant requiring removal of the graffiti within a period of not less than seven (7) calendar days and such time period has elapsed without remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
5707 - GRAFFITI REMOVAL 
a.  Graffiti removal—In General. Notwithstanding any other provisions, when the Director of Public Works or the Director of Community Development determines that graffiti or other inscribed materials constitute obnoxious graffiti and by virtue of its location on public or private property is in view of a person utilizing any public right-of-way, whether a highway, street, road, parkway, or alley, the City shall be authorized to undertake the removal of such graffiti. Prior to the removal of such graffiti the City shall obtain the written consent from the owner for such action and the owner shall execute an appropriate release form and right of entry form to permit such graffiti removal. If the City provides for the removal of graffiti, it shall not be authorized or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that area where the graffiti is located. 
b.  Graffiti removal—Structures on Public Property. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any utility box, cable box, pole, structure, or other similar appurtenances or facilities ("structures") on any public property or public easements to permit graffiti to remain on such structures for a period of over 48 hours when such graffiti is capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, such as a highway, street, sidewalk, road, parkway, easement, or alley. The 48-hour period shall commence from the time the City has given notice, written or telephonic, to the owner and/or responsible party of such structure. If notice is provided by City by close of business on a Friday, the removal shall occur no later than close of business on the immediately following business day. All owners and/or managers ("responsible parties") of such structures shall provide the City with an address and telephone number the City can use to provide such notification. If the graffiti is not removed within the applicable timeline, the City may summarily remove the graffiti. 
In addition to penalties provided under this Code, the owner of the structures shall reimburse the City for its cost of removal including any cost associated with notification. The City shall provide the owner of the structure with an invoice for the costs. If the owner of the structure desires to dispute either the imposition or the amount of the invoice, then such owner shall notify the Community Development Director in writing of a request for hearing within seven (7) calendar days of the mailing of the invoice in accordance with Section 5504. The invoice shall notify the owner of the address at which to request an appeal and the timeframe for making a request. Failure to request an appeal within the timeframe provided by this Section shall to waive any right to contest the imposition or the amount of the invoice. If an appeal is requested, a hearing shall be held in the manner set forth in Section 5504. 
An appeal may be brought on the ground (1) that notice was not provided as required by this Section, or (2) that the costs invoiced exceeded the actual costs of abatement or were otherwise unreasonable, or (3) that the City was informed, prior to the City's removal of graffiti, of extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the owner such as an emergency or natural disaster that prevented timely removal of the graffiti by the owner, or (4) that the requirement to reimburse such costs is otherwise unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 1338, Sec. 3, 8-7-07)  
5708 - GRAFFITI REWARD 
A reward in an amount established by resolution of the City Council may be authorized, offered and may be paid by the City to any person who provides information leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of, any person who willfully or maliciously paints, marks or defaces any public or private structure located on private or public property within the City. 
The exact amount of any reward to be paid by the City shall be determined by the City Council after receipt of a report from the City Manager indicating that information was received leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of, a person who willfully or maliciously painted, marred or defaced a structure located on public or private property located within the City, and indicating the final disposition of such matter. No law enforcement officer, municipal officer, official or employee of the City shall be eligible for such reward. 
Any person violating the provisions of Sections 5705 through 5707 of this chapter shall pay the City the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this Section, and if such person is an unemancipated minor, such minor's parents or guardian are so liable and shall pay the amount of any reward to the City. Failure to pay any amount demanded by the City pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days of written demand therefor shall itself be a violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1079, Sec. 1, 11-18-91)  
CHAPTER 8 - REGULATION OF SOLICITATION ACTIVITY  
PART I - REGULATION OF SOLICITATION ACTIVITY IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
5800 - FINDINGS AND INTENT 
The City Council finds that it is necessary to regulate the solicitation activity of pedestrians and motor vehicle occupants who utilize certain public rights-of-way based upon the following findings: 
(1)  The City of Tustin has experienced negative secondary impacts arising out of solicitation activities of pedestrians and passing motorists who utilize certain public rights-of-way as documented in a Police Department report provided to the City Council. These impacts consist of traffic hazards caused by: the distraction of automobile drivers observing solicitation activity or otherwise stopping or slowing in traffic lanes; solicitors' physical obstruction of vehicular traffic flow by walking randomly into streets to solicit passing motorists. Additional problems emanating from this solicitation activity include littering, public urination, interference with pedestrian access to public sidewalks, and interference with on-site commercial business operations. These secondary impacts are found to be a nuisance condition requiring reasonable restrictions to mitigate potential impacts from such nuisance conditions. 
(2)  The City Council takes notice of the fact that other local municipalities, such as the cities of Orange and Newport Beach, and nationwide have experienced similar impacts from solicitation in public rights-of-way aimed at passing motorists. The City of Orange conducted an extensive analysis of such impacts in a study and report to the City Council resulting in the enactment of an ordinance which establishes City of Orange regulations restricting solicitation activity at certain public rights-of-way. The Orange ordinance makes specific findings that solicitation on public rights-of-way, upon which vehicle parking is prohibited or restricted, causes significant traffic hazards. That analysis and ordinance provides a further factual basis to support the enactment of regulations restricting solicitation activity in certain public rights-of-way as further set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5801 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Charitable solicitation activity" means commercial sales or requests for charitable contributions on behalf of a nonprofit organization, including e.g., patriotic, philanthropic, social services, welfare, benevolent, educational, religious, civil, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
"Commercial property" means any real property held, owned, or controlled by private interests and which is zoned by the city for any form of business enterprise, including, but not limited to, retail, office, commercial, or industrial, or recreational purpose. 
"Contribution" means the giving of anything of value, including money, property, or any type of financial assistance, or the pledging of anything of value, including money, property, or other type of financial assistance, or the purchasing or offering to purchase anything of value, including, but not limited to, goods, services, books, real property, pamphlets, tickets, or subscriptions to publications. 
"Employment" shall mean services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under contract of hire, whether written, oral, expressed or implied. 
"Occupants of motor vehicles" shall mean the driver and passengers of the vehicle. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, league, fraternal organization, joint stock company, estate, trust, corporation, or any other group acting as a unit. 
"Solicit", "solicitation", or "solicitation activity" shall mean and include, but not [be] limited to, any request, offer, enticement, or other action which announces the availability of employment, the sale of goods, services, or requests for funds, petition gathering; or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or sell goods, or to cause a contribution of money or other property to be made. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made whether or not an actual transaction of any type is completed, or exchange of money, including charitable contributions, takes place. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5802 - PROHIBITED SOLICITATION ACTIVITY 
(a)  Solicitation prohibited when conducted from sidewalks and driveways where vehicle parking is not legally permitted. It shall be unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of a public sidewalk or driveway, to engage in solicitation activity with any person traveling in a vehicle along any public street or highway which has been designated by the City as a prohibited parking area or no parking zone. 
(b)  Solicitation prohibited when conducted within public streets and medians. It shall be unlawful for any person while standing within any public street or highway or public median to engage in solicitation activity with any person in a vehicle in the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, a public street, highway, sidewalk, or driveway. 
(c)  Prohibition of solicitation by occupants of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any occupant of a vehicle to engage in solicitation activity with a person who is within a public street or highway which has been designated by the City as a prohibited parking area or no parking zone. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5803 - POSTING OF SIGNS 
The City shall post signs in the public right-of-way to notify the public of the prohibitions of Section 5802. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
PART II - REGULATION OF RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION ACTIVITY 
 
5810—5816 - [OMITTED]  
5817 - REGULATION OF SOLICITATION IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
(a)  Specific requirements. No person shall solicit in any of the residential zoned areas of the City: 
1.  Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless done by appointment; 
2.  At any house, apartment, or other dwelling to which is affixed a sign indicating "No Solicitors" or similar indication that no solicitation is desired by the occupants thereof; 
3.  At any house, apartment, or other dwelling within a homeowners' association that maintains private streets where the homeowners' association has posted on each vehicular entry way to the property a notice in substantially the following form: 
"No Solicitors", or similar indication that no solicitation is permitted by occupants thereof. 
4.  By using profane or abusive language or making verbal threats, during the solicitation; 
5.  By stepping onto or over the threshold of a doorway, unless invited to do so by the occupant; 
6.  By placing hands, legs, or any portion of the solicitor's body in the doorway so that it reasonably appears that the door may not be closed, unless allowed to do so by the occupant; 
7.  By refusing to immediately leave the solicited premises when asked to do so by any occupant; or 
8.  By knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations about the purpose of the solicitation. 
(b)  Receipts. Any person receiving money or anything of value in excess of five dollars ($5.00) from any contributor by means of a solicitation shall, upon request, give such contributor a written receipt showing the name and address of the solicitor, the date, and the amount received. 
(c)  Compliance with state and city charitable laws. Prior to and while engaging in solicitation in any residential area of the City, every person shall fully comply with all applicable state laws, including the provisions of the California Charitable Disclosure Law as set forth in the California Business and Professions Code sections 17510 et seq., and the charitable solicitation permit requirements in Tustin City Code section 2513(f). 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5818 - REGULATION OF SOLICITATION CONDUCTED ON COMMERCIAL PROPERTY 
(a)  Findings and intent. The City has received a growing number of complaints from certain merchants and business patrons that solicitors have engaged in a variety of commercial and noncommercial solicitation activity on private commercial property without the owner's consent. This solicitation activity can have the effect of impeding the free movement of citizen patrons, and otherwise cause noise and physical obstruction which detracts from a conducive commercial environment. 
(b)  Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to solicit in or upon any commercial property within the City when such property is affixed with signage stating "NO SOLICITORS", or similar statement to the effect that solicitation is not permitted on the property, or is otherwise permitted only in restricted areas of the property. 
(c)  Signage requirements. 
(1)  Excepting commercial property containing communal areas, the property owner shall post a "No Solicitors" sign of a size not less than twenty-two (22) inches by seventeen (17) inches, with lettering of at least one (1) inch in height, at each vehicular entry point to the property. 
(2)  For commercial property containing communal areas, the property owner shall post signs stating that: 
"Solicitation of any type is permitted only in designated areas of this Commercial Property. Violators are subject to prosecution pursuant to Tustin City Code section 5818(b). Contact the property manager for a permissible solicitation location." 
The signing shall be located at prominent entry point(s) of the property, and at such other locations which have been designated by the property owner as permissible solicitation locations. The size of the signs shall be not less than twenty-two (22) inches by seventeen (17) inches with lettering of at least one (1) inch in height. 
For purposes of this section, "communal areas" shall mean such areas set aside by the owner in which the public may engage in such matters as discourse, recreation, or entertainment separate and apart from commercial patronage occurring at business establishments. Examples of communal areas are seating areas, plazas, or large walking areas. Restaurant seating restricted to particular patronage does not constitute communal areas of the center. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
PART III - PROHIBITION OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION AND SOLICITATION AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS 
 
5830 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The City Council finds that it is necessary to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying aggressive solicitation and all solicitation in certain confined areas. Aggressive solicitation may include approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5831 - AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED 
No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5832 - ALL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED LOCATIONS 
(a)  City parking structures. Any act of solicitation is prohibited in any City public parking lot or parking structure. 
(b)  Restrooms. No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in any public restroom or within twenty five (25) feet of the entrance to a public restroom. 
(c)  Banks and ATMs. No person shall solicit ask or beg within twenty five (25) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within twenty five (25) feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. 
(d)  A marked bus stop; 
(e)  Public transportation vehicles or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
5833 - DEFINITIONS 
In construing the provisions of this Part, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Aggressive manner" shall mean any of the following: 
1.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to: 
(i)  Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to loss of property, or 
(ii)  Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
2.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle, by any means, or the blocking or interfering with pedestrian or vehicular access to any building, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact or to gain entrance to a building; 
3.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of such soliciting, asking, or begging; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging; 
5.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or 
6.  Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation. 
"Public place" shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, public parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby, and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house, or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
"Solicitation" shall have the same meaning set forth in Tustin City Code Section 5801. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
PART IV - VIOLATIONS 
 
5840 - MISDEMEANOR/INFRACTION 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor pursuant to section 1121, of Part II, of Chapter 1 of the Tustin City Code. Violations may also be punished by other penalty, citation, and administrative citation process provided for in Chapter 1 of Article 1. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. I, 5-15-12)  
CHAPTER 9 - ABATEMENT OF SHOPPING CART NUISANCE[1] 
CHAPTER 9 ABATEMENT OF SHOPPING CART NUISANCE 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1360, adopted Feb. 17, 2009, amended Chapter 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 9 consisted of sections 5900-5909, pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1184, adopted July 21, 1997. 
 
5900 - DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND PURPOSE 
Abandoned shopping carts located outside the premises or parking areas of retail establishments and on public or private properties and viewable from the public right-of-way are injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare and constitute a public nuisance (hereinafter "shopping cart nuisance"). The nuisance is caused by persons unlawfully removing shopping carts from the premises or parking areas of retail establishments and by certain retail establishments failing to maintain adequate supervision of their premises and parking areas, failing to educate their customers, and failing to implement effective cart removal prevention programs or cart retrieval programs. The purpose of this Chapter is to: 
1.  Set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to (a) prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, and (b) provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts; and 
2.  Complement and supplement provisions of state law and adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute regarding the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises and parking areas of retail establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5901 - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
"Abandoned shopping carts" or "lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart" means a shopping cart which is either (1) removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without the prior written consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart, or (2) left unattended, discarded, or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner. For purposes of this Chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed lost, stolen, or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof is either (a) the owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of the shopping cart, (b) an officer, employee, or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts, (c) enforcement personnel retrieving, storing, or disposing of said cart pursuant to the provisions of the applicable provisions of the California Business and Professions Code, or (d) has consent to be in possession of the shopping cart from the owner entitled to possession of the shopping cart. 
"City" means the City of Tustin. 
"Enforcement personnel" means any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other person employed or contracted by the City of Tustin. 
"Laundry cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them. 
"Owner" means any owner, manager, agent, or operator of any retail establishment. 
"Parking area" means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for the use of customers for parking of customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multi-store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multi-store complex or shopping center. 
"Person" means an individual or entity as defined in Tustin City Code Section 1112. 
"Premises" means any building, property, or other area upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the City, including the parking area provided for customers. 
"Public property" means all real property in the City in which a public agency has a fee simple, easement, or leasehold interest. This includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, the civic center, parks, and flood control facilities. 
"Retail establishment" means any trade establishment selling articles, commodity, or any line of merchandise regardless of whether the business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, and regardless of whether the business is open to the general public, or is a private club or business, or is a membership store. 
"Shopping cart" or "cart" means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The term "shopping cart" or "cart" includes a laundry cart. 
"Unidentified shopping cart" means a shopping cart that is not an owner-identified cart, or an owner-identified shopping cart of a retail establishment located outside the City that has a permanently affixed sign that identifies it in accordance with applicable provisions of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5902 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections 5903 through 5906 of this Chapter may be implemented and enforced by designated representatives of the City of Tustin as designated by their respective department heads in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5903 - MANDATORY MEASURES TO PREVENT THE REMOVAL OF CARTS 
Owners of every retail establishment that uses ten (10) or more carts shall implement the following measures to 1) prevent the unauthorized removal of carts from their premises, and 2) provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment: 
A.  Mandatory Cart Containment Plan. Every retail establishment that uses ten (10) or more carts shall develop, implement, and comply with the provisions of a written plan submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of such business without authorization of the owner (the "Cart Containment Plan"). Two (2) or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single Cart Containment Plan. The Cart Containment Plan, at a minimum, shall include the following elements: 
1.  Signs Affixed to Carts. In accordance with applicable provisions of the California Business and Professions Code, every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that (a) identifies the owner of the cart or the retailer or both; (b) notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; (c) notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of the business, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law, and (d) lists a valid telephone number and/or address for returning the cart removed from the premises to the owner or retailer. 
2.  Notice to Customers. Written notice shall be provided to customers, in English and in Spanish, that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. Such notice may be provided in the form of flyers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags, direct mail, website notices, or any other means demonstrated to be effective. In addition, conspicuous signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and throughout the premises, including the parking area; warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. 
3.  Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of the retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the Cart Containment Plan until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business twenty-four (24) hours per day, other than carts currently in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the Cart Containment Plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building. 
4.  Installation of One (1) of the Following Physical Measures: 
i.  Disabling devices on all carts, which are activated when they cross a barriers at the perimeter of the premises; or 
ii.  Physical barriers located at doors, around loading areas, or other defined perimeters that will prevent the passage of carts beyond the barriers. The barriers may also be placed on the carts themselves so that the carts cannot pass through door openings or other defined perimeters. 
5.  Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of this Chapter and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. 
B.  Mandatory Cart Retrieval Plan. Every retail establishment that uses ten (10) or more carts shall develop, implement, and comply with the provisions of a written plan submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director for the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment. The Cart Retrieval Plan shall include the following elements: 
1.  Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one (1) or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The Cart Retrieval Plan shall either (a) identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties, provide the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned), and include the training schedule that each such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts, or (b) include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (other than confidential financial information which may be obscured from the contract). The owner shall provide written authorized to all retrieval personnel. (For purposes of this Section, those persons identified in the Cart Retrieval Plan as providing cart retrieval services, whether employees of the business or independent contract services, shall be referred to in this Section as retrieval personnel.) Such authorization shall be carried by each such person(s) while performing cart retrieval services off-site on behalf of the owner and shall be provided to any enforcement personnel upon request. Each vehicle used by retrieval personnel shall bear conspicuous signs on the vehicle identifying either the name of the retail establishment for which such retrieval service is being performed or, if applicable, the name of the cart retrieval service with which the retail establishment has contracted for such services. 
2.  Prompt Retrieval of Carts. Retrieval personnel or services shall assure that all public streets and all bus stops are patrolled and each lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment which is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property upon which the cart is found. At the discretion of the Community Development Director, the Cart Retrieval Plan shall (a) identify the perimeter streets and bus stops in which all streets within the perimeter area will be patrolled as required by this subsection; (b) the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and (c) the procedures to be employed by the retail establishment to identify and retrieve any lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts. The Cart Retrieval Plan shall (d) identify the number of trucks; (e) hours of operation of the retrieval personnel; and (f) such other information as reasonably required by the City to assure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provision of this Section and the approved Cart Retrieval Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5904 - PLAN SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL 
A.  New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Prior to the establishment of a business license, each new retail establishment and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the City that utilizes ten (10) or more carts shall present to the Community Development Director written plans consistent with the requirements of Section 5903 setting forth the physical measures it plans to implement to comply with the requirements of this Chapter. A user fee may be established by resolution of the City Council to recover the cost of plan review and processing the application. Such plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. 
B.  Existing Retail Establishments. Each existing retail establishment shall submit proposed plans complying with the requirements of Section 5903 of this Chapter to the Community Development Director within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days following the date of adoption of this ordinance [Ord. No. 1360]. Such plan review shall be subject to fees established by resolution of the City Council to recover the cost of plan review and processing the application. 
C.  Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed plan pursuant to Section 5903 of this Chapter, the Community Development Director shall review the proposed plan in accordance with Chapter 2, Section 9272 of the Tustin City Code. The Director shall approve or deny the proposed plan within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt thereof. If the proposed plan complies with each of the applicable requirements of this Chapter, the Director shall approve the plan; otherwise, the proposed plan shall be denied. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. A decision of the Director may be appealed by the owner in the time and manner provided in subsection 5904E. 
D.  Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment which has an approved plan conforming to the requirements of this Chapter may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan to the Community Development Director. Such amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure provided for a proposed plan as set forth in Subsection C. of this Section. 
E.  Filing of Appeal. Pursuant to Section 9272f of the Tustin City Code, any owner aggrieved by any adverse decision of the Community Development Director pursuant to this Chapter may appeal such decision to the Planning Commission. No appeal shall be accepted for filing and processing unless accompanied by the appeal processing fee as established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5905 - REVOCATION 
A.  Grounds for Revocation. An approved plan may be revoked by the Community Development Director upon his/her determination that any of the following grounds for revocation exist: 
1.  The owner of any retail establishment has received notice that the establishment is operating, or is permitting operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one (1) or more of the provisions of said approved plan(s) and has failed to correct said violation(s) for a period of al least sixty (60) calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City. 
2.  The mandatory Cart Containment Plan is inadequate to reasonably prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. 
3.  The mandatory Cart Retrieval Plan is inadequate to reasonably provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment. 
B.  Notice of Revocation. If at any time following the approval of a plan, the Community Development Director obtains information or evidence that any of the grounds set forth in subsection A. of this Section may exist, the Community Development Director shall issue a written order (Notice of Revocation) stating why the approved plan should be revoked and provide the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the approved plan. The Notice of Revocation shall include the information and evidence, or a summary thereof, upon which such order was issued and shall specify the effective date of the revocation of the plan, which date shall be at least ten (10) days after the delivery of the Notice. The Notice of Revocation shall become effective on the proposed effective date unless the owner files a timely written appeal pursuant to Subsection C. If a timely appeal is filed, the Notice of Revocation shall become effective on the date the Planning Commission acts upon the appeal, unless the Planning Commission determines the approved plan should not be revoked. 
C.  Decision of the Director. The decision by the Director shall become final unless the owner files a written appeal to the Planning Commission within ten (10) days of delivery of the Notice of Revocation. Such appeal shall be subject to a filing fee in the amount as prescribed by City Council Resolution. 
D.  Use of Shopping Carts Following Revocation is Prohibited. No retail establishment owner shall provide or make available shopping carts for the use of customers following the effective date of any decision revoking a required plan pursuant to this Chapter unless and until a new proposed plan is approved by the City for such retail establishment subject to the requirements of Section 5904 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
5906 - PENALTIES 
A.  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment that provides ten (10) or more shopping carts to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment without an approved mandatory Cart Containment Plan and mandatory Cart Retrieval Plan as required by this Chapter. 
If at any time, the Community Development Director determines that the owner is not in compliance with the mandatory Cart Containment Plan and/or the mandatory Cart Retrieval Plan as approved and on file with the City, the owner is considered to be in violation and is subject to penalties. Each day shall be considered a new and separate violation when a violation of any provision of this Chapter occurs. 
1.  Penalty for Violation. Violation of any of these provisions or failing to comply with the mandatory requirements of this Chapter may be prosecuted as provided for in Section 1121 of the Tustin City Code. The first violation to any provision of this Chapter committed by the owner of any retail establishment subject to the requirements of this Chapter shall be an infraction. Any subsequent violation committed by the owner of any retail establishment after having previously been convicted of violating said same section shall be a misdemeanor. 
2.  Proceedings. Any violation may be abated by the City through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be responsible for the City's attorney fees and legal costs associated with the abatement. 
3.  Penalties not Exclusive. The penalties set forth herein are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this Chapter, or in any other ordinances, laws, rules, or regulations of the City of Tustin, County of Orange, and the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Sec. II, 2-17-09)  
CHAPTER 10 - REPEALED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 5(a) of Ord. No. 1412, adopted May 15, 2012, repealed Ch. 10 of Art. 5, which pertained to charitable and commercial solicitations, consisted of sections 5910—5915, and derived from Ord. No. 1305, adopted Oct. 3, 2005. 
 
CHAPTER 11 - REPEALED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 5(b) of Ord. No. 1412, adopted May 15, 2012, repealed Ch. 11 of Art. 5, which pertained to the prohibition against certain forms of aggressive solicitation, consisted of sections 5920—5940, and derived from Ord. No. 1328, adopted Feb. 5, 2007. 
 
CHAPTER 12 - REPEALED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 1470, adopted September 20, 2016, repealed Chapter 12 of Article 5, which pertained to Sex Offenders Residency and Loitering, consisted of §§ 5950—5961, and derived from Ord. No. 1395, adopted March 1, 2011; and Ord. No. 1444, adopted June 17, 2014.  
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC WELFARE  
CHAPTER 1 - MINORS 
 
6100 - APPLICABILITY 
All places within the City where minors gather, congregate, come and go, attend or are attracted to are hereby made subject to the provisions of this chapter. All such regulated places are found to be likely to affect injuriously the public health, safety, morals and welfare. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 1)  
6101 - HARMFUL CONDITIONS PROHIBITED 
No place regulated hereunder shall maintain any condition or conditions which pose a threat or harm or are dangerous or deleterious to the health, morals, welfare or safety of minors. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 2) 
a 
Notice of Determination 
Upon determination by the Chief of Police that any such place does pose a threat or harm or is dangerous or deleterious to the health, morals, welfare or safety of minors, a notice in writing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the last address known to the Chief of Police for the person last known to be the owner, lessee, occupant or manager of the premises that such a determination has been made. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 3) 
b 
Hearing—Failure to Request 
If no request for hearing is made in writing within five (5) days following such written notice, by any owner, lessee, occupant or manager, the determination by the Chief of Police shall automatically become final. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 4) 
c 
Request for Hearing 
Upon receipt by any persons of such a notice, they may within five (5) days thereafter deliver to the Chief of Police, in writing, their request for a hearing. Such request shall state whether the person requests a private or a public hearing. Upon receipt of such request for hearing the Chief of Police shall set a public hearing before the City Council if a public hearing is requested, or a private hearing before the Chief of Police if a private hearing is requested. Such hearing shall be set for a date within thirty (30) days following such request for hearing. Notice in writing shall be given to the party or parties requesting such hearing at least five (5) days before such hearing. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 5) 
d 
Determination 
At such hearing there shall be presented the evidence upon which the determination has first been made and the owner, occupant, lessee or manager of the premises shall be afforded an opportunity to present such evidence and arguments as he may desire. At the close of such hearing a determination shall be made as to whether or not such place poses a threat or harm or is deleterious to the health, morals, welfare or safety of minors. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 6) 
e 
Notice to Close Business 
Upon determination as hereinabove provided that such place does pose a threat or harm or is deleterious to the health, morals, welfare or safety of minors a notice in writing of such determination shall be given to the owner, lessee, occupant or manager that such place shall close within five (5) days after such notice is received unless evidence to the satisfaction of either the City Council or the Chief of Police has been presented showing correction or elimination of such condition prior to such time. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 7) 
f 
Maintenance of Premises for Public Use Prohibited 
After such written notice has been given as provided herein it shall be unlawful for any person to continue to maintain such premises or cause the same to be maintained or open to the public or minors, or to allow minors upon such premises. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 9) 
(g) 
Business Not to be Issued License 
Upon any determination as herein provided that any business does pose a threat or harm or is dangerous or deleterious to the health, morals, welfare or safety of minors, no business license shall be issued for the premises until such condition or circumstances have been corrected to the satisfaction of the City Council or the Chief of Police and any existing business license shall be automatically revoked. (Ord. No. 222, Sec. 8)  
6102 - CURFEW—PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE 
a 
Definitions 
For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 
"City" means City of Tustin. 
"Curfew hours" means the period from 11:00 p.m. any evening of the week, until 5:00 a.m. the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
"Public place" means any place in the City of Tustin to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, shopping centers, and malls. 
"Remain" means to linger or stay, or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
"Responsible adult" means a person at least eighteen (18) years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
b 
Curfew Restriction 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours; 
(2)  No parent or guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; 
(3)  No owner, operator or employee of any establishment shall knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
c 
Exceptions 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under this Section that the minor is: 
(a)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; 
(b)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
(c)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(d)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(e)  Involved in an emergency; 
(f)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence; 
(g)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Tustin, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, any of the foregoing activities; 
(h)  Exercising First Amendment rights of speech or associational activity protected by the United States Constitution or civil liberties protected by the California Constitution; or is 
(i)  Emancipated pursuant to federal or state law. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if the parent notified the police department that the minor was out after curfew hours without permission, or failed to obey the parents' order to stay home during curfew hours. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
d 
Enforcement 
(1)  Every law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to demand from any person whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe is a minor who is violating this Section and does not come within the exceptions herein that such person give his or her name and address, and the name of his or her parent(s), guardian(s) or other responsible adult(s), if any, who has the care and custody of such person, and furnish proof of his or her age and that he or she comes within the exceptions herein. 
(2)  If, after demanding the information described in subpart 1 above the officer still has reasonable cause to believe the person is violating this Section and does not come within the exceptions herein, the officer is hereby authorized and empowered to take any or more than one of the following actions: 
(a)  To issue a warning to such person and/or his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) about the consequences of violating this Section; 
(b)  To take such minor into custody and transport him or her to his or her residence or to another place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult; 
(c)  To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such minor and demand from any of them the information described in subpart (1) above; 
(d)  To communicate with the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such minor and demand of any of them that he or she take the minor to the minor's residence or to any place where the minor will be supervised by a responsible adult; 
(e)  To issue to such minor a notice to appear before the Juvenile Court, a Juvenile Court referee or a juvenile traffic hearing officer, as appropriate; 
(f)  To take such minor into temporary custody in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 625 and 625.5, subject to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 207; 
(g)  To take such other action or actions as are permitted by the laws of the State of California and are deemed necessary by the officer to safeguard the well being of such minor. 
(3)  A law enforcement officer shall not take any of the enforcement actions described in part (2) above unless the officer reasonably believes that the person with respect to whom the action(s) is taken is violating this Section and, based upon any responses and other circumstances, has no defense hereunder. 
e 
Failure of parent or guardian to take minor to safe place during curfew hours 
It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to fail to take a minor to his or her residence or to a place where he or she will be supervised by a responsible adult, when so demanded by any law enforcement officer in accordance with subpart (2) (d) of subsection (d) above. 
f 
Violation and Penalty 
Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, one hundred fifty for a second violation of the same provision within any twelve consecutive month period, and two hundred for a third violation of the same provision within any twelve consecutive month period. Any fourth and subsequent violation of the same provision of this Section within any twelve consecutive month period shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. No. 454, Sec. 1; Ord No. 1068, Sec. 1, 5-20-91; Ord. No. 1216, Sec. 2, 5-17-99)  
6103 - INDECENT PUBLICATIONS 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer to sell, rent, lease, expose, exhibit or circulate in any public place, or anywhere in view of a store or place frequented by minors, or where it may come into the possession of or be disclosed to minors, any immoral, indecent or obscene publication. Immoral, indecent or obscene publications shall include printed written matter, photographs, motion picture films, videotapes or any other representation which: 
(a)  The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and 
(b)  Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of: 
(1)  Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or 
(2)  Masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of the genitals or genital area. 
Nothing herein contained is intended to include or prescribe any matter which, when considered as a whole, and in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 4, 2-19-80) 
CROSS REFERENCES: Lewd films, section 3251 et seq.; adult businesses, section 9611 et seq.  
6104 - PROHIBITION OF STANDING, SITTING, OR LYING IN OR UPON PROPERTY SO AS TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE 
a 
A Public Property 
No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, shall stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public street, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, or mall so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
b 
Private Property Open to the Public 
No person after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with this section, shall stand, sit, or lie in or upon any portion of private property utilized for public space, so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; (nor) shall any person block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1069, Sec. 1, 6-3-91; Ord. No. 1287, Sec. 4, 8-16-04)  
CHAPTER 2 - FIREARMS 
 
6200 - CONCEALED WEAPONS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed about his person any pistol, revolver or any other weapon with which he might take the life of any person or do serious bodily injury to the person of another; provided, however, that the City Council may, in its discretion, grant the privilege of carrying such weapon to any person upon his written application made to the City Council, bearing also a statement of approval from the Chief of Police. (Ord. No. 9, Sec. 6)  
6201 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, AIR GUNS, ETC., PROHIBITED 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a police officer while on duty to discharge any rifle, pistol, or firearm within the City except (1) in target shooting in shooting galleries regularly licensed by the City, or (2) for agricultural or other reasonable, non-recreational use pursuant to and in accordance with a permit duly issued by the License and Permit Board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any air gun, spring gun, sling shot or other similar device within the City. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, project or cause to be thrown or projected any object, missile or projectile of any kind toward any other person in such a manner as to constitute a hazard of bodily injury to such person. Usual and ordinary sports activities are hereby excepted from the prohibitions of this subsection. (Ord. No. 750)  
CHAPTER 3 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT  
PART 1 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
6310 - DRINKING IN PUBLIC 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, restroom or other property owned or maintained by the City. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person while in any public park, public sidewalk, public street, public building, or any area designated for public parking, to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in such a location, any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or contents of which has been partially removed. 
C.  This Section shall not apply where the possession is within premises located in a park or other public place for which a license has been issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, of for which a written permit has been issued for a special event by the Director of Community Development pursuant to established procedures and policies of the Community Development Department and upon written approval of the City Manager and Chief of Police. 
(Ord. No. 63, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 856, Sec. 1, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 1364, Sec. 2, 6-2-09)  
6311, 6312 - RESERVED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 856, Sec. 3, adopted Aug. 17, 1981, repealed former Sections 6311 and 6312 which pertained to drunkenness in public and drunken or disorderly conduct and were derived from Ord. No. 63, Sec. 1.  
PART 2 - INHALATION 
 
6320 - INHALATION OF FUMES PROHIBITED 
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, inhale the fumes from any model glue or any other intoxicating, stupefying, exhilarating or anesthetic drug, chemical, or substance; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. (Ord. No. 349)  
6321 - DEFINITION OF GLUE 
"Model glue" as used in this Part shall mean any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of model airplanes, boats, and automobiles, containing toluene, acetone, or other solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic or intoxicating vapors. (Ord. No. 349)  
6322 - CERTAIN POSSESSION PROHIBITED 
No person shall, for the purpose of violating, or aiding another to violate, any provision of this Part, intentionally possess, transfer possession, or receive possession of any model glue or other intoxicating, stupefying, exhilarating, or anesthetic drug, chemical or substance. (Ord. No. 349)  
PART 3 - URINATION AND HUMAN WASTE 
 
6330 - URINATION AND HUMAN WASTE 
No person shall urinate or defecate on private property in an area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place, except in a public restroom. (Ord. No. 9, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1067, Sec. 1, 5-6-91)  
PART 4 - POLICE RESPONSE SERVICE AT LARGE GATHERINGS 
 
6340 - PURPOSE 
The City of Tustin finds and determines that: the control of large parties, gatherings, or events on private property is necessary when such continued activities is determined to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. Police officers have been required to make as many as three return calls to a location of a party gathering event within a short period of time in order to disburse uncooperative participants and the return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources, often leaving other areas of the City without minimal levels of police protection; all of which creates a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general. (Ord. No. 1098, Sec. 1, 10-5-92)  
6341 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this part, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Large party, gathering, or event" is a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion, or for a social activity. 
(b)  "Police services fee" shall include all costs of personnel and equipment for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in the remaining at the party, gathering, or event, at a rate established by resolution of the City Council, including, but not limited to, the salaries of police personnel, the actual costs of any medical treatment to injured officers, the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property, and overhead and administrative costs related to all of the following. 
(c)  "Person responsible for the event" includes the following: 
(1)  Each tenant, renter and lessee of the premises; 
(2)  Each owner and part-owner, who also is an occupant of the premises; 
(3)  Each person in charge of the premises; and 
(4)  Each person who organized the event. 
"Premises" means the housing unit or, in the case of multifamily housing, the individual apartment unit, at which the event is conducted. 
If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services. 
(d)  "Special security assignment" means the assignment of police officers and services during a second call and all subsequent calls to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law. (Ord. No. 1098, Sec. 1, 10-5-92)  
6342 - POLICE SERVICES AT LARGE PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS REQUIRING A SECOND RESPONSE 
When a large party, gathering, or event occurs on private property, and a police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, that officer shall order a special security assignment to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, and disburse the gathering. The person(s) responsible for the event shall be liable for the police services fee for the special security assignment during the second and all subsequent responses by the police. 
The provisions to this part are an additional authority for regulation of large gatherings, and shall supplement and not supplant exercise of any other available law including, but not limited to, arrest or citation of violators of the State Penal Code or other local regulations. (Ord. No. 1098, Sec. 1, 10-5-92)  
6343 - POLICE SERVICES FEE 
A police services fee shall be based upon actual cost of services rendered in accordance with the schedule of fees set by City Council resolution. 
The amount of such fees charged shall be deemed a debt to the City from the person or persons responsible for the event receiving said services. If minors are involved as persons responsible for the event, then their parents or guardians shall be responsible for said debt. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought by the City in its own name for recovery of such amount including reasonable attorney's fees. (Ord. No. 1098, Sec. 1, 10-5-92)  
6344 - BILLING 
The Chief of Police shall notify the Chief of Collections of the City in writing following such performance of police services, of the name and address of the responsible person(s), the date and time of the incident, the services performed, the cost thereof, and such other information as may be required. The Chief of Collections of the City shall, thereafter, cause appropriate billings to be made to the responsible parties.  
6345 - ADOPTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS 
The Chief of Police is further authorized to adopt departmental administrative procedures for implementation of these cost recovery provisions. (Ord. No. 1098, Sec. 1, 10-5-92)  
PART 5 - TRESPASS ON EXTERIOR PREMISES OF COMMERCIAL PROPERTY 
 
6350 - REMAINING ON EXTERIOR PREMISES WHEN A BUSINESS IS CLOSED 
(a)  Findings and intent. The City has received complaints from business owners that individuals enter upon and remain overnight on the exterior portion of their private commercial property without owner consent. This transient occupation leads to health and safety impacts on properties including urination and the leaving of waste and debris. This section is intended to prohibit such transient overnight occupation when owners post appropriate signage on their properties in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon the exterior premises of any private commercial property, including any parking area, when the business is closed, and the property is posted with at least one (1) sign at a pedestrian entry point prohibiting the presence of any person on the property during non-business hours. "Private commercial property" means any real property held, owned, or controlled by private interests and which is zoned by the City for any form of business enterprise, including, but not limited to, retail, office, commercial, industrial, or recreational purpose. 
(c)  Signage. The sign shall be a minimum size of seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches and shall state: 
"PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Entrance to this property is limited to patrons only. It is a trespass and violation of law to remain on this property during non-business hours. (Tustin City Code section 6350(b)) 
Business Hours are: 
( insert hours ) " 
(d)  Scope and application. This section shall not apply to any person who has a bona fide intent to exercise an established constitutional right. 
(Ord. No. 1412, Sec. II, 5-15-12)  
CHAPTER 4 - NARCOTIC PARAPHERNALIA  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
6410 - PURPOSE 
The task of protecting young persons from drug abuse poses unique problems in that young people often lack the discernment and judgment of adults. They often do not make the distinctions adults make between the freedom to advertise or sell an item which may be used for illegal purposes and the impropriety of using that item in an illegal manner. The unrestricted display and sale by businesses of narcotics paraphernalia, enumerated in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 11364, may impress upon young people the conception that the use of such paraphernalia with illegal drugs is endorsed by businesses and condoned by the community. The impression of endorsement or acceptance of controlled substance use is likely to encourage drug use by young people. Therefore, in order to protect the health, safety, and well-being of young people in the community, it is necessary to regulate the advertising, display and sale of such materials in community businesses. (Ord. No. 818, Sec. 1, 1-7-80)  
6411 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
"Advertise" shall mean to verbally, literally or pictorially display, publicize, or tell of an item or a quantum of merchandise that is offered for sale. 
"Business" shall mean any commercial enterprise or establishment whether ongoing or transient and whether occupying indoor or outdoor premises. 
"Device," "contrivance," "instrument," or "paraphernalia" shall mean bongs, waterpipes or roach clips; and/or pipes, scales, pouches, cigarette papers, and/or pillboxes located within fifty (50) feet of either bongs, waterpipes, or roach clips; and/or literature, posters, or wearing apparel displaying a method of using, growing, manufacturing, or consuming controlled substances as defined in the Health and Safety Code. 
"Display" shall mean to show or to have available for viewing. 
"Young Person" shall mean any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Sell" shall mean to transfer possession of, for consideration, or gratuity. (Ord. No. 818, Sec. 1, 1-7-80)  
6412 - YOUNG PERSONS 
(a)  No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling, or displaying for the purpose of sale, any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such young person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. 
(b)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale, advertising, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian. 
(c)  This Section shall not apply to a licensed pharmacist dispensing properly prescribed drugs otherwise illegal, and selling and advertising devices for the consumption of those prescribed drugs. (Ord. No. 818, Sec. 1, 1-7-80)  
6413 - SALE AND DISPLAY ROOMS 
No person or business may maintain in any place or business the display for sale, or any offering for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments, or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting of marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance unless such place or business is located wholly within a room or enclosure from which persons under the age of eighteen (18) years of age who, not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded and the inside and contents of which are not visible from the outside. (Ord. No. 818, Sec. 1, 1-7-80)  
CHAPTER 5 - PICKETING OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
 
6510 - PURPOSE 
In enacting this chapter, the City Council finds as follows: 
(a)  Protecting the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the homes of residents of the City is a significant governmental interest. 
(b)  A special benefit of the privacy all residents enjoy within their residential properties is the ability to avoid unwanted intrusions and unwanted speech. 
(c)  The targeting picketing of a residential property creates a "captive audience" situation because the occupants cannot readily move to another residence in order to avoid the unwelcome picketing activity being directed at them. 
(d)  Picketing which targets specific residential properties of residents of the City is thus, an inherently and offensive intrusion on residential privacy. 
(e)  The protection of the right to privacy in the home requires the enactment of a reasonable time, place, and manner restriction upon picketing activity. 
(f)  This chapter is a necessary time, place and manner restriction intended to reconcile and protect the First Amendment rights of picketers to peacefully communicate and express their opinions to the public and the right of privacy at home. 
(g)  A buffer zone is a reasonable way to reconcile privacy interests and First Amendment rights when picketing targets a specific residential property. 
(h)  An ordinance prohibiting the targeted picketing of homes has been upheld by the United States Supreme Court in Frisby vs. Schulz (1988) 487 U.S. 474, and a three hundred (300) foot buffer zone has been upheld by a California Court of Appeal as a reasonable exercise of the City's legislative discretion in regulating such targeted picketing (City of San Jose v. Superior Court of Santa Clara County, (1995) 32 Cal. App. 4th 330). 
(i)  This chapter is not intended to preclude the right to picket in a residential area generally and in a manner that does not target or focus upon a particular residential property. (Ord. No. 1194, Sec. 1, 2-2-98)  
6520 - PICKETING WITHIN 300 FEET OF TARGETED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES PROHIBITED. 
(a)  No person shall engage in picketing activity that is targeted at and is within three hundred (300) feet of a residential property. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "residential property" means any property being used by its occupants solely for nontransient residential uses. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "targeted" picketing means picketing activity that is targeted at a particular residential property and is intended to proceed or does proceed on a definite course or route in front of or around a particular residential property. 
(d)  For purposes of this chapter, three hundred (300) feet shall be measured from the nearest property line of the targeted residential property to the picketing activity. 
(e)  This chapter does not and shall not be interpreted to preclude picketing in a residential area that is not targeted at a particular residential property. (Ord. No. 1194, Sec. 1, 2-2-98)  
6530 - VIOLATIONS 
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both. No fine imposed pursuant to this section for any single violation thereof shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Imprisonment shall not exceed six (6) months for each violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. 1194, Sec. 1, 2-2-98)  
CHAPTER 6 - PUBLIC NUDITY 
 
6610 - PURPOSE 
The City of Tustin has a valid governmental interest in protecting public order, decency and morality. The City Council of the City of Tustin finds that the appearance of people in the nude in a public place or in a place open to, or visible by, the public is inimical to public order, decency and morality. The United States Supreme Court has upheld regulation of nudity to protect the public order, decency and morality in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. By this chapter the City Council of the City of Tustin intends to regulate public nudity in public places. (Ord. No. 1133, Sec. 1, 7-18-94)  
6620 - PUBLIC NUDITY PROHIBITED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any public park, playground, public right-of-way, or in any other public place or public accommodation, or in any place open to the public or obviously open to public view (with or without payment of an admission fee), to knowingly and intentionally: 
(a)  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region; or 
(b)  Use any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(c)  Expose the nipples and/or areolae of the female breast, except as necessary while breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years of age; or 
(d)  Use any device (commonly known as a "pasty" or "pasties") worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areolae of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areolae. (Ord. No. 1133, Sec. 1, 7-18-94)  
6630 - EXEMPTIONS 
The prohibitions set forth in section 6620 shall not apply to: 
(a)  Any child under ten (10) years of age; or 
(b)  Any acts prohibited, or the prohibition of which is preempted, by any provision of state law. 
(c)  Any theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment devoted to theatrical performances. The phrase "theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment devoted to theatrical performances" shall mean a building, playhouse, room hall or other place having fixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage upon which theatrical performances or similar forms of artistic expression are presented, and where such performances are not incidental to the promoting of the sale of food, drink or other merchandise and for which a City license or permit for a theater is in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 1133, Sec. 1, 7-18-94)  
6640 - VIOLATIONS 
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both. No fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for any single violation thereof shall exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Imprisonment shall not exceed six (6) months for each violation of this chapter. (Ord. No. 1133, Sec. 1, 7-18-94)  
CHAPTER 7 - REPEALED[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 5(c) of Ord. No. 1412, adopted May 15, 2012, repealed Ch. 7 of Art. 6, which pertained to the solicitation in private commercial parking areas, consisted of sections 6700—6711, and derived from Ord. No. 1136, adopted Nov. 7, 1994. 
 
CHAPTER 8 - AMBULANCE SERVICE 
 
6800 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 
It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the City in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest, and to provide a means for the designation of exclusive operating areas. This chapter is modeled after Division 9, Article I of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (County Model Ambulance Ordinance No. 3517; OCC §4-9-1). 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6801 - DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
a  Advanced life support service ("ALS") and basic life support service ("BLS") mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
b  Ambulance means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter. 
c  Ambulance service means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
d  Ambulance service operator means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service. 
e  Attendant means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients. 
f  County means the County of Orange, State of California. 
g  City means the City of Tustin, California. 
h  Department means the Emergency Medical Services Agency of the County of Orange or the Health Care Agency of the County of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. 
i  Dispatcher means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient. 
j  Driver means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance. 
k  Emergency means sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency. 
l  Exclusive Operating Area ("EOA") means the same as defined in Section 1797.85 of the Health and Safety Code, and which is established pursuant to Section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code. 
m  Emergency service means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency. 
n  Fire Chief means the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. 
o  Health Officer means the Orange County Health Officer or other official designated by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County to perform the Health Officer's functions under this chapter. 
p  Licensee means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service. 
q  Medical services means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
r  Paramedic means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
s  Patient means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person. 
t  Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
u  Physician means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code. 
v  Public safety agency means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the County. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6802 - LICENSE REQUIRED 
a  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, within the City without possession of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. A license may specify the specific geographical area within the City in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOA's, reference to the EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter. 
b  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "state of war emergency," "state of emergency," or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code. 
(2)  Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the City regardless of destination. 
(3)  Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6803 - TRANSFER AND TERM OF LICENSE 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this Section: 
a  Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
(1)  A sole proprietorship; 
(2)  A partnership, including any change in the partners; and 
(3)  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise. 
b  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver. 
c  A sale or transfer of over ten (10) percent of the assets of a licensee. 
A licensee may apply to the Health Officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6804 - APPLICATIONS 
a  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the Health Officer. 
b  Each applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein; 
(2)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients; 
(3)  The names under which the applicant has engaged, does engage, and proposes to engage in ambulance service; 
(4)  A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicles, a description of the company's program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle's radio(s); 
(5)  Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by State or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made; 
(6)  The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service; 
(7)  Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application; 
(8)  A description of the applicant company's training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers, and dispatchers; 
(9)  Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter; 
(10)  Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the Department; 
(11)  As to new applications or transfers as specified in Section 6803 of this chapter, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of Section 6806(d)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7); 
(12)  A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operation; and 
(13)  A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service, and, if so: 
(i)  The number of basic life support service or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift; 
(ii)  The emergency response area(s) to receive basic life support service or advanced life support service; and 
(iii)  The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants. 
(14)  Such other information as the health officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
c  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications, except the requirement of Section 6804(b)(11). 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6805 - INVESTIGATIONS 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the Health Officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the Health Officer deems necessary to determine if: 
a  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate, or engage in the provision of ambulance services; 
b  The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6806 - ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE 
a  The Health Officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the Health Officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, has been paid. 
b  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the Health Officer in writing of the reasons therefore. 
c  The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the Health Officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this chapter or any other law of the State of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000 for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000 per person and $1,000,000 annual aggregate. Workers' compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the Health Officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the Health Officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a thirty (30) day notice to be given to the Department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this chapter. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply. 
d  Grounds for denial of a license application shall be: 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290; 
(3)  Use of narcotics or other controlled substances; 
(4)  Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics, or other controlled substances; 
(5)  Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages; 
(6)  Conviction during the preceding seven (7) years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California; 
(7)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain. 
e  In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the Health Officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the person(s) involved. The Health Officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6807 - LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 
a  The Health Officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of state law or regulation or this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license. 
b  Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the Health Officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the reason(s) for which the proposed action is to be taken; 
(2)  Set a hearing for not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven (7) days after the date of the notice; 
(3)  Specify the date, time, and place of the hearing; and 
(4)  Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any. 
c  If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this Section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the Health Officer may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time. 
d  At the hearing, the Health Officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee. 
e  The Health Officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty-four (24) hours when the Health Officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceedings, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five (5) days of the licensee's request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
f  Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the Department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the Health Care Agency Director. 
g  The Health Care Agency Director shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days after receiving the Hearing Officer's findings and conclusions. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6808 - APPEAL TO ORANGE COUNTY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS 
In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6809 - NOTIFICATION 
The licensee shall notify the Health Officer within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term "substantial change" shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6810 - PERSONNEL STANDARDS 
a  A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section. 
b  Attendants shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current Emergency Medical Technician-1A ("EMT -1A"), or State educational equivalent, certification in compliance with all State laws, rules, and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the Health Officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the Health Officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefore. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this chapter no less than once every four (4) years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same form and manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license. 
c  Each licensee shall have at least one (1) dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a twenty-four (24) hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, "adequate" training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets State standards, if any, or County requirements. 
d  Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6811 - RATES 
No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors or the Orange County Fire Authority. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6812 - SELECTION OF AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSEES FOR EXCLUSIVE OPERATING AREAS. 
a  The Orange County Fire Authority shall administer the competitive process, on behalf of the local EMS agency, for the award of EOA contracts within the City. The Orange County Fire Authority shall select and shall enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA, unless the City has provided written notification to the Orange County Fire Authority of its intention to retain licensee selection and contracting authority for itself. Such contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other back-up service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. In awarding these contracts, the Orange County Fire Authority, or City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority, shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the City evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of: 
(1)  The quality of service to be provided; 
(2)  The level of service to be provided; 
(3)  The rates charged for services to be provided; and 
(4)  The cost, if any, to the awarding authority. 
b  The Fire Chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the Orange County Fire Authority, or by the City if applicable, under this Section. The Fire chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The Fire Chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider which has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, as the primary contractor as well as the emergency ambulance service provider(s) who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area. 
c  In the event no proposals acceptable to the Orange County Fire Authority, or to the City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority under the provisions of this section, are received for one or more EOA's, the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services for the EOA. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected area(s), provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this chapter. 
d  No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request. 
No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless: 
(1)  A paramedic is present at the location of the patient; or 
(2)  A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or 
(3)  A safety qualified employee of the Orange County Fire Authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic. 
Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under Section 6813 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6813 - RULES AND REGULATIONS 
a  As to all sections of this chapter except Section 6812, the Health Officer shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
b  As to Section 6812 of this chapter, the Fire Chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this section. Prior to adoption, the Fire Chief's rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
c  The Health Officer or the Fire Chief or their respective designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment, and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the Health Officer, at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6814 - COMPLAINTS 
The  Department, the City, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the Department and the Fire Chief setting forth such allegations. The Department and Fire Chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notification. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6815 - VARIANCE 
As to all but Section 6812 of this chapter, the Health Officer may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to Section 6812 of this chapter, the Fire Chief may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to the Health Officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days in duration. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
6816 - VIOLATIONS—PENALTY 
Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1285, Sec. 2, 6-21-04)  
CHAPTER 9 - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
6900 - FINDINGS 
The City Council of the City of Tustin finds and determines that the need to regulate the installation, operation, and maintenance of residential and commercial burglary and robbery alarm systems is of paramount importance for the proper protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. California Business and Professions Code Section 7592.8 authorizes local authorities of any City or County, within the exercise of their police power, to enact ordinances governing false alarm activations and responses. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and controls to reduce the incidents of false burglary and robbery alarm calls responded to by the Police Department. The fees collected by this chapter will be used to offset the costs associated with the Police Department's responses to burglary and robbery alarms. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6901 - DEFINITIONS 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
(1)  "Alarm agent" means any person who is employed by an alarm business, whether directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring on any building, place, or premises any alarm system. 
(2)  "Alarm business" means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or monitoring any alarm system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, installed, or monitored an alarm system in or on any building, place, or premises. 
(3)  "Alarm system" means any electronic device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when actuated, emits a sound or transmits a signal to indicate that an emergency exists, and to which police are expected to respond. 
(4)  "Alarm user" means a person contracting with an alarm business for the leasing, servicing, or maintaining of an alarm system, or who owns, uses, or maintains a proprietor alarm. 
(5)  "Audible alarm" means a device designed to emit an audible sound to alert others of an unauthorized entry onto property, an unauthorized entry into a structure, or the commission of a robbery. 
(6)  "City," "Chief of Police", and "Police" mean the City of Tustin, the Tustin Chief of Police, and the Tustin Police Department. 
(6.1)  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Tustin or his or her designee." 
(7)  "False alarm" means an alarm signal which causes response by the Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist. "Response" means arrival at the location of the alarm. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal activated by earthquake, extraordinary weather conditions, or other act of God. 
(8)  "Proprietor alarm" means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business. 
(9)  "Silent alarm" means that type of alarm system which, when activated, sounds a bell or buzzer, or turns on a light at a pre-designated place other than the location where the alarm has been installed. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1341, Sec. 1, 8-7-07)  
6902 - EXEMPTIONS—SPECIAL ALARM SYSTEMS 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Audible alarms affixed to automobiles, unless the vehicle alarm is connected to a central monitoring system; 
(2)  Fire or smoke sensor alarm systems or detectors when such systems are not used as, or in lieu of, intrusion detection devices or alarm systems; 
(3)  Emergency medical crisis alarms when such systems are not used as, or in lieu of, intrusion detection devices or alarm systems. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6903 - PRE-EXISTING SYSTEMS/90-DAYS TO OBTAIN PERMIT 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all alarm systems, as defined in Section 6901(3) and not specifically exempted by Section 6902, within the City. All owners of alarm systems installed and operating prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date of this ordinance to obtain an alarm user permit pursuant to Section 6911. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6904 - AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF 
All audible alarm systems, excluding fire alarms that emit sound to indicate the functioning of an automatic fire sprinkler system, shall include a device that will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to not longer than fifteen (15) minutes after activation when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure, and fifteen (15) minutes when the alarm is protecting a commercial or industrial structure. Such systems shall include an automatic resetting device, which shall cause the system to be re-armed upon automatic shutoff. Any alarm system which causes an audible sound for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes is declared to be a public nuisance, which may be the subject of prosecution under Article 5, Chapter 5, Section 5500 et seq. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6905 - ALARM SYSTEMS TERMINATING AT POLICE DEPARTMENT 
No alarm system shall be installed which, when activated, causes an alarm or signal to be sent directly to the Police Department or any facility thereof, or any City building, unless and until written permission therefore is received from the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is authorized to limit the number of such devices terminating into the Police Department if he/she determines that any such device or devices would interfere with the normal functions of the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6906 - AUTOMATIC CALLING DEVICES 
No person other than an authorized agent of the Police Department shall use, maintain, operate, or attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, any alarm system or other device or combination of devices that is arranged, adjusted, or programmed so that it will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other automatic means, initiate, call, and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to the City or its Police Department, or to any radio frequency used thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6907 - USE OF PANIC BUTTON 
A burglary or robbery panic button shall only be activated when there is an immediate threat to life or property. It shall be unlawful to activate such panic button to merely summon the Police, or in lieu of dialing 911. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6908 - INSTRUCTION AS TO OPERATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS 
It shall be the responsibility of the alarm business to instruct the alarm user in the proper use and operation of the alarm system, whether silent or audible, as frequently as necessary, especially in those factors which can cause false alarms. The alarm business shall instruct the alarm user that activating an alarm in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 of the California Penal Code. Prior to activation of an alarm system, the alarm business shall inform the alarm user that an alarm user permit issued by the City is required and shall supply the alarm user with a City alarm user permit application. The alarm user permit application shall be made available to the alarm business by the Police Department at no cost. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6909 - ADMINISTRATION 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee(s). The Chief of Police shall have the power to interpret this chapter and to issue guidelines, as necessary, to assist in enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6910 - ALARM USER PERMIT 
(a)  (1)  No person shall install or cause to be installed, use, or maintain an alarm system on premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the City without first having obtained an alarm user permit from the City in accordance with this section. The application for an alarm user permit shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Police Department and shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
(A)  The address of the premises where the alarm system is to be located; 
(B)  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm user applicant; 
(C)  The name, address, and telephone number of a second person who may be contacted in case of an emergency; 
(D)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or alarm business who will render service or repairs to the alarm system during any hour of the day or night. 
(E)  The name, address, telephone number, alarm license number and city business license number of the installing alarm company. 
(2)  The alarm user permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  A separate alarm user permit shall be required for each premises of address on which an alarm system is used or installed. Alarm system permits shall not be transferable. A new alarm user permit shall be required whenever there is a change in a business name, ownership, or location. With regard to an alarm system installed at a residence, a new alarm user permit shall be required whenever there is a change in ownership. For any change in occupants of a residence with an alarm system, the holder of the alarm user permit shall update the notification list as submitted to the City in his or her application to include the name(s) and telephone number(s) of the new occupants. 
(c)  If requested by the Police Department, the person(s) listed on the notification list in the alarm user permit application shall be required to be present at the alarm location within forty-five (45) minutes after being advised that the Police Department has received any signal or message of an alarm activation at that location. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6911 - ALARM USER PERMIT—APPROVAL/DENIAL 
(a)  Approval. Upon finding the requested alarm user permit application conforms to the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code and contains all the information requested in the application form, the Chief of Police shall issue the alarm user permit. The applicant shall pay an alarm user permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Denial. The Chief of Police shall deny the alarm user permit application if he or she determines any of the following: 
(1)  The requested alarm user permit is in conflict with any provision of the Tustin City Code; 
(2)  The applicant, or his/her employee(s) or agent(s), has knowingly made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit. 
(3)  The applicant has failed to pay the alarm user permit or application fee required by this chapter; 
(4)  The applicant has had a similar permit revoked pursuant to Section 6915 herein within the past year and has failed to show material change in the circumstances justifying the revocation since the date of revocation. 
(c)  Any such denial is final unless the applicant appeals the decision to the City Manager in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6912 - ALARM BUSINESS REGISTRATION 
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on an alarm business within the City, nor shall any person provide alarm system installation, maintenance, and/or monitoring services within the City, without first: (i) obtaining a City business license, and (ii) applying for and receiving a state alarm company operator license therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 7512) and filing a copy of such license with the Chief of Police. In the event its license is suspended, revoked, or otherwise rendered invalid by the state issuing authority, the alarm business shall notify the Chief of Police in writing of such state action within five (5) days thereof. Each alarm business owner providing alarm system services within the City is required to provide the Chief of Police with the name, address, and telephone number of each new alarm system subscriber within the City prior to the activation of the new alarm system. Such notification shall also include the name, address, and telephone number of each new subscriber when any existing alarm system operating within the City has been sold or transferred to another subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6913 - TERM OF PERMIT 
Alarm user permits are issued for a one (1) calendar year period from January 1 to December 31, or from the date after January 1 that the application is submitted and approved to December 31 of the same year. The application fee shall not be prorated based on the date of application. All alarm user permits expire and must be renewed annually. The alarm user permit renewal fee shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6914 - FALSE ALARM RESPONSE FEES 
(a)  In addition to the alarm user permit fee, a permitted alarm user may become liable to the City for the costs of the Police Department responding to an excessive false alarm emitted by his or her alarm system. For purposes of this section, "excessive false alarm" means every false burglary alarm occurring after three (3) false burglary alarms have been received from any one (1) protected premises or from any one (1) permitted alarm system within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. Responses to excessive false burglary alarms are subject to false burglary alarm response fees. The false burglary alarm fees shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council. A higher fee may be established by resolution of the City Council for each additional false burglary alarm during any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. 
(b)  A false robbery alarm ("211 Alarm") response fee shall be paid to the City for every manually activated false robbery alarm call. The false robbery alarm fees shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council. A higher fee may be established by resolution of the City Council for each additional manually activated false robbery alarm during any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. 
(c)  Any burglary alarm which causes ten (10) or more false alarms, or any manually activated robbery alarm which causes four (4) or more false alarms, may be declared a public nuisance, and will be subject to revocation of permit as specified in section 6915 of this chapter. False alarms responded to beyond ten (10) for burglary and four (4) for robbery will continue to be billed at the rates established by resolution of the City Council, and the Police Department will no longer be required to respond to alarms at said address once the Police Department has sent a letter, return receipt requested, to the owner or occupant of the subject premises advising of the cessation of such service and the reasons therefore. 
(d)  A response to a non-permitted burglary or robbery alarm, whether false or valid, shall result in the assessment of a non-permitted alarm fee. If an alarm user permit is applied for within thirty (30) days of the response to a non-permitted burglary or robbery alarm, the non-permitted alarm fee shall be waived. However, if an alarm user permit is not applied for within thirty (30) days of the response, each additional response to a non-permitted location, whether false or valid, shall result in the assessment of a higher fee, as established by resolution of the City Council. Should a non-permitted false burglary alarm frequency reach more than ten (10), or a non-permitted false robbery alarm reach more than four (4), in any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period, the alarm user shall be notified by certified mail that the Police Department will no longer respond to alarm calls at that location. 
(e)  All fees established and/or levied by this section shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice mailed to the holder of the alarm user permit or the owner of the subject premises upon which the alarm system is located if no permit has been issued for the alarm system, and become delinquent thereafter. 
(f)  All delinquent unpaid fees shall accrue interest at five (5) percent per annum. 
(g)  The amount of any permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms accrued plus interest shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent alarm user permit fee or excessive false alarm prevention fee, plus accrued interest. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1341, Sec. 2, 8-7-07)  
6915 - REVOCATION OF ALARM USER PERMIT 
(a)  Any alarm user permit may be revoked at any time at the discretion of the Chief of Police whenever: 
(1)  The alarm user is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  The alarm system activates ten (10) or more burglary or four (4) or more manually activated robbery false alarms within any consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period; 
(3)  The alarm user, or his/her employee(s) or agent(s), has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact to the Police Department in the permit application or renewal process; 
(4)  Immediately following an alarm activation, the alarm user or his designated representative fails to respond in person to the subject premises within forty-five (45) minutes to a request for access to the protected premises, upon request to do so by a police officer or a public safety dispatcher who deems a response is necessary to insure the security of the premises or persons where the alarm system is installed. 
(b)  If the Chief of Police determines that grounds exist to revoke the alarm user permit, the permittee shall be served with written notice of the intent to revoke the alarm user permit and a detailed explanation of the reasons for the intended revocation. The permittee shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of issuance of the notice of intent to revoke to respond and present evidence to the Chief of Police that he or she has corrected any deficiencies in the equipment or operation of the alarm system or that he or she has paid those fees owed to the City under this chapter. Within five (5) days of the date on which such evidence is presented, the Chief of Police shall notify the permittee of his or her decision. Absent any evidentiary showing by the permittee, the Chief of Police shall issue an order of revocation. The order of revocation shall be effective immediately if personally served on the permittee, or seventy-two (72) hours after the order has been sent by certified mail addressed to the permittee at his or her last known address. 
(c)  Upon revocation of an alarm user permit, the Police Department shall not respond to alarms from the alarm system(s) if the revocation was a result of excessive false alarms or defective equipment. The City may charge for responses based on the fees set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6916 - APPEAL 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police to deny an application for a permit, to deny an application to renew a permit, to revoke a permit, or to require reimbursement for excessive false alarms, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the City Manager. 
(b)  A written statement setting forth fully the grounds of such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after notice of the decision of the Chief of Police has been delivered to such person or mailed via certified mail to his or her last known address. The notice of appeal is to be sent to the Police Department of the city. 
(c)  Where an appeal has been timely filed with the Police Department, an order of revocation shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the City Manager or his/her designee. The permittee shall be allowed to continue to use the alarm system until the appeal process has been exhausted. The order of revocation shall be effective from its initial date of issuance if the City Manager or his/her designee upholds the revocation decision. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1341, Sec. 3, 8-7-07)  
6917 - WAIVER OF HEARING 
Failure to timely file a letter of appeal with the Police Department within fifteen (15) days of the Chief of Police's decision shall constitute a waiver of the appellant's rights to an appeal hearing. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1341, Sec. 4, 8-7-07)  
6918 - APPEAL—HEARING AND DECISION 
(a)  The City Manager of the city may preside over the hearing on appeal or, in the alternative, the City Manager may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing, receive relevant evidence, and submit to the City Manager, findings and recommendations to be considered by the City Manager. The City Manager shall render his or her decision within forty-five (45) days from the date of the hearing or, in the event that a hearing officer has been appointed, within forty-five (45) days from the date on which the City Manager receives the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. The applicant shall be entitled to notice of the basis for the proposed action, a copy of the documents upon which the decision was based, and the opportunity to present contrary evidence at the hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, by the U.S. Mail, with proof of service attached, addressed to the address listed on the alarm application, or the address given in the Notice of Appeal, as the case may be." 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1341, Sec. 5, 8-7-07)  
6919 - RE-ISSUANCE OF ALARM USER PERMIT 
(a)  After revocation of an alarm user permit, no new or renewal user permit shall be issued for the premises until written proof of correction is provided to the Chief of Police and the alarm system is determined, in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, to be in an acceptable working order. Acceptance and approval of the written proof of correction shall be the responsibility of the Chief of Police. If a reissued permit is revoked, no new alarm user permit may be issued for the same premises until a new or remodeled alarm system is installed, which meets all standards required in this chapter. 
(b)  An additional fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council shall be required prior to the reissuing of an alarm user permit after the original permit has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
6920 - ENFORCEMENT 
The criminal conviction of any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not release such person from paying the permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any permit fee or reimbursement for excessive false alarms prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the City shall not preclude the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1302, § 3, 9-19-05)  
ARTICLE 7 - PUBLIC FACILITIES 
   
CHAPTER 1 - PARKS 
 
7110 - NORTH TUSTIN PARKETTE-RESTRICTIONS 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in North Tustin Parkette, sometimes known as Santa Clara Parkette located at Santa Clara Avenue, east of the Newport Freeway, except the following: 
(a)  Persons under the age of thirteen (13) years 
(b)  Any adult accompanying a member of his family under the age of (13) years. 
(c)  Authorized City public safety, maintenance, Park and Recreation Department and other City personnel. 
(Ord. No. 562)  
7111 - CLOSING OF DESIGNATED PARKS 
a 
Closing of Parks and Playgrounds 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go on, be in, loiter or remain in, on, within or upon any park, or playground of the City of Tustin between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. or during any period of time which shall have been designated by resolution or minute order of the City Council as a period when such facility shall be closed; provided, however, that special permits to occupy and use particular parks and playgrounds during such hours may be issued by the City Administrator pursuant to the procedures and standards prescribed in Section 7113b of the Tustin City Code. (Ord. No. 666, Sec. 1) 
b 
Posting Signs 
Signs prescribing the hours that a particular facility is closed shall be posted. 
(Ord. No. 666, Sec. 1)  
7112 - PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN PARKS 
The following activities, sports and uses are hereby prohibited at any park, or playground: 
(a)  Sale, possession or use of fireworks. 
(b)  Sale, possession or use of narcotics. 
(c)  Sale, possession or use of alcoholic beverages except upon written permit duly issued by the Director of Community Services as provided in Section 6310. 
(d)  Gambling. 
(e)  Safe, possession or use of firearms or weapons of any kind, including, but not limited to, air rifles, slings, knives or clubs. 
(f)  Littering, defacing or damaging of property. 
(g)  Giving private lessons for commercial purposes. 
(h)  Use of abusive or profane language. 
(i)  Smoking or use of any tobacco product or cannabis as set forth in Article 4, Chapter 1, Part 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 666, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 856, Sec. 2, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 1485, § 3, 10-3-17)  
7113 - ACTIVITIES REQUIRING SPECIAL PERMIT 
a 
Activities Enumerated 
The activities hereinafter set forth in this Section may only be conducted in any park or playground, upon obtaining a permit therefor as provided herein, and only when conducted in complete conformity with such permit and compliance with all of its terms, conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  Archery 
(2)  Camping 
(3)  Golf 
(4)  Motorized vehicles 
(5)  Powered model crafts or rockets 
(6)  Any open fire except in designated barbeque pits, grills or stoves 
(7)  Permitting the presence of any animal 
(8)  Advertising or selling merchandise 
(9)  Use of any sound amplifying equipment 
(10)  Assemblies or rallies with in excess of 35 persons. 
b 
Permit Procedure 
A permit for any of such activities may be obtained upon written application to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall consider whether the time place and manner of the proposed use will pose a danger threat or likelihood of detriment to the health, safety or general welfare of the community and shall balance the interest of the applicant against the general public welfare. Upon the determination that there will be no substantial likelihood of detrimental effect, the City Administrator shall give a written approval of the application upon such terms, restrictions, limitations and conditions as he shall reasonably determine to be appropriate to afford proper protection. 
(Ord. No. 666, Sec. 1)  
7114 - TUSTIN CIVIC CENTER PLAZA 
a 
Purpose and Intent 
The Tustin Civic Center Plaza, including all public plazas, parking lots, parkways and other publically-owned or controlled property therein should be readily accessible and available to residents, businesses, and the public at large. The purpose of this section is to maintain these public areas within the City in a clean, sanitary, safe, and accessible condition, to adequately protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, and to ensure that the Tustin Civic Center Plaza is used for its intended purpose and remains accessible to all citizens, businesses and visitors in the City. Nothing in this section is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public property. 
b 
Definitions 
For the purpose of this section and unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein as follows: 
"City Hall" means the Tustin City Hall located at 300 Centennial Way, Tustin, CA 92780. 
"Library" means the Tustin branch of the Orange County Public library system, located at 345 East Main Street, Tustin, CA 92780. 
"Police Department" means the Tustin Police Department located at 300 Centennial Way, Tustin, CA 92780. 
"Tustin Civic Center Plaza" means the exterior open public areas generally bounded by Centennial Way to the East; East Main Street to the South; South Prospect Avenue, and the parcels of private properties identified as 217-249 Preble Drive, and 309 East 3 rd Street to the West; and East 3 rd Street and the parcels of private property identified as 380-436 East 2 nd Street, and 190 Centennial Way to the North. The Tustin Civic Center Plaza is owned and controlled by the City and for purposes of this section does not include the sidewalks adjacent to the public areas described herein. The specific area that comprises the Tustin Civic Center Plaza is more precisely identified in the map located at subsection (g) (Figures) of this Section. 
c 
Prohibited Conduct Generally 
The following activities and uses are prohibited in any area within the Tustin Civic Center Plaza: 
(1)  To remain, stay or loiter in or on any portion of the Tustin Civic Center Plaza between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., or during any period of time which shall have been designated by resolution or minute order of the City Council as a period when the Tustin Civic Center Plaza shall be closed; 
(2)  To cut, break, injure, deface, move or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, monument, fence, bench, chair, table, electronic plugs/switches or other structure, apparatus or property; or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure; or to cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer; 
(3)  To stand, sit, lie, or otherwise enter into any landscaped area. This shall not prohibit entry into such areas for purposes of maintenance or upkeep of any landscaped areas as authorized by the City; 
(4)  To make, kindle, or otherwise maintain a fire; 
(5)  To wash dishes or to empty water or other waste liquids elsewhere than in the sinks provided for such purposes; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the dumping or disposal of any waste which is otherwise prohibited by any other law; 
(6)  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse in any place other than in the receptacles provided therefor; 
(7)  To carry or discharge any weapons or firearms of any kind, including, but not limited to, knives, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, air guns or slingshots; 
(8)  To play or bet at any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or other device, for money, chips, shells, credit, or any other representative of value, or to maintain or exhibit any gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming; 
(9)  To disturb in any manner any meeting, service, permitted party, exercise or exhibition conducted within the Tustin Civic Center Plaza area, or within any of the structures located thereon, provided that this provision shall not prohibit any person, group, or entity from exercising any rights protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; 
(10)  To sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article or thing, whatsoever, without first obtaining permission from the City Council or a permit from the Parks and Recreation Department; 
(11)  To practice, carry on, or conduct any trade, occupation, business, or profession; provided that this subsection shall not apply to any activity occurring as an integral part of an event for which a permit has been approved pursuant to this chapter; 
(12)  To enter into any area of the Tustin Civic Center Plaza bordered by a fence, blockade, or other device without the express authorization of the City Manager or his or her designee; 
(13)  To bathe, swim, wade-in, or pollute the water of any public fountain or well. 
d 
Exceptions 
The prohibition of Section 7114(a)(1), "To remain, stay or loiter in or on any portion of the Tustin Civic Center Plaza between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., or during any period of time which shall have been designated by resolution or minute order of the City Council as a period when the Tustin Civic Center Plaza shall be closed" shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  Personnel of the City of Tustin, including any staff, employees, council members, volunteers, agents, or other contractors authorized by the City to be present in the Tustin Civic Center Plaza to engage in City business; 
(2)  Personnel of the County of Orange public library system, including any staff, employees, supervisors, volunteers, agents, or other contractors authorized by the County to be present in the Tustin Civic Center Plaza to engage in the business of the Orange County Public Library system; 
(3)  To any period of time within the 30 minutes immediately following any regularly scheduled public meeting or event, or any other meeting, event, or proceeding conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the City, which takes place within the Tustin Civic Center Plaza, or any building located thereon; 
(4)  To any person(s) within the Tustin Civic Center Plaza for purposes of contacting the tustin Police Department. 
e 
Posting of Signs 
Signs prescribing that the Tustin Civic Center Plaza will be closed between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works. 
f 
Violations 
Any violation of the provisions of this section is unlawful and a public nuisance, which may be prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of Part 2 of Chapter 2 of Article 1 of this Code. 
g 
Figures 
The area outlined in red in the following figure delineates the boundaries of the Tustin Civic Center Plaza as described in subsection b of this Section: 
  
(Ord. No. 1488, Sec. 1, 11-21-17)  
CHAPTER 10 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDERS 
 
7940 - PURPOSE 
a  This Chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the City. As of January 1, 2007, the State of California has the sole authority to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (DIVCA). Pursuant to DIVCA, the City of Tustin may receive a franchise fee and may receive a fee for public, educational and governmental access (defined in this Chapter as "PEG" or "PEG access channels") from all state video franchise holders operating within the City. Additionally, although DIVCA grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state, the City has the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of such customer service standards. 
b  It is the purpose of this Chapter to implement within the City the provisions of DIVCA and the rules the California Public Utilities Commission promulgated thereunder that are applicable to a "local franchising entity" or a "local entity" as defined in DIVCA. Consistent with that purpose, the provisions of this Chapter are to be construed in a manner that is consistent with DIVCA and the applicable rules of the Commission promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7941 - APPLICABLE DEFINITIONS 
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the same meaning as established in (1) DIVCA, and, if not defined therein, (2) Commission rules implementing DIVCA, and, if not defined therein, (3) Subchapter V-A of Chapter 5 of Title 47 of the United States Code, and, if not defined therein, (4) their common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) shall refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If a specific provision of law referred to in this Chapter should be renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to any law shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, including any law now in force or subsequently enacted or amended. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7942 - STATE FRANCHISE REQUIRED 
a  Except as the City Council may authorize by resolution, and except for franchisees with a valid franchise issued under Chapter 4 of this Article 7 of this Code, no person may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable system or video service provider's network in the City without first obtaining a state franchise therefore. 
b  A state franchise shall not convey rights other than as specified in this Chapter or in DIVCA or other applicable law; no rights shall pass by implication. 
c  Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for: 
1.  Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the City may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing non-video services; 
2.  Any permit or authorization, other than a state franchise, required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property; and 
3.  Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the City or private persons to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise. 
d  Except as otherwise provided in DIVCA, a state franchise shall not relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with all laws, including laws of the City, and every state franchisee shall comply with the same. The City reserves its rights to the lawful exercise of police and other powers the City now has or may later obtain. 
e  The City reserves the right to construct, operate, maintain or repair its own cable system or video service provider network. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7943 - ADMINISTRATION AND REGULATIONS 
a  The City may from time to time adopt rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Chapter consistent with DIVCA. 
b  The City Manager, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to administer this Chapter and to provide or cause to be provided any notices (including noncompliance notices) and to take any action on behalf of the City that may be required under this Chapter, DIVCA, or under applicable law. 
c  The failure of the City, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this Chapter or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically waived in writing or its exercise by the City is not permitted by DIVCA. 
d  The City may designate one or more entities, including itself, to control and manage the use of PEG access channels, and any PEG facilities and equipment owned, controlled or used by the City or the designated entity or entities. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7944 - FRANCHISE FEE 
A state video franchise holder operating in the City shall pay to the City a franchise fee that is equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term "gross revenues" shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7945 - PEG FEE 
In addition to the franchise fee required pursuant to Section 7944, a state video franchise holder operating in the City shall pay to the City a fee that is equal to one (1) percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder which fee shall be used to support PEG channel facilities. The term "gross revenues" shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7946 - PAYMENT OF FEES; EXAMINATION OF BUSINESS RECORDS 
a  The Franchise Fee and PEG Fee shall be remitted to the City on a quarterly basis within forty-five (45) days after the end of each quarter for that calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a detailed summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the Franchise Fee and PEG Fee. 
b  If a state video franchise holder fails to pay the fees when due, or underpays the proper amounts due, the state video franchise holder shall pay a late payment charge at the annual interest rate equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one (1) percent. If the state video franchise holder has overpaid the fees, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment. 
c  Not more than once annually, the City may examine the business records of a state video franchise holder to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7947 - CUSTOMER SERVICE PENALTIES UNDER STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
a  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with California Government Code §§ 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2; the FCC customer service and notice standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603 and 76.1619; California Penal Code § 637.5; the privacy standards of 47 U.S.C. § 551; and all other applicable state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection standards under this section shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the standards. 
b  The City shall monitor state video franchise holder's compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period are subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the City in accordance with state law: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within a 12-month period, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each such violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within a 12-month period, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each such violation. 
4.  A state video franchise holder may appeal to the City Council, or a hearing officer as the City Council may appoint, a monetary penalty assessed by the City within sixty (60) days after notice of the assessment. After relevant evidence and testimony as may be received, and staff reports as may be submitted, the City Council may uphold, vacate, or modify the monetary penalty consistent with the evidence presented. The decision of the City Council, or hearing officer, on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7948 - CITY RESPONSE TO STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS 
a  Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide to the City complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One (1) complete copy must be provided to the City Clerk. 
b  The City may provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7949 - PEG CHANNEL CAPACITY 
a  A state video franchise holder shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least three (3) PEG access channels. PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the City or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming. 
b  A state video franchise holder shall provide additional PEG channels when the standards set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5870 are satisfied by the City or any entity designated by the City to be responsible for PEG access. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
7950 - EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM AND EMERGENCY OVERRIDES 
A state video franchise holder must comply with the Emergency Alert System requirements of the Federal Communications Commission so that emergency messages may be distributed over its network. 
(Ord. No. 1355, Sec. 1, 6-17-08)  
CHAPTER 11 - REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL, EXTENSION OR MODIFICATION OF LEASEHOLDS FOR CITY OR REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY REAL PROPERTY 
 
7960 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL, EXTENSION OR MODIFICATION OF EXISTING CITY OR REDEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY LEASES 
A.  No existing City or Redevelopment Agency real property lease for less than market value shall be approved, modified, or extended without following the process as identified in this section. 
B.  The City Council or Redevelopment Agency shall direct: 
(i)  The preparation of a proposed lease, modification, or extension thereof; 
(ii)  The preparation of a request for proposal ("RFP") for a new leasehold from interested parties; or 
(iii)  Take such other action as deemed appropriate. 
C.  A request for proposals process shall include the submission of prior business experience, financial strength, proposed uses of property, credit history, market rental conditions, and such other information as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1389, Sec. 1, 10-5-10)  
CHAPTER 2 - STREETS AND HIGHWAYS  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1218, Sec. II, adopted July 6, 1999, repealed the former Part 1, Secs. 7210—7212, and enacted a new Part 1 to read as herein set out. The former Part 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 9, Sec. 13; Ord. No. 569; Ord. No. 583; Ord. No. 1046, 5-21-90. 
 
7210 - OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction of any kind in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property in the City or to authorize, procure or permit any obstruction to be placed therein or thereon, except as authorized by this Code or as may be required by employees or officials of the City in the proper discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1218, Sec. II, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 1373, Sec. IV, 1-19-10)  
7211 - REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS 
a 
Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to newsracks on the public streets, sidewalks and other public property. The purpose of this section is to advance and improve safety and aesthetics by controlling the number, size, construction, placement and appearance of newsracks without restricting the free dispersal of information guaranteed by the Constitutions of the United States and the State of California. 
More specifically, the purpose of this section is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare by regulating the placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of newsracks so as to protect against the dangers of impairing or distracting the vision of motorists and pedestrians; the hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; unreasonably interfering with the use of public property for its intended purpose; unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or locations used for transportation purposes; unsightly structures consistent with the intent and purpose of the City's design regulations; neglectful servicing of newsracks resulting in visual blight on public rights-of-way and other public property and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements; reduction in value of surrounding property; unnecessary exposure of the City to personal injury and property damage claims and lawsuits; and public displays of harmful or offensive matters. 
The City Council finds and determines that the strong and competing interests of the public and of newspapers require a reasonable accommodation which can only be satisfactorily achieved through the means of this section which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the time, place and manner of usage of newsracks. It is not the intent of this section to in any way discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any newspapers. 
b 
Definitions 
For the purpose of this section, the words set out in this subsection shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Director" means the Director of Community Development or his/her assigned agents. 
(2)  "Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or periodicals. 
(3)  "Parkway" means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and, where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the adjacent property line. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
(4)  "Person" means any individual, company, corporation, association, business or other legal entity. 
(5)  "Public property" means parks, squares, plazas and any and all other real property owned by the City. 
(6)  "Right-of-way" means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes. 
(7)  "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(8)  "Sidewalk" means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(9)  "Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
c 
Permits 
(1)  No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a newsrack permit from the Director. An application for an amended newsrack permit shall be filed and approved prior to relocation of or replacement of a newsrack or deviation from any conditions of approval. Applicants may not, however, apply for newsrack permits to deviate from provisions of this Chapter 2. 
(2)  Applications for newsrack permits shall be filed upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the Community Development Department. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the following: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  The location(s) of the proposed installation of the newsrack(s); 
(c)  The time that said newsrack(s) is (are) proposed to be installed; 
(d)  The nature, type and model of the newsrack(s) proposed to be installed; 
(e)  That the applicant agrees, upon expiration or revocation of the permit, to immediately restore the public right-of-way or other public property to its condition prior to the installation of the newsrack(s); 
(f)  That the applicant understands that the approval of the permit by the Director is conditioned upon the applicant subsequently obtaining and maintaining an Encroachment Permit from the Public Works Department. 
(g)  Any additional information which the Director may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
(3)  Not more than one (1) newsrack permit shall be required for each applicant regardless of the number of newsracks proposed to be installed or maintained. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a newsrack permit, the applicant shall pay all fees provided by resolution of the City Council. 
(5)  In addition to the newsrack permit application, each applicant shall also obtain and maintain an encroachment permit from the Public Works Department, and as a condition thereof shall agree to hold the City, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location of any newsrack located upon, in or over a public right-of-way or other public property. 
(6)  The permittee shall continuously maintain insurance for the duration of the encroachment permit and shall deposit with the Director a certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000 (one million dollars) has been issued, naming the City as an additional named insured, and containing a provision that the policy will not be canceled, coverage materially modified, or limits of liability reduced or changed without notice of such to the Director. If such insurance is canceled or materially modified without such notice, the permit shall be considered revoked and said newsrack(s) shall be promptly removed. 
[6.1]  Except as provided herein, each newsrack permit shall be valid for a period of five (5) years and may be renewed in the same manner set forth in this section for original applications, provided however, that the Director may prescribe a simplified application form and procedure for renewals. A newsrack permit shall be null and void upon revocation of the newsrack permit or revocation of the encroachment permit. 
(7)  Each newsrack permit shall be issued only to the person making the application and may not be assigned to another person without first providing written notice to the Director of the proposed assignment on forms prescribed by the Community Development Department. If any permittee assigns his newsrack permit to another, without compliance with the aforesaid requirements, the permit will be deemed revoked as of the time of the assignment. 
(8)  Upon a finding that the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this section, the Director shall issue a newsrack permit with whatever conditions he/she deems reasonable for approved locations. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific cause of such denial by the Director and shall be informed of his or her right to appeal in accordance with subsection f of this section. 
d 
Regulations 
(1)  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway. 
(2)  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government or public use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk. 
(3)  Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway or other public property shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Newsracks shall not exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, or two (2) feet in depth. 
(b)  Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6) inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on a sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack. 
(c)  No newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object unless specifically approved by the Public Works Department in conjunction with the encroachment permit. 
(d)  Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than six (6) newsracks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen (18) inches shall separate each group of two (2) to six (6) newsracks allowed under this subsection (d). 
(e)  No newsrack, or group of attached newsracks allowed under paragraph (d) hereof, shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds when empty. 
(f)  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk. 
2.  Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk. 
3.  Within three (3) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
4.  Within three (3) feet of any driveway. 
5.  Within three (3) feet ahead of or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
6.  Within three (3) feet of any bus bench. 
7.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet. 
8.  Within three (3) feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees or within three (3) feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
(g)  No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
(h)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
(4)  Every person who places or maintains a newsrack on public property in the City of Tustin shall have the owner's name, address, and telephone number affixed upon the fixture in a place where such information may be easily seen. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly exhibit, display, or cause to be displayed, harmful matter as such term is defined in Section 313, Chapter 7.6, Title 9, Park 1, of the Penal Code of California, in any newsrack located on a public sidewalk or public place from which minors are not excluded, unless blinder racks have been installed so that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to public view. For the purposes of this section, the term "blinder rack" shall mean opaque material placed in front of, or inside, the newsrack and which prevents exposure to public view. 
(b)  Any publication offered for sale or distribution in a newsrack placed or maintained on a public sidewalk or public right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view, from any public place, any of the following: 
1.  Any statement or word describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect, sexual arousal, gratification or affront; or 
2.  Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; or 
3.  Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect, sexual arousal, gratification or affront. 
For the purpose of this subsection the term "explicit sexual acts" means the depiction of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulations, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. 
e 
Removal 
(1)  In the event that the Director determines that a lawfully established newsrack does not comply with the provisions of this Section, he or she shall use reasonable efforts to provide written notice of such determination to the permittee or owner. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the location of the newsrack which is in violation, the intent of the Director to (a) remove the newsrack if it has no permit, or (b) to revoke the permit and cause the removal of the legal nonconforming newsrack, and of the right of the permittee to request, in writing, a hearing before the Director within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. If the newsrack is one which has not been authorized by the Director and ownership is not known, nor apparent after inspection, a notice complying with this Section shall be affixed to the newsrack. 
(2)  In the event that a hearing is held pursuant to this Section, the Director shall render a decision, in writing, within ten (10) days from the date of the hearing, and the decision shall advise the permittee or owner of his or her right to appeal to the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of subsection f. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the permittee or owner and shall be considered effective on the date mailed provided that the notice is properly addressed and placed in the U.S. Mail with first class postage prepaid. 
(3)  The Director may take possession of a newsrack in violation of this Section and dispose of the newsrack as required by law, if: 
(a)  No hearing is requested by the permittee or owner within fifteen (15) days as provided in subsection e(1); or 
(b)  The appeal period specified in section f has expired and no appeal has been taken; or 
(c)  In the event that an owner or permittee fails to remove the rack within ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the City Council that the newsrack is not in compliance with the rules, regulations and standards established by this Section. 
(4)  The Director shall inspect any newsrack that is illegally reinstalled after removal pursuant to this Section e. The permittee of the newsrack shall be charged a fee representing the City's costs of abatement, including all administrative, inspection, and removal costs associated therewith. 
(5)  In the event that any newsrack is abandoned, the Director may cause it to be removed pursuant to the procedures set out in this Section e. For the purposes of this section, the term "abandoned" shall mean no publication has been displayed in the newsrack for a period of fifteen (15) consecutive days and no prior written notice has been given by the permittee to the Director specifying the reason(s) for nonuse, and the condition of the rack and related circumstances indicate it will not be actively used within a reasonable period of time. 
f 
Appeals 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1218, Sec. II, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 15, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 4, 11-15-11)  
PART 2 - CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS 
 
7220 - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 
Any owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of a building or dwelling shall also provide for the construction of combination curbs and gutters out of cement and cement sidewalks in accordance with City specifications, unless adequate curbs, gutters and sidewalks already exist along all street frontage adjoining the lot or lots on which the building or dwelling is to be constructed. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 3)  
7221 - LARGE OR UNSUBDIVIDED LAND PROVISION 
In areas not subdivided or parceled into one-half acre or smaller lots, the curb and gutter and sidewalk need not extend a greater distance than the side yards, or side and rear yards in the case of corner lots, as required by Chapter 2 or Article 9, entitled Zoning, of this Code. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 3)  
7222 - FINAL APPROVAL SUBJECT TO COMPLETION OR CASH DEPOSIT 
The building inspector shall deny final approval and acceptance or final public utility connections to any building or dwelling until curbs and gutters and sidewalks exist or are constructed or their construction is guaranteed by cash deposited with the City in a sum equal to one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per lineal foot for combination cement curbs and gutters and thirty-five cents ($0.35) per square foot for sidewalks. (Ord. No. 95, Sec. 3)  
7223 - CLEAN-UP BOND 
The Building Official shall prior to issuing a permit for a swimming pool require clean-up bonds as follows: 
(1)  Each applicant for a swimming pool permit shall provide, before issuance, an agreement and cash bond for the purpose of insuring (a) that all sand, cement, dirt and any other debris is removed from streets, gutters, curbs, parkways, sidewalks and other public property; (b) that the public property shall be left in clean and undamaged condition, and (c) that adequate barricades have been installed and maintained. Said bond shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the construction of a swimming pool or other construction related thereto requiring the use of heavy equipment. 
(2)  Said agreement and bond may be reduced to not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the issuance of a spa, jacuzzi, and other small pool permit not intended for swimming, when in the determination of the Building Official the scope of the project will have a minimal impact on public improvements, by reason of not requiring the use of heavy construction equipment over curbs, sidewalks or public streets. 
(c)  Said bond shall terminate and be returnable to the applicant at the time and provided that (a) debris and other materials have been properly removed; (b) the public property has been left clean and undamaged, and (c) final inspection, approval and acceptance of the work and public property has been made by the Street Department. 
(d)  If the public property has not been left in a clean and undamaged condition and/or adequate barricades required by the City Engineer have not been installed and maintained, the City shall cause the necessary work to be done and shall deduct the cost thereof from the bond. (Ord. No. 770, Sec. 9)  
7224 - MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
The Building Official shall advise at permit issuance, and he shall enforce the requirement of this Section by stop order if necessary, the following: 
Construction materials, debris, trash containers (dumpsters), and other non-vehicle materials shall not be deposited on public property without the written approval of the City Engineer and only under such conditions as he may impose. Any barricading required by the City Engineer shall be provided by the contractor at his expense. (Ord. No. 770, Sec. 9)  
PART 3 - STREET IMPROVEMENT PERMITS 
 
7230 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Part, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
"Highway" means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the territory of the City either owned by the City or dedicated to the public for purpose of travel. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, this State, any county, except the road department of this municipality, district or other political subdivisions thereof, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Public Agency" means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State or any department or agency thereof, county, municipal corporation or public district. 
"Street Commissioner and Commissioner" means the Street Commissioner of the City. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 1)  
7231 - PERMIT REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, construct or repair any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall or storm drain or culvert in, over, along, across or through any highway without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Commissioner as herein provided. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 2)  
7232 - APPLICATION 
a 
Contents 
An applicant for a permit shall state in his application: 
1.  The location, nature and extent of the work to be performed. 
2.  The materials to be used. 
3.  Such other information, including plans and specifications as the Commissioner may require. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 7) 
b 
Statement of liability 
On each application the applicant shall sign a statement that he agrees to preserve and save harmless the City and each officer and employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under any permit granted pursuant to the application. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 5) 
c 
Plans to accompany 
If in the opinion of the Commissioner the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the Commissioner may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 13) 
d 
Modifications 
The Commissioner may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, method or manner of construction, installation or repair as may reasonably be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 8) 
e 
Issuance Fee 
Except as otherwise provided in this Part each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by an issuance fee of one dollar ($1.00). The issuance fee is required for the purpose of defraying the cost of processing the application for a permit and no part of the fee shall be returned irrespective of the disposition made of the application. 
No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Section 6103 of the Government Code of the State. (Ord. No. 197, Secs. 3 and 4) 
f 
Deposit—Required 
An applicant for a permit to construct any work except curbs, walks, gutters or highway surfaces for which no engineering or inspection fee shall be charged shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay or make a deposit for engineering and inspection fees as follows: 
1.  For a permit to construct a driveway with surfacing other than dirt, gravel or decomposed rock: 
(a)  For each residential driveway, one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50). 
(b)  For each commercial driveway, ten dollars ($10.00) 
2.  For each residential driveway, culvert, one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50). 
3.  For all other work, an amount estimated by the Commissioner to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection costs. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 9) 
g 
Exemption 
If the United States, this State, this or any other county, any municipal corporation, school district or other public agency files with the Commissioner a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which it may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such person. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 4) 
h 
Refund—Additional Payment 
The engineering and inspection costs provided for in subsections 1 and 2 of Section 7232f shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund thereof shall not be made to any applicant unless (1) the inspection or engineering fee was erroneously collected in which case the entire amount may be returned or (2) unless the driveway or culvert is not constructed or installed in which event the applicant may apply for a refund of the unused fees less a charge of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for any final inspection which may be made. Where the deposit has been made under subsection 3 of Section 7232f the Commissioner shall deduct from the deposit the actual cost to the City of the required engineering and inspection plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed fifteen percent of the total cost. If such cost including overhead is less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as authorizing the repayment of any issuance fee. 
If the cost exceeds the deposit, the permittee shall upon demand by the Commissioner pay the excess to the City. If payment is not made within fifteen days after such demand the City may recover the amount in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits under this Part shall not be issued to such permittee. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 10) 
i 
Issuance—Generally 
If the applicant complies with every provision of this Part and with all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the Commissioner shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 14) 
j 
Residential driveway construction under certain conditions 
The Commissioner shall issue without any inspection fee or deposit therefor a permit to construct a residential driveway if the applicant for such permit pays the issuance fee and submits satisfactory evidence to the Commissioner that the driveway will be inspected by a competent governmental agency other than an agency of the City and such governmental agency will furnish a certificate to the effect that that portion of the driveway installed in the public right of way was inspected and complies with minimum standards required by the City. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 11) 
k 
Inspection by City 
If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 7232j and the governmental agency referred to in that Section fails to make the inspection or fails to file the certificate there provided for within four months of the issuance of the permit, the Commissioner may himself inspect the driveway in which case the applicant shall pay to the Commissioner the actual cost of such inspection. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 12) 
l 
Work to commence within sixty days 
Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within sixty (60) days after the granting of the permit and thereafter prosecute the work to completion in a diligent and workmanlike manner. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 15) 
m 
Cancellation 
The Commissioner may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the commissioner, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending the same to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 16) 
n 
Refunds 
When a permit has been cancelled by the Commissioner the permittee may obtain a refund of any unused fee paid or deposited. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 17)  
7233 - CONSTRUCTION 
a 
Standards 
The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made, and specifications referred to in the permit and to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the Commissioner. In addition, all work to be performed in, upon or across highways shall be in accordance with and conform to the County standards established by County Ordinance No. 612. The Commissioner may waive inspection if he believes such inspection is not necessary for the best interests of the City. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 20) 
b 
Relocation of Structures, Utilities, Etc. 
If so required by the Commissioner the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of, relocating any structure, public utility, tree or shrub where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The Commissioner may elect to do the necessary relocation, in which event the permittee shall deposit with the Commissioner a sum of money estimated by him to be sufficient to pay the cost thereof. After such relocation a refund shall be paid to or a deficiency shall be paid by the permittee as provided in Section 7241h. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 18) 
c 
Lines and Grades 
Before a permittee performs any work covered by this Part, he shall obtain from the Commissioner the lines and grades thereof. Where the work proposed to be done consists of or includes the laying or constructing of a culvert in or upon a highway, the Commissioner may specify in any permit issued therefor the size, the type of material, and the grade of the culvert. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 19) 
d 
Setting of Additional Stakes 
If any stakes set for any work covered by this Part are disturbed or destroyed and it becomes necessary to set additional stakes, the permittee shall deposit a sum estimated by the Commissioner to be sufficient to pay the cost of setting such additional stakes. The Commissioner shall set the additional stakes. After such setting, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in Section 7241h. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 21) 
e 
Barriers and Warning Lights 
A permittee shall place and maintain at each end of the work, not more than fifty (50) feet apart along the side thereof, unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner from sunset of each day until sunrise of the following day until the work is entirely completed, flares or red warning lights. He shall also place and maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of the work until the work is completed to the entire satisfaction of the Commissioner, and shall take such other precautions as may be necessary for the protection of the traveling public. The Commissioner may, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, specify such additional safety devices or measures to be used by the permittee, but the failure of the Commissioner to so specify the devices or measures shall not relieve the permittee of his obligation hereunder. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 23)  
7234 - APPLICATION FOR INSPECTOR 
Not less than eighteen (18) hours before the commencement of any work covered by this Part, the permittee shall apply in writing to the Commissioner for an inspector therefor. In such application he shall specify the day and hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 22)  
7235 - CLEANUP REQUIRED 
A permittee shall remove all material and debris: 
(a)  Where new work is covered with earth in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit. 
(b)  In all other cases within three days. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 27)  
7236 - NOTICE OF COMPLETION 
Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he shall so notify the Commissioner in writing. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 24)  
7237 - CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE 
If the Commissioner by survey or by inspection or by both ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of this Part, he shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 25)  
7238 - VIOLATION OF THIS PART 
Every person who performs any work covered by this Part in an amount greater than or in any way different from, or contrary to the terms of any permit issued therefor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 197, Sec. 26)  
PART 4 - HOUSE NUMBERS AND OTHER STREET MARKINGS 
 
7240 - PAINTING OF CURBS AND PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
No person shall paint, mark, inscribe, nor impose upon any curb, parkway or public street any house number, traffic control, or parking instructions without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer. (Ord. No. 763)  
7241 - PROCEDURES 
Applications for a permit to paint house numbers on City curbs may be filed with the City Engineer indicating area of City to be serviced, evidence of compliance with City standards, and name of responsible adult supervisor. A business license with a fee as specified from time to time by the City Council shall be required. (Ord. No. 763)  
7242 - STANDARDS 
(a)  All curb house numbers shall be of size, color, and style in conformity with specifications on file with the City Engineer. 
(b)  Numerals and design shall be located on the curb face not more than one (1) inch from the top of the curb. 
(c)  Curb house numerals shall be not less than three (3) inches in height. 
(d)  Curb house numerals shall be located to provide exposure and clarity in associating the number with its respective dwelling. 
(e)  Masonry paint shall be used for numerals and background equal to or greater than the standard specification on file with the City Engineer for street application. (Ord. No. 763)  
7243 - SERVICE AREA AND TIME PERIOD 
The permit of the City Engineer will be valid for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days and shall specify the area of the City to be solicited for the painting of house numbers. No permit shall be authorized for an area greater than can reasonably be serviced within the time span of the permit and no more than one permit shall be issued for any one time period for any area. (Ord. No. 763)  
7244 - LOGO 
The logo of the City, as per specifications on file with the City Engineer, may precede the house number for all curb addresses within the City limits. The City logo shall not be used for those addresses outside of the incorporated limits of the City. (Ord. No. 763)  
7245 - SOLICITATION OF FEES AND DONATIONS 
Permittees may request payment or solicit donations for the painting of house numbers not in excess of the amount as may be specified from time to time by the City Council. Such request or solicitations shall be made by mail or circulars only prior to any door to door personal canvas. Letters of request or solicitation may state compliance with the City Ordinance but shall not imply City endorsement. Letters or circulars shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to use. (Ord. No. 763)  
7246 - REVOCATION 
The City Engineer shall be authorized to revoke any permit for non-compliance with the terms and conditions herein specified or for failure to perform within the time period of the permit. (Ord. No. 763, Sec. 1)  
PART 5 - STREET EXCAVATION PERMITS 
 
7250 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Part, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section: 
"Highway" means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the territory of the City, either owned by the City or dedicated to the public for purpose of travel. 
"Person" includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, this State, any county except the Road Department, municipality, district or other political subdivisions thereof, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Public agency" means the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State or any department or agency thereof, county, municipal corporation or public district. 
"Street Commissioner and Commissioner" means the Street Commissioner of the City. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 1)  
7251 - PERMITS 
a 
Permit Required 
A person who digs up, plows up, removes or breaks the earth, soil, stone, pavement or other surface of or otherwise injures any highway; or makes or causes to be made any excavation; or constructs, places upon, maintains or leaves any material or any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon a highway, or installs or maintains or causes to be installed or maintained any tank, pipes, conduit, duct, tunnel or any other installation of any nature across, upon, in or under any highway unless he shall have first obtained a permit hereunder so to do shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 2) 
b 
Application for Permit 
Applications for permits required by this Part shall be filed with the Street Commissioner upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by him. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction. 
(c)  The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill or obstruction will exist. 
(d)  That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities or annoyances or loss resulting from claims or court action and arising out of any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application. 
(e)  That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the excavation, fill or obstruction for which the permit is issued which shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening or change of grade of the highway, the applicant, or his successors or assigns, within ten (10) days after the receipt of a written notice from the Commissioner to do so, will at his own expense either remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation, or subject to the approval of the Commissioner relocate them to a site which may be designated by the Commissioner. 
(f)  Any additional information which the Commissioner may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 4) 
c 
Time for Filing 
Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than forty-eight (48) hours before the work is proposed to be done. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 3) 
d 
Plans 
The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed excavation, obstruction or fill and any other detail which the Commissioner may require. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 5) 
e 
Modification of Application 
The Commissioner may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, character or number of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as in his opinion may be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 7) 
f 
Proof of Right to Use Highway 
Each applicant for a permit shall submit to the Commissioner satisfactory proof of the applicant's right to use the highway for the purpose set forth in the application. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 6) 
g 
Issuance Fee 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee of One Dollar ($1.00), no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 9) 
h 
Issuance of Permit 
If the applicant for a permit hereunder complies in all respects with this Part and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the City or of any other public agency and pays the fees and deposits required by this Part the Street Commissioner shall approve the application and issue the permit. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 14) 
i 
Conditions of Permit 
The permit shall be subject to the following conditions which shall be stated thereon: 
(a)  The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. 
(b)  The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. 
(c)  All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this Part and of all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the City and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. 
(d)  The permit shall be nontransferable. 
(e)  The Commissioner may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within sixty days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the Commissioner, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending the same to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(f)  The Commissioner may either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work prescribe such additional conditions as he may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 15) 
j 
Emergency Exemption 
Nothing in this Part prohibits any person from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the Commissioner are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 28)  
7252 - DEPOSITS REQUIRED 
a 
Special Deposit 
Unless the Commissioner shall have authorized the applicant to perform the resurfacing or repair of the surface of any highway which may be removed in part of damaged by the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction, each applicant shall in addition to the issuance fee deposit with the Commissioner the estimated cost of resurfacing or repairing the surface of the highway which may be damaged or destroyed. The special deposit required hereunder shall in no event be less than Fifteen Dollars ($15.00). The estimated cost shall be determined by the Commissioner by multiplying the number of square feet of surface which may be damaged, as shown by the application by the sum of Forty Cents ($.40) per square foot of surfacing. The City Council may from time to time change and revise the method of determining the estimated cost. 
The minimum cost of restoration or repair shall be presumed to be not less than Two Dollars ($2.00). (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 10) 
b 
General Deposit 
(a)  In lieu of making the special deposit required by Section 7252a, the applicant may make and maintain with the Commissioner a general deposit in an amount estimated by the Commissioner to be sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions, but not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  In lieu of the special deposit required by Section 7252a or of making the general deposit as provided for in subsection (a) of this Section, the applicant may with the approval of the Commissioner furnish a surety bond conforming in all respects to the requirements for surety bonds set forth in this Code except that the condition of such bond shall be that the applicant will pay to the City upon demand all fees, costs or charges incurred by or due to the City under the provisions of this Part. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 11) 
c 
Calculation of Costs 
Whenever in this Part any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation thereof is specified such cost shall be the actual cost, including the proportionate part of the salaries, wages or other compensation of any deputy or employee, plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed fifteen per cent (15%) of the total cost. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 12) 
d 
Exemption for Public Agencies 
If the United States, this State, this or any other county, any municipal corporation, school district or other public body files with the Commissioner a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such persons. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Section 6103 of the Government Code of the State. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 13) 
e 
Deductions from Deposit 
The City shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee: 
(a)  The permit issuance fee if it has not otherwise been paid. 
(b)  The cost to the City of refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction. 
(c)  The cost to the City of resurfacing or repairing the highway calculated pursuant to the provisions of Section 7252a or Section 7252c. 
(d)  The cost to the City of any additional repairs as provided in Section 7253f. 
(e)  The cost of any inspection by the Commissioner made necessary by the failure of the permittee to comply with any provision of this Part or the terms or conditions of the permit. 
After making the deductions specified above, the City shall, unless the deductions are made from a general deposit, refund any balance to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. The balance remaining in the general deposit shall be retained by the Commissioner and applied to issuance fees and costs in connection with any future excavations, fills or obstructions pursuant to a permit issued hereunder unless a written demand for the balance be made by the depositor, in which event any balance therein shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. 
If any deposit is insufficient to pay all fees and costs herein provided, the permittee shall upon demand pay to the Commissioner an amount equal to the deficiency. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 24 and 25) 
f 
Failure to Pay Costs 
If a permittee upon demand fails to pay any deficiency as provided in Section 7252e or shall fail to pay any other costs due the City hereunder for which no deposit has been made, the City may recover the same by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency or cost is paid in full, a permit hereunder shall not thereafter be issued to such permittee. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 26)  
7253 - PERFORMANCE OF WORK 
a 
Compliance with Permit 
A permittee shall not make or cause to be made any excavation or construct, place upon, maintain or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel or pile or place any material in or upon any highway or install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel in, upon, or under the surface of any highway at any location or in any manner other than that described in the application as approved by the Commissioner or contrary to the terms of the permit or of any provision of this Part. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 16) 
b 
Restoration upon Completion of Work 
Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this Part, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. 
If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he has made or remove any obstruction which he has placed on any highway, the Commissioner may do so and the applicant shall promptly reimburse the City the cost thereof. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 17) 
c 
Resurfacing 
1.  After completion of the refilling and compacting of the backfill material in the excavation as specified in Section 7253g and the removal of the obstruction, the permittee shall promptly replace with temporary or permanent patching material or repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation, obstruction or construction operations as specified elsewhere herein, to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, or the Commissioner may at his option elect to do the surfacing or repairing himself. 
2.  Permanent repaving. Where the pavement (except Portland cement concrete pavement) or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it with a standard repair consisting of either five inches of plant mixed surfacing or three inches (3") of plant mixed surfacing over six inches (6") untreated rock base except that the standard repair shall not be less in total thickness than the adjacent pavement or surfacing and except that road-mixed surfacing may be repaired with three inches (3") of plant mixed surfacing in lieu of the standard repair. Plant mixed surfacing shall consist of mineral aggregate and liquid asphalt grade SC-6, or grade 200-300 penetration paving asphalt. If Portland cement concrete pavement is removed, it shall first be sawed at the neat lines of the excavation and subsequently replaced with Portland cement concrete. 
3.  Tunneling or boring. Excavation of pavement or surfacing on an arterial highway (as shown on the Master Plan of Highways) and determined by the Commissioner as having been improved with plant mixed surfacing or Portland cement concrete pavement, will be permitted only when physical conditions make boring or tunneling impossible. All boring and tunneling and placing conduits, casings and pipe lines shall be done in such a manner that the existing driving lanes will not be disturbed. If a casing is installed to receive the conduit or pipe line, all voids between the casing conduit shall be filled with grout or sand. 
4.  Replacing entire driving lane. If the surfacing or pavement within the driving lanes of an arterial highway (as shown on the Master Plan of Highways) and determined by the Commissioner as having been improved with plant mixed surfacing or Portland cement concrete is removed or damaged by parallel construction operations, the existing surfacing or pavement of the width of the driving lane for the length of the damaged surfacing shall be removed and replaced except that such a removal and replacement shall in no case be less than one hundred feet in length. All materials and construction operations shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Orange County Standard Specifications. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 18) 
d 
Restoration by Commissioner 
The Commissioner may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter, elect to do the resurfacing or repair of any highway surface removed or damaged by the proposed excavation or obstruction pursuant to a permit hereunder. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 8) 
e 
Charges for Resurfacing 
If after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface or repair that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him, or if the Commissioner has elected to do such resurfacing or repairing, the Commissioner shall do so and the permittee shall be charged with the cost thereof computed by the Commissioner as provided in Section 7252a or Section 7252c whichever in the judgment of the Commissioner will most fairly compensate the City for the expenses incurred by it. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 19) 
f 
Cost of Later Repairs 
If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the City the cost of such additional repairs made by the Commissioner. The cost shall be computed by the Commissioner as provided in Section 7252a or Section 7252c whichever in the judgment of the Commissioner will most fairly compensate the City for the expenses incurred by it. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 20) 
g 
Work Regulations 
1.  General compaction requirements. All backfill replaced in excavations within the road right of way shall be compacted until the relative compaction within six feet of the top surface is not less than ninety per cent and below six feet is not less than the adjacent undisturbed soil as determined by the Relative Compaction Test specified in Section 6, Article b-21 of the State Standard Specifications. 
2.  Compaction of clayey soils. Clayey materials shall be defined as a soil containing more than thirty per cent of material which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen. Clayey material replaced as backfill may not be ponded or jetted but shall be compacted as specified under general compaction requirements by any other suitable method providing the material is first conditioned by wetting or drying to within two per cent of optimum moisture content. 
In lieu of backfilling with clayey material the permittee at his option may elect to furnish sandy or grandular material less than thirty per cent of which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen in which case compaction may be obtained as specified under general compaction requirements. 
3.  Finishing and clean up. After the work has been completed all debris and excess material from excavation and backfill operations shall be removed from the right of way and the roadway left in a neat and orderly condition. 
All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to the original grades and the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts shall be left free and clear. 
All approaches to private driveways and intersecting highways and streets shall be kept open to traffic at all times. 
Excess and nonsurfacing materials which adhere to roadway surfacing as a result of construction operations shall be removed by approved methods to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 23) 
h 
Traffic to be Kept Open 
Trenching for installation across any intersecting roadway open to traffic shall be progressive. Not more than one-half of the width of a traveled way shall be disturbed at one time and the remaining width shall be kept open to traffic by bridging or backfilling. More than one-half of the width of a traveled way shall be disturbed at one time only upon the prior authorization by minute order of the City Council. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 21) 
i 
Protection of Traveling Public 
The permittee shall take adequate precautions for the protection of the traveling public. Barricades, red lights and warning signs together with flagmen where necessary shall be maintained until the excavation is refilled, the obstruction removed and the roadway is safe for the use of the traveling public. The Commissioner may specify as a condition of the issuance of the permit the safety devices or measures to be used by the permittee, but the failure of the Commissioner to so specify the devices or measures to be used shall not relieve the permittee of his obligation hereunder. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 27) 
j 
Location of Pipes and Conduit 
All pipes and conduits laid parallel to the roadway shall be placed at least five feet from the edge of the pavement or graded traveled roadway unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Commissioner. The shallowest portion of any pipe line or other facility shall be installed not less than thirty inches below the roadway surface. (Ord. No. 199, Sec. 22)  
PART 6 - DESIGN REVIEW OF ABOVEGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
7260 - PURPOSE AND FINDINGS 
The purpose of this Part 6 is to maintain a safe and aesthetically pleasing environment in the public right-of-way and on City-owned properties by regulating the location, color, screening, and other aspects of aboveground utility facilities. 
Aboveground utility facilities come in a variety of forms that include, but are not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, and antennae to transmit, receive, distribute, provide, or offer utility services. Their accessory equipment typically is contained in enclosures, cabinets, artificial rocks, or boxes to house a variety of uses such as controls for signals, electronics, and wiring for cable television and telecommunications, or power sources. Often these facilities are located aboveground on existing structures such as utility or light poles and have the tendency to proliferate to ensure user coverage. Such proliferation can result in visual clutter, blocking visibility to signs and other structures, preventing access for the disabled, distracting motorists travelling along the right-of-way, and creating noise. 
Reasonable regulations for locating the aboveground utility facilities and their accessory equipment are necessary to promote the health and aesthetic welfare of the people of Tustin. Reasonable compensation for permitting private use of public property and the public right-of-way is also necessary to offset the right-of-way maintenance costs. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
7261 - LEASE AGREEMENT REQUIRED 
No person shall place, construct, install, own, control, operate, manage, maintain, or use any aboveground utility facilities and their accessory equipment in, above, beneath, or across any public property, exclusive of the public right-of-way, without first obtaining a Lease Agreement or License in accordance with the Design Guidelines. Franchises and Right-of-Way Agreements for telecommunication facilities in the public right-of-way are governed by State and Federal regulations and pertinent provisions of Chapter 7 of Article 7 of the Tustin City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
7262 - DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED 
No person shall place, construct, install, own, control, operate, manage, maintain, or use any aboveground utility facilities and their accessory equipment without compliance with the Design Review requirements in Tustin City Code Section 9272 and with this Part 6. This requirement applies to existing and future franchisees and any other person who wishes to locate replacement or new aboveground utility facilities and their accessory equipment on public property and in the public right-of-way. Aboveground utility facilities located within Redevelopment Project areas shall be consistent with the respective redevelopment plans. No Design Review approvals or any permits can be issued unless the Redevelopment Agency can make a finding of conformity. 
Existing aboveground utility facilities and accessory equipment installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be subject to this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
7263 - APPLICATION FOR DESIGN REVIEW 
An applicant shall submit a plan of the proposed location of all aboveground utility facilities including their accessory equipment located in cabinets, enclosures, or boxes to the Director of Community Development ("Director"). Information shall also be provided as to the dimensions, proposed colors, screening materials, noise levels, and whether there will be interference with the public radio system anticipated. The applicant shall pay a fee to cover the anticipated staff time to review and process the application as established by the City Council for a Design Review application. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
7264 - DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS 
Upon the application being found complete by the Director, or designee, the Director or designee shall review the plan (the "Plan") using the criteria set forth in the Design Guidelines for Aboveground Utility Facilities on Public Properties and in the Public Right-of-way adopted by resolution of the City Council. If the utility facilities are to be located within redevelopment areas, then a finding of conformity by the Redevelopment Agency would need to be made prior to the Director's consideration of the Design Review. The Director may conditionally approve or deny the application. Amendments to the Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Director concurrent with or prior to issuance of an Encroachment Permit, Lease Agreement or License, as provided for in the Design Guidelines, or Right-of-Way Agreement as defined in Chapter 7 of Article 7 of the Tustin City Code. The aboveground utility facilities and their accessory equipment must be installed pursuant to the approved Plan. The noise generated from the aboveground utility facilities, including their accessory equipment, shall comply with the City's noise regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
7265 - APPEALS 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 16, 11-17-09)  
7266 - TERM/ABANDONMENT 
(a)  An aboveground utility facility is considered abandoned if it no longer provides service. If the use of the facility is discontinued for any reason, the operator shall notify the City of Tustin in writing no later than thirty (30) days after the discontinuation of use. If no notification is provided to the City, the facility shall be deemed discontinued. 
(b)  Aboveground utility facilities, including their accessory equipment, that are no longer being used shall be removed promptly no later than ninety (90) days after the discontinuation of use. Such removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements. All affected areas shall be restored to their original condition at the operator's expense. 
(c)  The Design Review approval shall remain valid for the term of the Lease Agreement, License, Right-of-Way Agreement, or as long as the Encroachment Permit is valid. If the Lease Agreement, License, Right-of-Way Agreement, or Encroachment Permit is terminated, notice and evidence thereof shall be provided to the Director. Upon termination or expiration of the Lease Agreement, License, Right-of-Way Agreement, or Encroachment Permit, the aboveground utility facilities, including their accessory equipment, shall be removed from the public property or the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1232, Sec. 2, 12-3-01)  
CHAPTER 3 - TREES AND SHRUBS 
 
7301 - PURPOSE 
The City intends to maintain and exercise full power, authority and jurisdiction over all trees, plants or shrubs in or growing upon or over any public parkway street, highway, alley, right-of-way, City-owned property in the City. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7302 - DAMAGE 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten anything, including but not limited to, any animal, guy-rope, guy-line, or contrivance to any tree, shrub, stake, guard or other plant protective structure located in any public parkway, median, street, highway, alley, right-of-way or other City owned property without prior written approval of the City's Manager of Field Services. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7303 - DESTRUCTION 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trim, cut, cut down, girdle, remove, break, injure, deface or destroy any tree or shrub or cut any ornament or improvement on any public parkway, median, street, highway, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way within the City without prior written approval of the City's Manager of Field Services. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7304 - MAINTENANCE 
Except as may otherwise be provided herein, it shall be the duty and responsibility of every person to water and otherwise maintain in proper and sightly manner, all trees and shrubbery located in the public parkway located immediately in front of or along side of property owned by said person. (Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7305 - TRIMMING 
When the Manager of Field Services determines that any limbs or branches or other growth on any trees or shrubbery growing in, on or over any land owned by the City or located in any public parkway, median, street, highway, alley or right-of-way should be trimmed, the Manager of Field Services may cause such trimming to be done, or by direction of the City Council may cause directions to perform such trimming to be given to the property owner in front of or along side of whose property said trees or shrubbery are located. (Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7306 - REMOVAL AND/OR REPLACEMENT 
(a)  The Manager of Field Services shall be authorized to remove trees which have been determined to be blighted, diseased or unsafe to the public. Trees removed by the City will be replaced within a reasonable time by the City with a tree from the City approved list of trees. 
(b)  Request from an adjacent property owner for the removal of healthy tree specimen in the public right-of-way shall be evaluated by the Manager of Field Services or his designated representative. A healthy tree specimen will not be removed unless it has caused damage to adjacent property or is determined to be unsafe. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7307 - RIGHT OF APPEAL 
Any determination of the Manager of Field Services may be appealed, in writing to the Director of Public Works, and ultimately to the City Council. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7308 - REQUIREMENTS OF PLANTING 
Whenever any person shall apply for a building permit for the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or addition of any structure, with a cost of construction, reconstruction, remodeling or addition exceeding fifty (50) percent of the then assessed value of the then existing improvements upon the property, said plans of improvement shall show and provide for planting of trees in accordance with the Master Tree Plan of the City. (Ord. No. 589, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
7309 - MASTER TREE PLAN 
Trees shall hereafter be planted in the City of Tustin in public parkways, medians, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks and right-of-way, in accordance with the Master Tree Plan adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. No. 1051, Sec. 1, 3-4-91)  
CHAPTER 4 - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS  
PART 1 - FRANCHISES 
 
7410 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number: 
"Cable television system, CATC and CTV" are terms describing a system employing antennae, micro-wave, wires, wave-guides, coaxial cables, or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or used for the purpose of: 
1.  collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them; 
2.  transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
3.  transmitting television pictures, film and video-tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; 
4.  transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice and audio-visual, 
provided, however, that any of the services, permitted hereunder to be performed, as described above, shall be those performed by the Grantee for subscribers, as herein defined, in the operation of a cable television or CATV system franchised by the City and not otherwise. 
"City" shall mean the City of Tustin, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
"City Administrator" shall mean the City Administrator of the City of Tustin, or his duly authorized designee. 
"Council" shall mean the present governing body of the City of Tustin or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City. 
"Franchise" shall mean and include any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or a specified area in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as required by other ordinances and laws of the City. 
"Franchise Payment" means the first year after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, or, at the option of the Franchisee, any shorter period of time immediately following the effective date of said ordinance, and each year thereafter, during the life of the franchise. 
"Grantee" shall mean the person, firm, corporation granted a franchise by the Council under this Chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation. 
"Gross Annual Advertising Receipts" shall mean any income, compensation and other consideration received by Grantee derived from any form of advertising. 
"Gross Annual Basic Subscriber Receipts" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the Grantee from subscribers in payment of the regularly furnished service of the cable television system in the transmission of broadcast television, radio signals and original cablecast programming of the Grantee. 
"Gross Annual Lease Receipts" shall mean any fees or income received by Grantee for the lease or rental, and compensation for any service in connection therewith, such as studio and equipment rental and production costs, of any channel permitted or designated by the Federal Communications Commission to be so leased or rented. 
"Gross Annual Non-basic Service Receipts" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the Grantee from subscribers or users in payment for the receipt of signals other than broadcast television, radio, or original cablecast programming of the Grantee, whether for "pay television", "facsimile" transmission, "return" or "response" communication, and whether or not transmitted encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected subscribers. 
"Gross receipts," as used in the following categories, shall mean any and all compensation, in whatever form, grant, subsidy, exchange, or otherwise, directly or indirectly received by a grantee, not including any taxes or services furnished by the Grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by a city, county, state or other governmental unit, and collected by the Grantee for such entity. 
"Person" shall mean any natural person and all domestic and foreign corporations, association, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, and societies. 
"Property of Grantee" shall mean all property owned, installed, or used within the City by a Grantee in the conduct of a cable television system business under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter. 
"Street" shall mean the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements. 
"Subscriber" or "User" shall mean any person or entity receiving for any purpose any service of the Grantee's cable television system including, but not limited to, the conventional cable television system service of retransmission of television broadcast, radio signals, Grantee's original cablecasting, and the local government, education and public access channels; and other services, such as leasing of channels, data and facsimile transmission, pay television, and police, fire and similar public service communication. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 10; Ord. No. 791, Sec. 1, 2-5-79)  
7411 - FRANCHISE TO INSTALL AND OPERATE 
(a)  A non-exclusive franchise to install, construct, operate, and maintain a cable television system on streets within all or a specific portion of the City may be granted by the Council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  No provision of this Chapter may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the Council it is the public interest to restrict the number of Grantees to one or more. 
(c)  When and in the event that the Grantee of any franchise granted hereunder uses in his cable television system distribution channels furnished to the Grantee by a telephone company pursuant to a tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and said Grantee makes no use of the streets independent of such telephone company-furnished facilities, said Grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a "Licensee" and in such event whenever the term "Grantee" is used herein it shall be deemed to mean and include "Licensee." (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 20)  
7412 - CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE 
a 
Basic Service 
The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder shall: 
1.  be operationally capable of relaying to subscribers terminals those televisions and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the Grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the Federal Communications Commission; 
2.  be constructed with the potential of two-way digital signal transmission; 
3.  distribute color television signals which it receives in color; 
4.  provide at least one (1) channel, without charge, for exclusive use of the City; 
5.  provide at least one (1) channel each for those educational and public access uses as now or hereafter required by the Federal Communications Commission for systems operating in the top 100 markets; 
6.  have a minimum capacity of twenty (20) channels. 
b 
Non-basic Services 
The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder, may also engage the business of: 
1.  transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
2.  transmitting television pictures, film and video-tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers; 
3.  transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice and audio-visual. 
c 
Customer Service Standards 
1.  As used herein, the following terms have the following meaning: 
(a)  Normal business hours—The term "normal business hours" means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one (1) night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
(b)  Normal operating conditions—The term "normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(c)  Service interruption—The term "service interruption" means the loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels. 
2.  In addition to other service regulations adopted by the City Council, including those in franchise ordinances, and excepting circumstances beyond Grantee's control, such as Acts of God, riots and civil disturbances, the Grantee shall: 
(a)  Planned Interruptions. Interrupt service only as necessary and for the shortest time possible. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours in advance and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(b)  Office Hours. Grantee's service office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints for Subscribers during normal business hours, and in no case less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday to Friday, excluding legal holidays, provided, however, that such hours may be lessened upon the prior written consent of the City Manager or designee provided that non-toll telephone service continues to be available during such times. 
(c)  Service Repair Force. Maintain a service repair force sufficient to comply with the standards in (f) for responding to any individual interruption of service and service installations. Additionally, upon complaint by a subscriber, Grantee shall make a demonstration satisfactory to the City Manager or designee that a signal is being delivered which is of sufficient strength and quality to meet the standards set forth in the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, or in regulations hereafter adopted by the City Council. 
(d)  Service Log. Keep a service log running a three (3) year period, which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, its location, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City. Grantee shall provide a copy of this log within ten (10) days of the written request of the City. 
(e)  Office hours and telephone availability. 
(i)  The Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week. 
(A)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
(B)  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(ii)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(iii)  The Grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(iv)  Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time. 
(v)  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. 
(f)  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(i)  Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. 
(ii)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the Grantee, the Grantee will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The Grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(iii)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. (The Grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the subscriber.) 
(iv)  A Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(v)  If a Grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the subscriber. 
(g)  Communications between a Grantee and subscribers 
(i)  Refunds—Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either 
(A)  The subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier, or 
(B)  The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
(ii)  Credits—Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. (Ord. No. 1245, Sec. 2, 10-1-01) 
d 
Municipal Service 
1.  With respect to the local government channel, the Grantee shall provide, at the request of the City Administrator, and upon City reimbursement of Grantee's actual cost, use of Grantee's studio, equipment and technical services for production of live and video-tape municipal programs, subject to scheduling requirements of the Grantee; 
2.  With respect to the basic television services, the Grantee shall provide all subscriber services, and a tie-in connection, without cost, when the system passes such facilities and as designated by the Council, to 
(a)  public schools and community colleges serving the City, and 
(b)  buildings owned and controlled by the City, used for public purposes. 
e 
Compatibility and Connectibility 
1.  It is the desire of the City that all cable television systems franchised hereunder shall, insofar as financially and technically possible, be compatible one with another and with systems adjacent to the City. 
2.  Wherever it is financially and technically feasible, the Grantee shall so construct, operate and modify the system so as to tie the same into all other systems within and adjacent to the City. 
f 
Uses permitted 
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall authorize and permit the Grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable television system in the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, and appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable television system; and, in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other Grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 30)  
7413 - FRANCHISE PAYMENTS 
(a)  As consideration for the franchise granted, Franchisee shall pay to the City, in lawful money of the United States, during the life of the franchise, for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise, according to the "franchise payment period" as defined in this Ordinance, three percent (3%) of its gross subscriber revenues received by the Franchisee for regular monthly cable television services rendered to customers located within the authorized franchise service area. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, the City reserves the right to change its fees at five-year intervals from the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, after a public hearing determining good cause is found and such action is not in conflict with Federal Communication Commission Rules and Regulations or the laws of the State of California. 
(c)  Upon request, the Grantee shall file with the City within sixty (60) days after the expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be enforced, a Financial Statement showing in detail the gross receipts of Grantee during the preceding year. In addition, the City shall have the right, at any time, to inspect the Grantee's revenue records under the franchise and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts payable under this Chapter. 
(d)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 40; Ord. No. 791, Sec. 2, 2-5-79)  
7414 - FRANCHISE TERM 
(a)  The franchise granted by the Council under this Chapter shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years from the date of its acceptance by the Grantee. 
(b)  The City may terminate any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter in the event of the willful failure, refusal or neglect by Grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this Chapter, or any material rule or regulation of the Council or City Administrator validly adopted pursuant to this Chapter. 
(c)  The City Administrator may make written demand that the Grantee do or comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the Grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the City Administrator may place his request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular Council meeting agenda. The City Administrator shall cause to be served upon such Grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of his intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City Clerk at least once ten (10) days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
(d)  The Council shall consider the request of the City Administrator and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the Grantee was with just cause. 
(e)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the Grantee was with just cause, the Council shall direct the Grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(f)  If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the Grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, be resolution, declare that the franchise of such Grantee shall be terminated and forfeited unless there be compliance by the Grantee within such period as the Council may fix. 
(g)  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way effect any of the rights of the City under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(h)  In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of any franchise granted hereunder, without the prior consent of the City, expressed by resolution, the Grantee shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than one hundred percent (100%) of its gross revenue during said period. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 50)  
7415 - APPLICATIONS FOR FRANCHISE 
a 
Basic Application 
Each application for a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain any cable television systems in this City shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant including, but not limited to, the following and to whatever extent required by the City: 
(a)  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors, and associates of the applicant. 
(b)  The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control of 5% or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity. 
(c)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable television systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby. 
(d)  A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable television system service and in related or similar fields. 
(e)  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by a certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the Council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the City, or a statement from a certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed system in this City. 
(f)  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
3.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served. 
(b)  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges and service charges. 
(c)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no event shall said operational and performance standards be less than those contained in Title 47, Subpart K (Sections 76.601 et seq.), Rules and Regulations, Federal Communications Commission, adopted February 2, 1972, and as amended. 
(d)  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber. 
(e)  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise. 
4.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any public utility subject to regulations by the California Public Utilities Commission providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including but not limited to poles, lines, or conduits. 
5.  Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the Council, or by any provision of any other ordinance of the City (and of its Charter). 
b 
Application Fee 
An application fee in the sum of $500, which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or money order, to pay the costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application, and which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part; provided, that any applicant who shall deliver to the City Clerk a written withdrawal of or cancellation of any application hereunder, not later than the seventh (7th) day next following the day such application is received by the City Clerk, shall be entitled to have returned and refunded the sum of $400, less any supplemental actual costs or expenses incurred by the City by reason of such application. 
c 
Procedure for Award of Franchise 
1.  The Council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the City, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received, and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications. 
The Grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the Grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
2.  Upon receipt of any application for franchise, the Council shall refer the same to the City Administrator who shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting such application, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the Council within 30 days. 
3.  In making any determination hereunder as to any application the Council may give due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, rates to subscriber, income to the City, experience, character, background, and financial responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, and to abide by policy conditions, franchise limitations and requirements, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the Council for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public. The Council, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of such considerations and without competitive bidding. 
If the Council shall determine to reject such application, such determination shall be final and conclusive, and the same shall be deemed rejected. 
4.  If the Council shall determine to further consider the application, the following shall be done: 
(a)  The Council shall decide and specify the terms and conditions of any franchise to be granted hereunder and as herein provided. 
(b)  The Council shall pass its resolution of intention to consider the granting of such a franchise, giving notice of receipt of the application, and describing the character of the franchise desired, stating the name of the proposed Grantee, the character of the franchise, the terms and conditions upon which such franchise is proposed to be granted, that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the Office of the City Clerk, fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection to the granting thereof may file written protests and appear before the Council and be heard, and directing the City Clerk to publish said resolution at least once within ten (10) days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
5.  At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear all written protests. Thereafter, the Council shall make one of the following determinations: 
(a)  That such franchise be denied; or 
(b)  That such franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions as specified in the resolution of intention to grant the same; or 
(c)  That such franchise be granted, but upon the terms and conditions different from those specified in the resolution of intention to grant the same. 
6.  If the Council shall determine that a franchise be denied such determination shall be expressed by resolution and shall be final and conclusive. 
If the Council shall determine that a franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions as specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the same, such determination shall be expressed by ordinance granting a franchise to the applicant. 
If the Council shall determine upon granting a franchise upon terms and conditions different from those specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the same, then such determination shall be expressed by resolution adopted prior to granting a franchise by ordinance. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 60)  
7416 - BONDS: INDEMNIFICATIONS; INSURANCE 
a 
Performance Bond to City 
Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance required under Section 7417 hereof, the Grantee shall file with the City Clerk and shall thereafter, annually, during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in such amount and kind as shall have been approved by the Council. The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned that in the event that Grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this Chapter or of such franchise, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or loss, or costs suffered or incurred by the City as a result thereof, including attorneys' fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal or abandonment of any property or other costs which may be in default, up to the full principal amount of such bond. Said condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until Grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the City which arise out of or pertain to said franchise. Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bond accepted by the City pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the Grantee, or limit the liability of the Grantee under any franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter or for damages either to the full amount of the bond, or otherwise. 
b 
Performance Bond for Subscribers 
Upon being granted a franchise, and upon filing of the acceptance required under Section 7417 hereof, the Grantee shall file, annually, with the City Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporate surety bond, or other adequate surety agreement, in the amount as shall have been approved by the Council. The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned that in the event such Grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of any agreement or undertaking made between Grantee and any subscriber, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or costs suffered or incurred by any subscriber as a result thereof, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of any action or proceeding. Said condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until Grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to any subscriber which arise out of or pertain to any such agreement or undertaking. 
c 
Hold Harmless Agreement 
Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including but not limited to damages to City property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by Grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by Grantee's cable television system), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the City with respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever, including but not limited to damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost, and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise hereunder by Grantee, or the granting thereof by the City. 
d 
Defense of Litigation 
Grantee shall at the sole risk and expense of Grantee, upon demand of the City, made by and through the City Attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the City, its officers, boards commissions, agents, or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the City. 
Granting shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against Grantee, the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees in any of these premises; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise, provided, that neither Grantee nor City shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit, or other proceeding, without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
e 
Insurance Required 
Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance required under Section 7417 hereof, the Grantee shall file with the City Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense each of the following policies of insurance: 
1.  General Comprehensive Liability Insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00, together with Bodily Injury Liability Insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00, for injuries including accidental death, to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 on account of any one occurrence, and Property Damage Liability Insurance in an amount not less than $500,000.00, resulting from any one occurrence or combined minimum single limits of liability of $1,000,000.00; provided, however as follows: 
(a)  The City shall be named as an additional assured in any of said insurance policies; and 
(b)  Where such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers Grantee or any other entity or person, it shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 70)  
7417 - ACCEPTANCE OF THE FRANCHISE 
(a)  No franchise granted under this Chapter shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the City Clerk. Written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance approved by the City Attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each and every term and condition and limitation contained in this Chapter, or in such franchise, or otherwise specified as herein provided. 
(b)  The written acceptance shall be filed by the Grantee not later than 12:01 o'clock P.M. of the fortieth (40th) day next following the effective date of the ordinance granting such franchise. 
(c)  In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required, the Grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise. Thereafter, the acceptance of the Grantee shall not be received nor filed by the City Clerk. The Grantee shall have no rights, remedies, or redress in the premises, unless and until the Council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms and conditions as the Council may impose. 
(d)  In any case, and in any instance, all rights, remedies and redress in these premises which may or shall be available to the City, shall at all times be available to the City, and shall be preserved and maintained and shall continuously exist in and to the City, and shall not be in any manner or means modified, abridged, altered, restricted, or impaired by reason of any of these premises, or otherwise. 
(e)  Any franchise granted and accepted under this Chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by the Grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any cable television systems in the City. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 80)  
7418 - LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE 
(a)  Every franchise granted under this Chapter shall be non-exclusive. 
(b)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this Chapter except those specifically prescribed herein. 
(c)  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the Grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
(d)  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original Grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, or assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, such as a bill of sale, or similar document, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after any such transfer or assignment. The said consent of the Council may not be unreasonably refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility as determined by the Council and must agree to comply with all provisions of this Chapter; and provided, further that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such hypothecation shall exceed 50% of the market value of the property used by the franchisee in the conduct of the cable television system, prior consent of the Council shall be required for such a transfer. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
In the event that Grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the City Council, expressed by resolution, shall be required where there is an actual change in control or where ownership of more than 50% of the voting stock of Grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own 50% or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively. Any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the City Council shall constitute a failure to comply with a provision of this Chapter within the meaning of Section 7414. 
(e)  Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The Grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this Chapter by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
(f)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the City. 
(g)  The Grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this Chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement. 
(h)  The Grantee shall be subject to all requirements of City laws, rules regulations, and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(i)  Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the Grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets. 
(j)  Any franchise granted hereunder, shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled, or exercisable by Grantee, or any successor to any interest of Grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any cable television system in the City; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between Grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the City, to the effect that, as between Grantee and the City, and all construction, operation and maintenance by any Grantee of any cable television system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to said franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity, or authority whatsoever. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 90; Ord. No. 791, Sec. 3, 2-5-79)  
7419 - RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY 
(a)  Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the Grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain. 
(b)  There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any law, and the Grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(c)  There is hereby reserved to the City the power to amend any Section of this Chapter so as to required additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the Grantee to reflect technical and economic changes occurring during the franchise term, and to enable the City and the Grantee to take advantage of new developments in the cable television industry so as to more effectively, efficiently and economically serve the public. 
(d)  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any government right or power of the City. 
(e)  The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The City Administrator, with the approval of the City Attorney, is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any Grantee under this Chapter, either on behalf of the City, the Grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the Grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the City Administrator may appeal the matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The Council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the City Administrator and the Council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of the Grantee or from any provision of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 100)  
PART 2 - REGULATIONS AND PERMITS 
 
7421 - COUNCIL TO ADOPT RULES-REGULATIONS 
a 
Regulation of Operation 
(1)  Prior to receiving any applications for franchises, the Council may adopt rules and regulations governing the operation of cable television systems in the City. Such rules and regulations shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the Grantee of any franchise hereunder, and are expressly declared a part of any franchise hereunder. 
(2)  Rules and regulations not adopted prior to receiving any application for a franchise shall be adopted by the Council at the first regular meeting of the Council next following the effective date of this Chapter, by Resolution which shall become effective upon the adoption and shall be applicable to any application for a franchise previously received. 
(3)  The rules and regulations adopted shall govern the nontechnical operation of the CATV system, except as provided in Section 7440. Technical operations shall include all areas of operation for which technical standards are set forth in rules promulgated by the Federal Communication Commission and as those standards may apply or be extended from time to time. 
(4)  (a)  Provided the same do not materially alter the content of the franchise without consent of the Grantee, the Council may, at any time, adopt new rules or regulations, or may amend, modify, delete or otherwise change its respective rules or regulations previously adopted, in the following manner: The Council shall pass its Resolution of Intention stating or describing the rules or regulations to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted, or otherwise changed, and fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection thereto may appear before the Council and be heard. Such Resolution shall direct the City Clerk to publish the same at least once within ten (10) days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, and to mail a copy of the same to any Grantee or Applicant for a franchise, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon. 
(b)  At the time set for such hearing or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such comments as may be presented. Thereafter, the Council, by its Resolution, may adopt, amend, modify, delete, or otherwise change its respective rules and regulations. Such determination by the Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(c)  Any rule or regulation as adopted, amended, modified, deleted, or otherwise changed by the Council shall become effective upon the tenth (10th) day following the adoption of such Resolution, unless a longer period shall be otherwise provided in such Resolution. (Ord. No. 791, Sec. 4, 2-5-79) 
b 
Rates 
1.  Prior to granting any franchise hereunder the Council, by resolution, shall establish and fix all rates and charges for the Basic Service, herein defined, allowable to Grantee, such as: 
(a)  charges for installation; 
(b)  subscriber rates; 
(c)  service charges for separate classifications of service (e.g., additional connections, etc.) 
Once established, such rates or charges shall not be changed at any time after granting of a franchise, except after due notice and hearing as provided herein. 
2.  Rates and charges for services, other than the Basic Service, shall also be approved by the Council by resolution, after due notice and hearing as provided herein. 
3.  In connection with any proposed change of any rates or charges of Grantee to subscribers initiated by Grantee, or the approval of rates for additional services, at any time after the granting of a franchise, the Council may direct the City Administrator of the City to conduct a preliminary hearing into the matter. If so directed by the Council, the City Administrator shall issue his written notice fixing and setting forth the day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear and be heard. 
The City Clerk shall cause such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The City Clerk also shall cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to any Grantee at least ten (10) days prior to the date specified for the hearing. At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Administrator shall proceed to hear the matter. Following the close of such hearing, the City Administrator shall prepare and file with the City Council his report of the hearing, his findings and an opinion containing his recommendations and the reasons therefore. After the expiration of ten (10) days following receipt of the City Administrator's report and opinion, and if no objection has been filed thereto, the Council shall determine whether to adopt the opinion or to hold a further hearing, and shall pass its resolution of intention to do so, describing and stating any rates or charges to be changed, the reasons of the Council therefor, fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear before the Council and be heard. 
Such resolution shall direct the City Clerk to publish the same resolution at least once within ten (10) days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. The City Clerk also shall cause a copy of such resolution to be mailed to the Grantee at least ten (10) days prior to the date specified for hearing thereon. 
At the time set for any further hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear the matter. 
If upon receipt of report and opinion, and the expiration of said ten (10) days without objection, or following the holding of a further hearing, if the Council determines to do so, the Council shall find that the changing of any rates or charges of Grantee to subscribers will be fair to the system operator and not detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the subscribers and users, and of the City, then the Council, by resolution, shall authorize the change of rates or charges of Grantee to subscribers and users as determined. Such resolution shall thereupon become and shall be a part of any franchise granted thereunder and affected thereby. 
4.  Neither the Council nor the Grantee shall, as to rates charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 110)  
7422 - PERMITS AND CONSTRUCTION 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of any franchise, the Grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable television systems, or associated micro-wave transmission facilities. 
In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting Grantee's cable television operations, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the City Administrator. 
(b)  Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, including right of access to poles and conduits, Grantee shall commence construction and installation of the cable television system. 
(c)  Within one year after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, Grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all of the areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made part of the franchise shall be provided as set forth therein. 
(d)  Failure on the part of the Grantee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise. By resolution, the Council, in its discretion, may extend the time for the commencement and completion of installation and construction for additional periods in the event the Grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control. 
By acceptance of the franchise granted hereunder, Grantee agrees that failure to comply with any time requirements referred to in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this Section will result in damage to the City, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay; and Grantee therefore agrees that, in addition to any other damage suffered by City, he will pay to City the sum of $25.00 per day for each and every day's delay beyond the time prescribed, plus authorized extensions thereof, for completion of any of the acts required to be done by this Section. 
(e)  Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public property or on privately-owned property unless and until first securing the written approval of the City Administrator. 
Whenever Grantee shall not utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities shall be located beneath the surface of the streets, or whenever the City shall undertake a program designed to cause all conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets in any area or throughout the City, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to Grantee, any such conduits or other facilities of Grantee shall be constructed, installed, placed, or replaced beneath the surface of the streets. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement, or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of Grantee, whose costs shall be determined as in the case of public utilities. 
(f)  The City shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits, or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for Grantee in any street, provided such use by City does not interfere with the use by Grantee. 
(g)  In those areas of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone, communication and electric services are underground, or hereafter are placed underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of his transmission and distribution facilities underground. The term "underground" shall include a partial underground system; provided, that upon obtaining the written approval of the City Administrator, amplifiers in the Grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. 
(h)  The Grantee at his expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any property of Grantee when, in the opinion of the City Administrator the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks, or any other types of structure or improvements by governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including but not limited to movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The Grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of Grantee in place, as herein provided. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of Grantee, and Grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
(i)  Upon the failure, refusal, or neglect of Grantee to cause any work or other act required by law or hereunder to be properly completed in, on, over, or under any street within any time prescribed therefor, or upon notice given, where no time is prescribed, the City Administrator may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to Grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The Grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof. 
(j)  In the event that, 
(1)  the use of any part of the system of Grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days, without prior written notice to and approval by the City; or 
(2)  any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements hereof; or 
(3)  any franchise shall be terminated, cancelled, or shall expire, then the Grantee shall, at the option of the City, and at the expense of Grantee and at no expense to the City, and upon demand of the City, promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of Grantee, and Grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to such condition as the City Administrator shall approve. 
The Council may, upon written application therefor by Grantee, approve the abandonment of any of such property in place by Grantee and under such terms and conditions as the Council may prescribe. Upon abandonment of any such property in place, Grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged, and delivered to the City such instruments as the City Attorney shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to the City. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 120)  
7423 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
(a)  A franchise granted to provide service within the City shall authorize and permit the Grantee to solicit, sell, distribute and make a charge to subscribers within the City for connection to the cable television system of Grantee, and shall also authorize and permit the Grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City. 
(b)  A franchise, easement, license or other permit granted to anyone other than the Grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City shall not authorize nor permit said person to solicit, sell, distribute, or make any charge to subscribers within the City, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the City to the cable television service system of Grantee. 
(c)  No franchise granted under this Chapter shall ever be given any value by any Court or other authority, public or private, in any proceeding of any nature or character, wherein or whereby the City shall be a party or affected therein or thereby. 
(d)  Grantee shall be subject to all provisions of the other ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted, including but not limited to those pertaining to works and activities in, on, over, under and about streets. 
Any privilege claimed under any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
Grantee also shall be subject to the provisions of general laws of the State of California, or as hereafter amended, when applicable to the exercise of any privilege contained in any franchise granted under this Chapter, including but not limited to those pertaining to works and activities in and about State highways. 
(e)  Grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any of the following: 
(1)  engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing, renting, repairing or servicing of television sets or radios; 
(2)  imposing a fee or charge for any service or repair to subscriber-owned receiving devices except for the connection of its service or for the determination by Grantee of the quality of its signal to the recipients thereof; 
(3)  soliciting, referring, or causing or permitting the solicitation or referral of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business herein prohibited to be engaged in by Grantee. 
(4)  providing information concerning the viewing patterns of identifiable individual subscribers to any person, group or organization for any purpose. 
(f)  If the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California or any other Federal or State body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted under this Chapter, that exercise of such paramount jurisdiction shall in no way diminish, impair, alter or affect any other portion, term or provision of any franchise not directly affected by the exercise of such paramount jurisdiction and to the extent that any exercise of such paramount jurisdiction shall affect any obligation of a Grantee or benefit to the City under the terms of this franchise, it is the intention of the parties hereto that the rules and regulations of the entity or agency having exercised such paramount jurisdiction shall control and that neither the City nor the Grantee shall be obligated to carry out any provision of or be subject to any obligation, term or condition of this franchise which is in conflict with the rules and regulations of the entity or agency exercising such paramount jurisdiction. The preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the City of its police power shall not diminish, impair, alter, or affect any contractual benefit to the City or Grantee nor any contractual obligation of the Grantee under any franchise issued hereunder. 
(g)  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(h)  No person, firm or corporation within the service area of the Grantee, and where trunk lines are in place, shall be refused service; provided, however, that the Grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charge. 
(i)  Before providing cable television service to any subscriber, the Grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows: 
"Subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television service the Grantee is making use of public rights-of-way within the City of Tustin and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to Grantee for any reason, Grantee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. By accepting cable television service, subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake any action against the City of Tustin, its officers, or its employees if the service to be provided hereunder is interrupted or discontinued." 
(j)  The form of the Grantee's contract with the subscriber shall also be subject to approval of the City. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 130; Ord. No. 791, Sec. 5, 2-5-79)  
7424 - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYMENT AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 
In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, the Grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin. 
The Grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. 
The Grantee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this non-discrimination clause. 
The Grantee shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Grantee, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex, or national origin. 
The Grantee shall incorporate the foregoing requirements in all of its contracts for work relative to construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 140)  
7425 - VIOLATIONS 
(a)  From and after the effective date of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, or within any privately-owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable television system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect, or approval for the installation of such conduct has been given by the City Council prior to the effective date of this Chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. (Ord. No. 581, Sec. 150) 
(c)  Penalties for Grantee's Failure to Comply with State Customer Service Standards 
(1)  Video Customer Service Act. 
(A)  Subject to the procedures in subdivision (B) below, and without limiting the City's authority to prosecute the violations of this Chapter pursuant to Chapter 1 of Article 1 of this Code, or pursuant to judicial enforcement of a Grantee's obligations at law or in equity, and without limiting the City's authority to terminate a franchise for cause, instead of any liquidated damages that may be provided for in any franchise hereunder, the City Manager or designee may, with the approval of the City Attorney, impose fines of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day of each material breach of the Customer Service Standards established under the California Video Customer Service Act, Government Code §§ 53088 et seq., not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each occurrence of material breach. However, where a material breach of any such provision has occurred and the City Manager or designee has provided notice and assessed the foregoing fines, in a subsequent material breach of the same nature occurring within twelve (12) months, the penalties may be increased by the City Manager or designee to a maximum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed twelve hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. Where a third or further material breach of the same nature occurs within those same twelve (12) months, and the City Manager or designee has provided notice and assessed penalties, the penalties may be increased to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(B)  Prior to imposing fines pursuant subdivision (A) above, the City Manager or designee shall give the Grantee written notice of any alleged material breaches of the consumer service standards of the California Video Customer Service Act, Government Code §§ 53088 et seq., and allow the Grantee at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. 
(C)  A material breach for the purposes of assessing the fines in subdivision (B) above shall be deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period specified in subdivision (B) above, that any material breach has not been remedied by the Grantee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected. 
(2)  Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act. 
(A)  Subject to the procedures in subdivision (B) below, and without limiting the City's authority to prosecute the violations of this Chapter pursuant to Chapter 1 of Article 1 of this Code, or pursuant to judicial enforcement of a Grantee's obligations at law or in equity, and without limiting the City's authority to terminate a franchise for cause, instead of any liquidated damages that may be provided for in any franchise hereunder, the City Manager or designee may, with the approval of the City Attorney, impose fines of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each year in which the notice required under the California Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act, Government Code §§ 53054 et seq., is not distributed to all subscribers. 
(B)  Prior to imposing the fines pursuant subdivision (A) above, the City Manager or designee shall give the Grantee written notice of any alleged failure to distribute to all subscriber the annual notice provided for in subdivision (A) above. If the Grantee distributes this notice to all subscribers within sixty (60) days after receipt of the notice from the City Manager or designee, no penalty shall be imposed upon the Grantee pursuant to subdivision (A). 
(d)  Penalties for Third Parties Violating the Provisions of this Chapter 
Any person not a Grantee convicted of violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor pursuant to Chapter 1 of Article 1 of this Code. (Ord. No. 1245, Sec. 3, 10-1-01)  
PART 3 - UNDERGROUNDING OF SYSTEM 
 
7430 - UNDERGROUNDING REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  All distribution lines and individual service lines for Cable Television Systems shall be required to be installed underground, except upon express waiver by the Planning Agency. The Planning Agency shall not grant any such waiver except for those areas where other utilities are installed above ground. 
(b)  All new development, residential, commercial and industrial, shall be required to install underground CATV conduit facilities in accordance with the provisions of this Section except upon express waiver by the Planning Commission at the time of approval of a tentative tract map or Parcel Map. (Ord. No. 584, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 791, Sec. 6, 2-5-79)  
7431 - RESERVED 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 791, Sec. 7, adopted Feb. 5, 1979, repealed former Section 7431 which pertained to undergrounding specifications and was derived from Ord. No. 584, Sec. 2.  
PART 4 - TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
 
7440 - GENERALLY 
(a)  The performance of Grantee's cable television system shall meet the technical standards as set forth in Section 76.605 or any successor Section of the Federal Communication Commissions Rules, as those standards may apply or be extended from time to time. 
(b)  Grantee shall conduct performance tests in accordance with the requirements of Section 76.601 or any successor section of the Federal Communication Commissions Rules, as these requirements may apply or be extended from time to time. (Ord. No. 791, Sec. 8, 2-5-79)  
CHAPTER 5 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
7500 - GENERAL PURPOSES 
This Chapter is known as the Underground Utility Ordinance, and is enacted to provide procedures for undergrounding of overhead distribution facilities of public utilities, and is enacted pursuant to the decisions, rules and regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission, and is intended to be in conformity with Case Nos. 8208 and 8209, General Orders 95 and 128. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 1)  
7501 - DEFINITIONS 
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases hereinafter defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them. 
"Commission" shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
"Underground Utility District" or "District" shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7502d of this Chapter. 
"Person" shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Utility" shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials, or devices. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 2)  
7502 - PROCEDURES 
a 
Public Hearing by Council 
1.  The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service, and to establish an Underground Utility District or Districts. 
2.  Not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of any such public hearing, the City Clerk shall mail to all persons owning real property within the proposed District, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and all affected utilities, a Notice of the time and place of said hearing, and a statement that the City Engineer's report containing details of the District, will be available for inspection by the public in the Office of the City Clerk prior to said hearing. 
3.  Each such hearing shall be open to the public, and may be continued from time to time. At such hearings all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
4.  The Council shall make a determination as to whether the replacement of existing overhead distribution facilities with underground distribution facilities along public streets and roads, and on public lands and private property across which rights-of-way satisfactory to the utility have been obtained, or may be obtained without cost or condemnation, would be in the general public interest for any reason or reasons set forth by applicable rules and regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission as a basis for undergrounding at utility expense, as such rules and regulations provide at the time of such determination, which said rules and regulations at this time provide for such undergrounding where: 
(a)  Such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy concentration of overhead distribution facilities; 
(b)  A street, road or right-of-way is extensively used by the general public, and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(c)  A street, road or right-of-way adjacent to overhead distribution facilities adjoins or passes through a civic area or public recreation area, or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 3) 
b 
Advisory Committee 
To assist in advising the City relative to undergrounding of utilities an Underground Utilities Committee shall be appointed by the City Administrator, who shall act as its Chairman, and which shall be composed of a representative of each affected utility, the City Engineer, and such of the following persons as may be designated by the City Administrator to serve from time to time: The Director of Public Works, City Attorney, Planning Director, members of the public, and others. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 4) 
c 
Report of City Engineer 
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing, containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. A copy of said report shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk prior to the hearing, and shall thereafter remain available for public inspection. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 5) 
d 
Council may designate Underground Utility District by Resolution 
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District, and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, material and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 6) 
e 
Unlawful Acts 
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in Section 7502d hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the District, after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such Resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 7505b hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 7)  
7503 - EXCEPTION 
a 
Emergency or Unusual Circumstances 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the Director of Public Works in order to provide emergency service. The Director of Public Works may grant special permission on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 8) 
b 
Other Exceptions 
This Chapter and any resolutions adopted pursuant thereto, shall not apply to the following types of facilities, unless otherwise provided in said resolution: 
1.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
2.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
3.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures), crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
4.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
5.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
6.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
7.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
8.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 9)  
7504 - NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITIES 
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7502d hereof, the City Clerk shall mail to all persons owning real property within the District created by said resolution, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to all affected utilities, a copy of said resolution, together with a copy of this Chapter, together with a statement of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission, together with a statement that the City Engineer's report containing details of the District, is available for inspection by the public in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 10)  
7505 - RESPONSIBILITIES 
a 
Responsibility of Utility Companies 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7502d hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 11) 
b 
Responsibility of Property Owners 
1.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 7505a and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
2.  The service connection shall be completed and ready for service in accordance with the construction schedule supplied by the City Engineer, as hereinafter provided. Prior to start of construction the City Engineer, as hereinafter provided. Prior to start of construction the City Engineer shall mail, postage prepaid, to owners and occupants in the manner provided in Section 7504 hereof, a construction notice, specifying the service connection work to be done, and the date on or before which said service connection shall be completed and ready for use. Said notice shall also advise the addressee that, in the event any required service connection has not been completed to meet the construction program of the utility concerned, or the date stipulated in said notice, whichever is later, the City Engineer may post written notice upon the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter, may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property, and/or may immediately undertake to provide the required service connection by force account or by contract; provided, however, that if there is no occupant and no utility service is being furnished, the City Engineer shall have the option to order removal of any existing poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, without replacement thereof. 
3.  Within five (5) days after a construction schedule has been mailed to any owner of property as provided in this Section, any owner desiring to protest the requirement that he comply with the provisions of this Chapter, or to protest the City undertaking to provide the required service, may make written request to the City for public hearing by the City Council. The City Council shall then set a time and place no less than fifteen (15) days thereafter, and at said time shall hear and consider the property owner's protest and shall affirm or modify the requirements for said property owner to comply with the provisions of this Section. 
4.  Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the Council, setting forth the facts that the required underground facilities have been provided and/or that the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures have been removed, and the cost thereof, together with the legal description and Assessor's parcel number of each such parcel of property against which said cost is to be assessed. 
5.  The Council shall then set a time and place, not less than fifteen (15) days thereafter, for hearing protests against said assessments, and authorize the City Clerk to give notice thereof to each such owner and/or occupant in the manner provided in Section 7504 hereof. The notice shall include the name and address of the owner, description of the work done and cost thereof, and the time and place set for the hearing of protests. 
6.  At the time and place set for said hearing, the Council shall hear and consider said protests and the report of the City Engineer, and upon conclusion of such consideration, shall affirm, modify, or reject each proposed assessment. The Council shall then direct the City Clerk to give notice to the owner of each property so assessed in the manner provided in Section 7504 hereof, stating the amount of the affirmed assessment, and that same is to be paid within five (5) days after receipt of said notice. Any such assessment remaining unpaid thereafter shall then become a lien against said property, and shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to the Assessor to be included in the next regular property tax bill levied against the premises, said assessment to be due and payable with said tax. Any such assessment shall bear interest from one (1) month after affirmation thereof, at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 12) 
c 
Responsibility of City 
City shall remove at its own expense all City owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder, in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 7502d hereof. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 13) 
d 
Modification and Abandonment 
1.  The City Council may terminate, abandon, modify, or enlarge any District or Districts, or the boundaries thereof, upon public hearing, conducted as provided in Section 7502a hereof, and upon findings that the public health, safety or welfare require such termination, abandonment, modification or enlargement. 
2.  In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7502b hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. No. 411, Sec. 14 and 15)  
CHAPTER 6 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PROPERTY 
 
7600 - PURPOSE 
The public streets and public areas within the City of Tustin should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and areas within the City of Tustin in a safe, clean and accessible condition. (Ord. No. 1154, Sec. 2, 7-17-95)  
7601 - DEFINITIONS 
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Camp" means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia. 
"Camp facilities" include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters. 
"Camp paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, blankets, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
"Public area" means and includes but is not limited to any public street, building, grounds, lot, parcel, park, plaza or parking lot dedicated to the authorized use and enjoyment of the public. 
"Public street" means and includes but is not limited to any publicly owned street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, bridge, culvert, drain, and other facilities or areas necessary for the construction, improvement, and maintenance of streets and roads. 
"Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. (Ord. No. 1154, Sec. 2, 7-17-95)  
7602 - CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY PROHIBITED 
Unless otherwise permitted, no person shall: 
a.  Maintain, erect, or permit the erection of any hut, shanty, tent, tarpaulin, or any other type of temporary structure upon any public street or public area; 
b.  Camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia upon any public street or public areas; 
c.  Store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, upon any public street or public area. (Ord. No. 1154, Sec. 2, 7-17-95)  
7603 - VIOLATIONS 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor, pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 1121. (Ord. No. 1154, Sec. 2, 7-17-95)  
CHAPTER 7 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 
7700 - PURPOSES 
The purposes of this Chapter are to: 
1.  Establish local regulations with respect to the location of private telecommunications facilities in the public right-of-way; 
2.  Comply with the Telecommunications Act in affording access for telecommunications providers to the public right-of-way in a nondiscriminatory manner; 
3.  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public right-of-way held in trust by the City; and 
4.  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City for permitting private use of the public right-of-ways by telecommunications providers. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7701 - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise: 
"City" means the City of Tustin. 
"Council" means the City Council of the City. 
"Grantee" means a person who has been granted an agreement pursuant to this Chapter. 
"Overhead facilities" means utility poles, street light poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground in the public right-of-way, including the underground supports and foundations. 
"Person" means and includes corporations, companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees, receivers, and successors in interest. 
"Public right-of-way" means and includes all public streets, sidewalks and utility easements, now or hereafter owned in fee or easement by the City. 
"Public Works Director" means the Director of Public Works of the City. 
"Right-of-way agreement" means a contract granted to a person pursuant to this chapter as follows: (1) a license in the case of a telecommunications provider that will not serve areas or persons within the City, or (2) a franchise in the case of a telecommunications provider that will serve areas or persons within the City, as it may be amended. 
"Telecommunications Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and by the Telecommunications act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.). 
"Telecommunications facility" means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
"Telecommunications provider" means and includes every person that proposes to or does own, control, operate or manage plant, equipment or property within the City in the public right-of-way that is used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications services within or outside areas of the City. 
"Telecommunications service" means the proposal to or the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points of wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, using facilities in the public right-of-way. 
"Telegraph or Telephone provider" means every person within the scope of California Public Utilities Code Section 7901 who has constructed or may construct telegraph or telephone lines within the public right-of-way for purposes of oral and aural communication by telephone or communication by telegraph. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7702 - AGREEMENT REQUIRED. 
Except for Telegraph or Telephone Providers, no person shall place, construct, install, own, control, operate, manage, maintain, or use any telecommunications facility in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right-of-way without first obtaining a right-of-way agreement from the City for such purpose. The execution of a right-of-way agreement pursuant to this chapter shall not diminish, abrogate, or otherwise affect a grantee's obligation to comply with any other applicable provision of this code, or state or federal law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Any permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting business within the City as required by the code or ordinances of the City. 
B.  Any permit, agreement, or authorization required in connection with activities in, upon, above, beneath, or across the public right-of-way, including by way of example but not limitation, encroachment permits for street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work, and design review of above ground cabinets pursuant to Ordinance No. 1213, codified at Part 6 of Chapter 2 of Article 7 of the Tustin City Code. 
C.  Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the City to which access is not specifically granted by the right-of-way agreement including, without limitation, permits and licenses for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures or facilities owned by the City or other governmental entity. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7703 - APPLICATION 
Each application for a right-of-way agreement required under this Chapter shall be in writing, shall be filed with the City Clerk, and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies. 
B.  A statement and description of the facilities proposed to be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed, or used by the applicant; the proposed location of such facilities; the manner in which the applicant proposes to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use the same; and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other person will be used. 
C.  A detailed description and location map of the public right-of-way or other public places within which the applicant proposes or seeks authority to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use any facilities; a detailed description and location map of the facilities to be installed in public right-of-way and any adjacent public or private facilities, equipment, or property; and a detailed description of the proposed traffic control plans and street repairs. 
D.  A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any person providing for use of the person's facilities such as poles, lines, or conduits. 
E.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person with respect to the applicant's proposed facilities in the public right-of-way. If a right-of-way agreement is granted to a person posing as the representative of another person, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such right-of-way agreement shall be null and void and of no force or effect whatsoever. 
F.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing applicant's financial status and financial ability to complete the construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
G.  Copies of all licenses, permits, franchises, petitions, or applications received or submitted by the applicant to the Federal Communications Commission, the California Public Utilities Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction concerning any matters affecting the applicant's activities or facilities under the proposed right-of-way agreement. 
H.  The City may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the Council or City staff may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested right-of-way agreement should be granted. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7704 - APPLICATION FEE/DEPOSIT 
Each application for a right-of-way agreement required under this Chapter shall be accompanied by payment to the City of an application fee in an amount necessary to pay all expenses incurred by the City in connection with the processing of such application and the execution of a right-of-way agreement, including any expense incurred by the City for outside technical or legal services to review any such application or agreement and submit a recommendation thereon. A minimum initial deposit of $5,000.00 is required. In the event the City subsequently determines the initial deposit is insufficient to pay for all City expenses incurred, it may require the applicant to pay an additional deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the additional estimated expenses. No portion of the fee shall be considered a tax or any portion of compensation or revenue due to the City under this chapter or code, or any other local, state, or federal law for use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7705 - RIGHT-OF-WAY USAGE FEE 
Each right-of-way agreement approved pursuant to this Chapter shall contain an annual compensation to be paid by Grantee for the property rights granted in the right-of-way agreement. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7706 - USE OF FACILITIES; CHANGES IN USE 
Grantee's facilities shall be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed, and used solely and exclusively for the purpose(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in Grantee's right-of-way agreement. Grantee shall not in any way use, or authorize or allow another person to use, any facility subject to grantee's right-of-way agreement for any purpose or use other than the purpose(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in the right-of-way agreement. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7707 - NONEXCLUSIVE USE; LIMITATIONS 
a 
Any right-of-way agreement executed under this Chapter shall be for the nonexclusive use of the public right-of-way. By executing a right-of-way agreement, the City does not agree to restrict the number of right-of-way agreements to be executed that cover all or any part of the City for any person in the same business, a competing business, or a related business as the grantee. 
b 
A right-of-way agreement only authorizes grantee to use the public right-of-way, and the use of any other public property, whether located within or outside a public right-of-way, is strictly prohibited unless authorized by a separate lease or license agreement with the City. 
c 
No reference herein, nor in any right-of-way agreement shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the City that its interest or other right to control the use of the property that is the subject of a right-of-way agreement is sufficient to permit its use for the purposes specified in the agreement. Any right-of-way agreement executed under this chapter shall be deemed to grant no more than the rights which the City may have the authority to grant. 
d 
Any privilege claimed by grantee in any public right-of-way shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7708 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES—INSTALLATION 
a 
Conformance with Applicable Law. No person shall place, construct, install, own, control, operate, manage, maintain, or use any telecommunications facility in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right-of-way without first obtaining all necessary or required permits, agreements, or approvals from the City and all other governmental entities with jurisdiction over the facility or public right-of-way. All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with such permits, agreements, or approvals, and all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, orders, and decisions issued by any federal, state, or local governmental body, agency, or court. 
b 
Time, Place and Manner. All telecommunications facilities shall be located, constructed, operated, and maintained in the time, place, and manner that causes the least interference with the public's use of the public right-of-way, and the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the public right-of-ways, all as determined by and approved by the City in conformance with the City's code and ordinances, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits for street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work, and design review of above ground cabinets and/or other similar facilities pursuant to Ordinance No. 1213, codified at Part 6 of Chapter 2 of Article 7 of the Tustin City Code. 
c 
Undergrounding. The City reserves the right to require that all telecommunications facilities be placed underground. 
d 
Overhead Wire/Pole Attachments. All new telecommunications facilities proposed to be installed on utility poles or as overhead facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council subject to the recommendations by the Planning Commission for the maximum protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1. 5-1-00)  
7709 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES—RELOCATION/REMOVAL 
Every person subject to this chapter shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from any public right-of-way, any facility of said person when required by the Public Works Director by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, undergrounding of power lines, signal lines, and tracks, or any other public use of the public right-of-way. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
7710 - RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY 
a 
Nothing in this chapter shall contract away, modify, abridge, impair, or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire any facility located in the public right-of-way through the exercise of the right of eminent domain. 
b 
There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City, and every person subject to this chapter, by its use of the public right-of-way, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
c 
Neither the execution of a right-of-way agreement nor any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City, including the City's authority to make any proper public use of the public right-of-way. 
d 
The City shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and make such inspections as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, a right-of-way agreement, or any other local, state, or federal law, regulation, permit, or standard. (Ord. No. 1229, Sec. 1, 5-1-00)  
CHAPTER 8 - PROSPECTIVE CONCESSIONAIRES 
 
7800 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Chapter Is to enable the City to access State criminal history Information pertaining to criminal convictions, and arrests, where the person is awaiting trial, In order to ensure that criminal corrupt influences do not have or gain control of businesses that are proposed to be conducted on publicly owned or leased land through a City concession, lease, license, or the granting of any other property rights for the use of the land. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 10-17-05)  
7801 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used indicates otherwise: 
"City" means the City of Tustin. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City. 
"Prospective Concessionaire" means any Individual, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust, association, or other entity, including their affiliates and associates, that is applying for, or seeking to obtain, the City's consent to, or approval of, the acquisition by that Individual or entity of any beneficial Interest in a City concession, lease, license or other property right, whether directly or Indirectly held. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 10-17-05)  
7802 - CITY MANAGER'S AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE FINGERPRINTS 
Upon written request of the City Manager, a Prospective Concessionaire shall submit fingerprints to the City so that the City may obtain State criminal conviction and arrest information, as described in California Penal Code Section 11105.2, in order to screen Prospective Concessionaire, who has applied for the acquisition of beneficial interest in a City concession, lease, license or other property Interest. Where the Prospective concessionaire is an entity, individuals who are the officers, partners, owners, managers, managing members of the entity, or who are authorized to sign contracts on behalf of entities who are partners or members of the Prospective Concessionaire shall submit their fingerprints to the City as directed by the City, Manager. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 10-17-05)  
7803 - SECURITY OF INFORMATION OBTAINED 
The City shall adhere to the requirements of Penal Code Section 11105.02, including the confidentiality of and disposition of criminal history information obtained from the State Department of Justice. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 10-17-05)  
CHAPTER 9 - DESIGNATED PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
 
7900 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a mechanism by which the City Council may designate available City-owned property as public parking areas in order to increase the availability of parking in certain areas of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7905 - DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
Upon making each of the following findings, the City Council may, by resolution, designate any available and suitable City-owned property within the City, or any portion thereof, as a public parking area: 
1.  That the designation of the subject property as a public parking area will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, and general welfare of residents or businesses in the area of the designation; and 
2.  That such designation will not interfere with the public safety or access to the subject property, or with preexisting traffic patterns, as applicable. 
In determining whether to make such a designation, the City Council shall take into account the existing parking conditions in the area and the extent of the desire and need of residents and/or commercial proprietors in the area for the public parking area. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7910 - USE OF DESIGNATED PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
Any property designated as a public parking area pursuant to this Chapter shall be held open to the general public solely for the purpose of temporary parking of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, or other motor-driven forms of transportation not in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds gross weight, subject to those conditions, rules, and regulations established by the City Council. Use of designated public parking areas for public parking shall be non-exclusive, and the City Council shall retain the right to concurrently use the property for whatever additional purposes the City Council or its designee reasonably determines are necessary or convenient and consistent with such parking use. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7915 - DE-DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
Upon making each of the following findings, the City Council may, by resolution, de-designate City-owned property previously designated as a public parking area pursuant to Section 7905: 
1.  That the subject property is needed for a significant public use; 
2.  That the continued use of the property as a public non-exclusive parking area is inconsistent or incompatible with such other public use; and 
3.  That the loss of the public parking area will not have a significant adverse impact on parking in the vicinity of the public parking area. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7920 - NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS 
A.  Public Hearing. Prior to the adoption of a resolution designating or de-designating City-owned property as a public parking area, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and shall consider comments received from the public, property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the public parking area, and any other interested persons or property owners. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. 
1.  Publication and Mailing of Notice. The City Clerk shall prepare a notice of the public hearing and shall publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Tustin, no less than ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be mailed or delivered at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary of the real property constituting the proposed or affected public parking area. 
2.  Failure to Post Notices. Failure to mail or publish notices as specified in subsection "B.1" hereof shall not invalidate any proceedings. 
3.  Filing of Affidavit. Upon completion of the publication and mailing of the notices provided for in subsection "B.1" hereof, the City Clerk shall cause an affidavit of such mailing or publication to be filed in the permanent records of the particular proceedings to which such notices pertain. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7925 - ESTABLISHMENT OF CONDITIONS, RULES, AND REGULATIONS 
The resolution designating a public parking area may provide such special conditions, rules, and regulations, including without limitation, hours of operation and duration, as the City Council deems necessary or appropriate in order to assure proper and appropriate use of designated public parking areas and to prevent interference with the orderly and efficient conduct of the City's business. A written statement or other graphic depiction of such special conditions, rules, and regulations shall, upon adoption by the City Council, be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
7930 - ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE DESIGNATED PUBLIC PARKING AREAS 
A.  Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21113, a written statement or other graphic depiction of all special conditions, rules, and regulations adopted per Section 7925 shall, at all times while the same remain effective, be kept on file and available at the office of the City Clerk, for examination by all interested persons. 
B.  The City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall erect, place, and maintain appropriate signs and markings at each designated public parking area giving notice of all special conditions, rules and regulations applicable thereto, adopted per Section 7925 and imposed under Vehicle Code Section 21113. 
C.  Any vehicle operation, parking, stopping, or left standing, and not complying with said special conditions, rules, and regulations, will constitute a violation of Vehicle Code Section 21113, except that subsection (a) of Vehicle Code Section 22507.8 shall apply with respect to unauthorized parking in stalls or spaces designated for physically handicapped persons. 
(Ord. No. 1323, Sec. 1, 1-15-07)  
ARTICLE 8 - BUILDING REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 1 - BUILDING CODES AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1475, adopted Nov. 1, 2016, deleted and replaced chapter 1, sections 8100—8108, 8126, 8127 to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 1 pertained to same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1435, adopted Dec. 3, 2013. 
 
8100 - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 
For the purpose of prescribing regulations for the safe erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment use, height, and area of buildings and structures within the City of Tustin, the following building and construction codes, including certain supplemental regulations, and subject to the local amendments set forth in this chapter, are adopted by reference as the City of Tustin Building Codes and Construction Regulations: 
The 2016 California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 1); 
The 2016 California Building Code (Title 24, Part 2), including the administrative provisions included in Division II of Chapter 1, adding Appendix N, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council; 
The 2016 California Residential Code (Title 24, Part 2.5), including Appendix O, based on the 2015 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council; 
The 2016 California Electrical Code (Title 24, Part 3), based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association; 
The 2016 California Mechanical Code (Title 24, Part 4), based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
The 2016 California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5), based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
The 2016 California Energy Code (Title 24, Part 6); 
The 2016 California Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8); 
The 2016 California Fire Code (Title 24, Part 9), including Appendices B, BB, C, CC, and H, based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council; 
The 2016 California Existing Building Code (Title 24, Part 10), based on the 2015 International Existing Building Code as published by the International Code Council; 
The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11); 
The 2016 California Referenced Standards Code (Title 24, Part 12); 
The 1997 Uniform Housing Code, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials; 
The 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials; and 
The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16) 
Pursuant to State law, the City of Tustin has made certain amendments to the California Code of Regulations Title 24 California Building Standards Codes which are necessary to address local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions in the City of Tustin, as identified in City Council Resolution No. 16-64. Except as amended herein, where the California Code of Regulations Title 24 Building Standards Codes differ from any sections of the City's Building and Construction Regulations, the State regulations shall prevail. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of the above-referenced codes, all fees for services provided pursuant to the City of Tustin Fire Code shall not take effect until a resolution for such fees is adopted by the Orange County Fire Authority Board of Directors. 
One (1) copy of all the above-referenced codes and standards is on file in the office of the Building Official pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and are made available for public inspection at City Hall within the Community Development Department, Building Division, during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8101 - AMENDMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 1, DIVISION II OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 
Chapter 1, Division II (Scope and Administration) of the 2016 California Building Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 101.2 "Scope" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to add a new second and third paragraph to read as follows: 
The provisions of these codes shall apply to and affect all of the properties within the City of Tustin, except work located primarily in a public way; public utility towers and poles; mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in these codes; hydraulic flood control structures; and facilities for the production, generation, storage or transmission of water or electrical energy by a local agency. If any conflict between this chapter and any other provisions of the Tustin City Code exists, this chapter shall govern. 
All references to the term "Uniform Building Code" in the Tustin City Code and Ordinances shall mean the 2016 California Building Standard's Code (Title 24) 
(b)  Section 103.1 "Creation of enforcement agency" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding the following to the end of the section to read as follows: 
Where referred to by this code, "building official" and "code official" shall mean the Building Official of the City of Tustin, and "Department of Building and Safety" or "department" shall mean the Building Division of the Community Development Department of the City of Tustin. Any and all classification, title changes, organizational changes are made with respect to approvals thereto by the City Council. 
(c)  Section 104.6 "Right of entry" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
When the Building Official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care of control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(d)  Section 105.1 "Required" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding Sections 105.1.3, 105.1.3.1, 105.1.4, and 105.1.5 to read as follows: 
105.1.3 Grading Permits. The Building Official may issue permits for grading and for construction, demolition, addition, alteration, and installation of improvements. Improvements subject to permit requirements include but are not limited to: streets, parking lots, curb and gutter, driveways, sidewalks, disabled access ramps and signage, street and parking lot striping and signage, street and parking lot lighting, storm drains, junction structures, catch basins, sewer mains and laterals, water mains and services, landscaping irrigation, and miscellaneous on-site improvements. In addition, all improvements shall comply with the Grading Ordinance and the Water Quality Ordinance of the Tustin City Code. 
105.1.3.1 Drainage across property lines. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devises. 
105.1.4 Relocation of Buildings. No building or structure shall be moved or relocated unless and until the necessary permits to relocate the building or structure have been issued by the Building Official. The Building Official shall determine the applicable year and Codes that apply. 
105.1.5 Demolition of Building or Structure, including in-ground swimming pool. No building or structure, including in-ground swimming pool, shall be demolished unless and until the necessary permits to demolish the building or structure have been issued by the Building Official. 
Prior to issuing any permits, the Building Official will ensure life and property is reasonably protected. A refundable cash deposit or surety bond shall be collected, to reimburse the expenses to the City should the Building Official be required to demolish the building or structure or any portion remaining thereof, and dispose of the debris in a public dump and/or to repair or clean public property damaged or not cleaned by the permittee or to mitigate water quality impacts per Tustin City Code. 
The cash deposit or surety bond shall be Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) plus Two Dollars ($2.00) per square foot for each square foot over one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
The Building Official shall, in issuing any demolition permit, impose therein such terms and conditions, including a cash bond deposit or surety bond, as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of all federal, State laws and City ordinances. The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be specified in writing in the permit, or appended in writing thereto. 
Default in Performance. 
a.  If the Building Official finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the demolition permit, or the owner and/or permittee has soiled or damaged public property, written notice thereof shall be given to the owner and/or permittee. 
b.  Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Building Official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. 
c.  After receipt of such notice, the owner and/or permittee thereof specified shall cause the required work to be performed. Should the owner and/or permittee refuse or fail therein, the Building Official shall proceed to cause the building to be demolished, but no liability shall be incurred therein, other than for City expenses deducted from the cash deposit. 
d.  Upon completion of the demolition work, the cash deposit shall be refunded or surety bond shall be released, less that portion required to reimburse the City for demolition, repairs, or clean-up expenses due to the default of the permittee. 
(e)  Section 11 05.2 "Work Exempt from Permit" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1.  Section 105.2, "Building" Item 1 is amended to read as follows: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, patio and pool supply sheds, free standing vehicle covers, BBQ or stand-alone fireplaces not exceeding six (6) feet above grade, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet with no air conditioning, no electrical, and no plumbing fixtures, and conforming with the Zoning Code are not exempt . A correctly dimensioned site plan depicting the property lines, location, elevation, colors, finishing surface and construction details shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. Electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and grading permits where applicable are not exempt. Upon approval of the design proposed, a building permit shall be issued. 
2.  Section 105.2, "Building" Item 2 is amended to read: 
2.  Fences, block walls, wood, steel, or iron fences three (3) feet and over in height but less than six (6) feet above finished grade supported either by natural grade, or by retaining walls two (2) feet and under in height above finished grade for Group R-3 occupancies and those structures covered by the California Residential Code are not exempt. A correctly dimensioned site plan depicting the property lines, location, elevation, color, finishing surface and construction details shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. Upon approval of the design proposed, a building permit shall be issued. Permit shall not be required if the aforementioned fence is less than three (3) feet in height 
3.  Section 105.2, "Plumbing" Item 3 is amended to read: 
3.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, or the removal and reinstallation or replacement of water closets, sinks, garbage disposals or dishwashers, provided such work does not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures and is in conformance with this code and applicable state laws. 
(f)  Section 105.3.2 "Time limitation of application" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
105.3.2. Time limitation of application. Applications for a permit for any proposed work for which no permit is issued shall be deemed to have expired 360 days after the date of filing unless otherwise limited by the Code. The Building Official is authorized to grant one extension of time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. When required by State law or City ordinance, permit applications shall be amended to comply with pertinent State laws and City ordinances adopted subsequent to the date of application. 
Time limitation for permit application and subsequent extension as the result of code enforcement cases shall be thirty (30) days from the date the notice of violation is issued or otherwise determined by the Building Official. 
(g)  Section 105.5 "Expiration" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to add a sentence at the end of the paragraph and add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Permits shall not be extended more than twice. 
Time limitation for permit as the result of code enforcement cases shall be thirty (30) days or as otherwise determined by the Building Official. 
(h)  The 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding Sections 105.8, 105.9, 105.10, 105.11 to read as follows: 
105.8 Residential remodeling. The following regulations and definitions shall apply to all remodeling construction on dwellings and properties: 
1.  Completion of construction. All building permits for remodeling Group R-3 occupancies and those structures covered by the California Residential Codie, shall expire in accordance with the provisions of the building code if work is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the issue date of such permit, or if the work authorized by permit is suspended or abandoned, for one hundred eighty (180) days at any time after the work. is commenced. Notwithstanding the above, and subject to the provisions for extensions provided in subsection 2 below, all residential remodeling shall be completed by the owner, owner's agent, or the permittee, and approved by the City within the following timeframe: 
a.  Room additions (exterior of buildings and property area) ..... 18 months 
b.  Pools/spas ..... 12 months 
c.  Patio covers ..... 6 months 
d.  Water heaters, water softeners ..... 6 months 
e.  Fireplaces ..... 6 months 
f.  Skylights ..... 6 months 
g.  All other remodeling or building air conditioners ..... 6 months 
2.  Maintenance of property during remodeling. During remodeling, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-kept manner in accordance with the Tustin City Code. 
3.  Definitions. 
a.  Remodeling. Residential remodeling is defined as construction which constitutes an addition, alteration, erection, repair, demolition or improvement, of an existing residential building or structure, or other improvement located on residential property. 
b.  Reasonable progress. Reasonable progress means the ability to complete the full scope of work within an agreed upon time schedule. 
105.9 Change of owner or contractor of record. An issued permit shall expire upon a change of owner or contractor if the full scope of work has not been completed. A new permit shall be issued with the updated information to complete the remaining scope of work. If changes have not been made to the permitted plans and specifications, a permit issuance fee shall be charged to the permit applicant. If changes have been made to the permitted plans and specifications, the Building Official shall have the project reviewed again and determine appropriate permit and plan check fees in accordance with the City's fee resolution. 
105.10 Clean-Up Deposit. For a swimming pool or spa, the Building Official shall require a clean-up deposit prior to issuing a permit as follows: 
1.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for a swimming pool or spa, the applicant shall provide an agreement and cash deposit for the purpose of insuring that: a) sand, cement, dirt and any other debris is removed from streets, gutters, curbs, parkways, sidewalks and other public property; b) public property is left in a clean and undamaged condition; and, c) adequate barricades have been installed and maintained. Said deposit shall be determined by the Building Official for the construction of a swimming pool, spa or other construction related thereto requiring the use of heavy equipment. 
2.  Said agreement and deposit may be reduced to not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the issuance of a spa, jacuzzi, and other small pool permit not intended for swimming when the scope of the project will have a minimal impact on public improvements; by reason of not requiring the use of heavy construction equipment over curbs, sidewalks or public streets. 
3.  Said deposit shall terminate and be returnable to the applicant at the time of completion and provided that debris and other materials have been properly removed, and the public property has been left clean and undamaged. 
All damage to public curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway and light standards during the construction of a pool, shall be repaired prior to preplaster inspection. A written signed release from the Public Works Department shall be filed with the Building Official to ensure damages have been repaired. 
4.  If the public property has not been left in a clean and undamaged condition and/or adequate barricades required by the Public Works Department have not been installed and maintained, the City shall cause the necessary work to be done and shall deduct the cost thereof from the deposit. 
105.1.1 Public Encroachment. Construction materials, debris, trash containers (dumpsters), and other non-vehicle materials shall not be deposited on public property without the written approval of the City Engineer and only under such conditions as he/she may impose. Any barricading required by the City Engineer shall be provided by the contractor. 
(i)  Section 109.2 "Schedule of permit fees" of the 2016 California Building Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced to read as follows: 
109.2 Schedule of plan check and permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical,. gas, mechanical, plumbing systems and grading, or alterations thereof that require a permit, a fee for each plan check and permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the City Council resolution in effect at the time of plan check application and issuance of the permit. 
109.2.1 Plan check fees. When construction documents are required, they should be submitted for plan check to the Building Official. A plan check fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the documents for plan check. The plan check fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
When submittal documents are incomplete or changed or amended so as to require additional plan review, or when the project is phased as defined in Section 107.3.3, or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, additional plan check fees shall' be charged as set forth in the fee schedule established by the City Council resolution in effect at the time of the additional or defined plan check submittal. 
109.2.2 Engineering or inspection investigation fees. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this Code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, the Building Official may require an investigation by City staff be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued for City's cost of investigation by City staff. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of the Tustin City Code nor from the penalty prescribed by law. 
A real estate investigation fee may also be charged for any investigation of a building, structure, or property, when approved by the Building Official and requested by an owner or authorized agent of such owner. Such fee shall be equal to or less than the cost of providing the inspection and/or investigation. 
(j)  Section 109.3 "Building permit valuations" of the 2016 California Building Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced to read as follows: 
109.3 Building permit valuations. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these Codes shall be made as set forth in the fee schedule established by City Council resolution in effect at the time of plan check submittal. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan check fees shall be the total value of all construction work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment, and grading as determined by the Building Official based on the current edition of a nationally or regionally recognized standard or construction cost data service. 
(k)  Section 109.6 "Refunds" of the 2016 California Building Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced to read as follows: 
109.6 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the plan check fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan check fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended. 
The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the permittee not later than three hundred sixty (360) days after the date of fee payment or as otherwise required by law or one hundred eighty (180) for Part 2.5. 
(l)  Section 110.3 "Required inspections" of the 2016 California Building Code is deleted in its entirety and replaced to read as follows: 
110.3 Required inspections. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in this Section. Structural tests, special, inspections and structural observation shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 17 of the California Building Code. 
110.3.1 Grading; excavation and filling inspection. Inspection shall be conducted during earthwork, excavations, grading and filling operations in accordance with Section 1705.6, Chapter 18, and the Tustin City Code. 
110.3.2 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel and other inserts are in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
110.3.3 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
110.3.4 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
110.3.5 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete, and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
110.3.6 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, are in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. 
110.3.7 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
110.3.8 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the CA Energy Code (Title 24, Part 6) and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value (Heat Loss Value), duct system R-value (Resistance-Value), and Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
110.3.9 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the Building Official is authorized to require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
110.3.10 Special inspections and special inspectors. For special inspections, see Chapter 17 "Special Inspections and Tests". Special inspection shall be performed by individuals with demonstrated qualifications approved by the Building Official and listed by the City of Tustin. 
110.3.11 Final inspections. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
(m)  Section 113 and 113.1 "General" of the 2016 California Building Code is adopted in its entirety without amendment. 
(n)  Section 114.1 "Unlawful acts" of the 2016 California Building Codie is amended to read as follows: 
114.11 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to grade, erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Tustin City Code. 
(o)  Section 114.4 "Violation penalties" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
114.4 Violation penalties. No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Code, or of any Code adopted herein by reference. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, or any Code adopted by reference herein, unless otherwise specified in this Code, shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as set forth in the Penalty Provisions of the Tustin City Code. 
Each such person, firm, or corporation violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements shall be guilty of a separate offense, and each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Code, or any Code adopted by reference herein, is committed, continued or permitted by such person, shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable accordingly. Provided further that each such person violating a provision which limits the time an act may be permitted or continued, each such period or portion thereof of which any violation of such provision is committed, continued or permitted by such person, shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or of any Code adopted by reference herein, may be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the City, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate nuisance and offense. 
(p)  Section 116.1 "Conditions" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
116.1 Conditions. All sites, buildings, structures or existing equipment which are determined by the Building Official to be unsafe, unsanitary or deficient, as this division or in any other effective ordinance, including but not limited to the International Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform Housing Code, and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as adopted by the City of Tustin constitute an unsafe condition. AH such unsafe conditions, sites, buildings, structures, or equipment are hereby declared to be public nuisances and may be abated by repair, rehabilitation, improvement, removal, demolition, in whole or part, in accordance with the procedures specified in the Tustin City Code or by any other legal means. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16; Ord. No. 1486, Sec. 1, 1-16-18)  
8102 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE 
Chapters 2 through 35, Division II of the 2016 California Building Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 202 "Definitions" of the 2016 California Building Code ls amended to include the following definition: 
Spark Arrester. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28 "Mechanical Systems." 
(b)  Section 903.2 "Where required" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height. 
2.  Existing buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet; or 
b.  When an addition exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet and the resulting building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor, regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Additions to Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8(2). 
(c)  Section 903.3.5.3 "Hydraulically calculated systems" is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the water supply capacity. 
Exception: When static pressure exceeds one hundred (100) psi and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3. 
  
(d)  Table 1505.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE 1505.1 
MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot= 0.0929 m 2 
a. Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A. 
(e)  Section 1505.1.3 "Roof coverings within all other areas" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than fifty percent (50%) of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B. 
(f)  Section 1807.1.6 "Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive desi.gn of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F. 
(g)  Section 3109A.4.2 "Construction permit; safety features required" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
3109.4.4.2 Construction permit; safety features required. Commencing January 1, 2007, except as provided in Section 3109.4.4.5, whenever a building permit is issued for the remodel or construction of a swimming pool, spa, or outdoor body of water having a depth in excess of eighteen (18) inches, at a private, single-family home, shall provide and maintain in good condition an enclosure to completely separate the private pool from adjoining properties by fencing complying with Section 3109.4.4.3 or building walls, or a combination thereof, substantially constructed, not lower than five (5) feet in height above the surface of the ground measured vertically from the outside grade or otherwise higher determined by the Planning Division. 
Any pool, spa, or outdoor body of water having a depth in excess of eighteen (18) inches which does not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be drained immediately and shall not be refilled until such time as the enclosure is brought into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
In addition, said pool, spa, or outdoor body of water having a depth in excess of eighteen (18) inches shall be equipped with at least one of the following seven drowning prevention safety features: 
1.  Removable mesh fencing that meets American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specifications F 2286 standards in conjunction with a gate that is self-closing and self-latching and can accommodate a key lockable device 
2.  An approved safety pool cover, as defined in subdivision of Section (d) of Section 115921 of the Health and Safety Code. 
3.  Exit alarms on the private single-family home's doors that provide direct access to the swimming pool or spa. The exit alarm may cause either an alarm noise or a verbal warning, such as a repeating notification that "the door to the pool is open." 
4.  A self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than fifty-four (54) inches above the floor on the private single-family home's doors providing direct access to the swimming pool or spa. 
5.  An alarm that, when placed in a swimming pool or spa, will sound upon detection of accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. The alarm shall meet and be independently certified to the ASTM Standard F 2208 "Standards Specification for Pool Alarms," which includes surface motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared type alarms. A swimming protection alarm feature designed for individual use, including an alarm attached to a child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes submerged in water, is not a qualifying drowning prevention safety feature. 
6.  Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the features set forth above and has been independently verified by an approved testing laboratory as meeting standards for those features established by the ASTM or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
Before the issuance of a final approval for the completion of permitted construction or remodeling work, the local building code official shall inspect the drowning safety prevention features required and if no violations are found, shall give final approval. 
(h)  Section 3109.4.4 "Private swimming pools (statewide)" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by adding Sections 3109.4.4.9 and 3109.4.4.10 to read as follows: 
3109.4.4.9, Waste water disposal. No direct or indirect connection shall be made between any storm drain, sewer, drainage system, seepage pit, underground leaching pit, or subsoil drainage line, and any line connected to a swimming pool, unless approved by the Building Official. 
Waste water from any filter, scum filter, scum gutter, overflow pool emptying line or similar apparatus or appurtenance shall discharge into an approved type receptor by air gap and subsequently into the public sewer. The flood level rim of such receptor shall be at least six (6) inches above the flood level of the adjacent ground. Each such receptor, when permitted to be connected to any part of a drainage system shall be provided with an approved three (3) inch trap. 
Plans and specifications for any deviation from the above manner of installation shall first be approved by the Building Official before any portion of any such system is installed. 
3109.4.4.10 Construction requirements. 
(a)  All pool construction shall be in conformance with engineered design for expansive soils, unless a soils report by a registered engineer approved by the Building Official indicates otherwise. 
(b)  The pool shall be constructed not less than seven (7) feet from the top of a cut, fill or natural earth slope, less than five (5) feet from toe of a cut, fill or natural earth slope, and not less than five (5) feet from the property line (measured from water line). 
(c)  A continuous inspection by a special inspector shall be required on all pools constructed of reinforced gunite, or reinforced cast in place concrete. Said special inspector shall insure all electrical bonding is properly installed; ensure all required reinforcing steel and diving board or slide anchor bolts are properly in place, ensure concrete is cast to the thickness required for expansive soil, ensure the concrete is properly placed; and take test samples during the placing of concrete and such samples shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory to attain a strength exceeding two thousand (2,000) psi, or as required by the design engineer at twenty-eight (28) days. 
Should such test show the concrete to fail or to be of questionable quality or strength, the special inspector may require core tests to be taken upon approval of the Building Official. Special inspectors shall submit to the Building Official a written report showing the dates of inspection, and the results of the laboratory tests. The report shall indicate the reinforcing steel is per the approved drawings, expansive soil details were followed, the work complies with the approved drawings, this Code and footings and anchor bolts of diving boards and other pool accessories are adequate. 
(i)  Chapter 35 "Referenced Standards" of the 2016 California Building Code is amended by revising or adding the following sections: 
1.  NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems" is amended to read as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDG) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of two and one-half-inch (2½") inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than five hundred (500) gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four (4) two and one-half inch (2½") inlets shall be provided. 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
(2)  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
(3)  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
(4)  ESFR sprinklers 
(5)  Standard response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard response sprinklers 
(6)  Standard response sprinklers used where individual standard response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade tile system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
(1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
(2)  Use a maximum of forty (40) psi, if available; 
(3)  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
2.  NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes" is hereby amended to read as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary or remote station alarm service. 
3.  NFPA 14, 2016 Edition, "Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems" is amended to read as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than eighteen (18) inches or more than twenty-four (24) inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than three (3) feet or more than five (5) feet above the finished floor. 
4.  NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, "Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances" is amended as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
(2)  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
6.2.9 All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
(1)  A post indicator valve installed not less than forty feet (40 ft.) from the building. 
a.  For buildings less than forty feet (40 ft.) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than forty feet (40 ft.) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
(2)  A wall post indicator valve. 
(3)  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4. 
(4)  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than forty feet (40 ft.) from the building. 
a.  For buildings less than forty feet (40 ft.) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than forty feet (40 ft.) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
(5)  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior. 
(6)  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior. 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose, B-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of twelve (12) inches and be sealed with two (2) inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
10.4.3.2 Where approved, private fire service mains supplying systems within the building shall be permitted to extend more than ten feet (10 ft.) under the building when all of the requirements of 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4 are met. Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4. 
(j)  Appendix N "Building Security" is added to the 2016 California Building Code to read as follows: 
Appendix N 
Building Security 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to openings into all buildings, including dwelling units within apartment houses of Group R, Divisions 1, 2, and 3 Occupancies, and to openings between attached garages and dwelling units. Except for vehicular access, door openings in enclosed attached garages shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
N101 Garage Type Doors. Rolling Overhead, Solid Overhead, Swinging, Sliding or Accordion style doors shall conform to the following: 
1.  Fiberglass doors shall have panels a minimum density of six (6) ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven (7) feet. Panels above seven (7) feet and panels in residential structures shall have a density of not less than five (5) ounces per square foot. 
2.  Overhead doors shall be equipped with bolts which shall be capable of utilizing padlocks with a minimum nine-thirty-seconds-inch ( 9/32 ) shackle. 
3.  Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five-pin tumbler operation with the bolt or locking bar extending into the receiving guide a minimum of one (1) inch. 
4.  Doors that exceed sixteen (16) feet in width shall have two (2) lock receiving points, or if the door does not exceed nineteen (19) feet, a single bolt may be used if placed in the center of the door with the locking point located either in the floor or door frame header. 
5.  Slide bolt assemblies shall have a frame a minimum of 0.120 inches in thickness, a bolt diameter a minimum of one-half (½) inch and protrude at least one and one-half (1½) inches into the receiving guide. A bolt diameter of three-eights (?) inch may be used in a residential building. 
6.  Slide bolt assemblies shall be attached to the door with bolts which are non-removable from the exterior. Rivets shall not be used to attach such assemblies. 
7.  Padlocks used with exterior mounted slide bolts shall have a hardened steel shackle a minimum of nine-thirty-seconds ( 9/32 ) inch in diameter with heel and tow locking and a minimum five-pin tumbler operation. The key shall be non-removable when in an unlocked position. 
N102 Special Residential Building Provisions. The following special provisions shall apply to all residential dwellings (R1, R-2, and R-3): 
1.  Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any residential building and attached enclosed garages, including the door leading from the garage area into the dwelling unit, shall be equipped as follows: 
a.  All wood doors shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths (1¾) inches, or with panels not less than nine-sixteenths ( 9/16 ) of an inch thick. 
b.  A single or double door shall be equipped with a single cylinder deadbolt having a minimum protection of one (1) inch and an embedment of at least three-fourths (¾) inch into the strike receiving the bolt. The bolt shall be constructed so as to resist cutting tool attacks. 
The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portions of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth (¼) inch in diameter. (The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not apply where panic hardware is required or an equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority. Further, a dual locking mechanism, constructed so that both the deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob or lever, may be substituted provided it meets all other specifications for locking devices.) 
c.  The inactive leaf on metal frame double doors shall be equipped with flush bolts having a minimum protection of five-eighths (?) inch at the top and bottom of the leaf. On wood frame double doors, the projection shall be a minimum of one (1) inch. 
d.  Glazing in exterior doors or within forty (40) inches of a door locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing, except where double cylinder deadbolts are installed. 
e.  All front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide angle (one hundred eighty [180] degrees) door viewer, except where clear vision panels are installed. 
2.  Lighting in R-1 and R-2 type occupancies shall be as follows: 
a.  Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with a maintained minimum of twenty-five hundredths (.25) of a footcandle at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant covers. 
b.  Open parking lots and carports shall be illuminated with a maintained minimum of one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface during hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal resistant covers or lens. These lighting devices shall be automatically energized during hours of darkness. 
c.  Luminaires utilized to meet the requirements of this section shall have vandal resistant light fixtures and be not less than three (3) feet in height from the walking; surface when used to illuminate walkways and a minimum of seventy-eight (78) inches in height above the driving surface when illuminating surfaces associated with vehicles. 
d.  A site plan shall be provided showing buildings, parking; area, walkways, detailed landscaping; and a point-by-point photometric calculation of the required light levels. Landscaping shall not be planted so as to obscure required light levels. Footcandles shall be measured on a horizontal plane. 
3.  Each residential unit of R-1 and R-2 type occupancies shall have an enclosed parking space with a garage door equipped as in Section N101 of this chapter. 
N103 Special Commercial Building. Provisions for other than Group R-1, R-2, R-3 and U-1. The following special provisions shall apply to buildings other than Group R-1, R-2, R-3 and U-1: 
1.  AH exterior swinging doors shall be equipped with a single cylinder deadbolt. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one (1) inch and will have an embedment of at least three-quarters (¾) inch into the strike receiving the bolt. The bolt shall be constructed so as to resist cutting tool attacks. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-quarter (¼) inch diameter. (The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not apply where panic hardware is required or an equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority.) 
2.  Wood doors shall be of solid core construction and have a minimum thickness of not less than one and three-fourths (1¾) inches. 
3.  Hollow metal doors shall be constructed of a minimum sixteen (16) U.S. gauge steel and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to resist collapsing of the door around the locking device. 
4.  The inactive leaf on metal frame double doors shall be equipped with automatic flush bolts having a minimum projection of five-eighths (?) inch at the top and bottom of the leaf. On wood frame doors, the projection shall be a minimum of one (1) inch. 
5.  Double doors shall have an astragal constructed of steel a minimum of one-eighth (?) inch thick which will cover the opening between the doors. The astragal shall be a minimum of two (2) inches wide and extend a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be attached to the outside of the active door by welding or non-removable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten (10) inches on center. 
6.  Any glazing utilized within forty (40) inches of any locking mechanism on a door shall be secured as follows: 
a.  Fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
b.  Iron or steel bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch by one- fourth-inch flat metal spaced not more than five (5) inches apart and secured on the inside of the building; or 
c.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth (?) inch metal with a maximum two (2) inch mesh, secured on the inside of the building. 
Items a. and b. above shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by this Code. 
7.  Aluminum frame swinging doors shall conform to the following: 
a.  The jamb shall be so constructed or protected to withstand sixteen hundred (1,600) pounds of pressure in both a vertical distance of three (3) inches and a horizontal distance of one (1) inch each side of the strike, so as to provide violation of the strike. 
b.  The bolt projection shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1½) inches; or a hook shaped or similar bolt may be used as long as it engages the strike sufficiently to resist jamb spreading. 
8.  In multiple occupancy office buildings, all entrance doors to individual office suites shall meet the requirements for exterior doors. 
9.  Where panic hardware is required by this Code, or Title 19, it shall be equipped and installed as follows: 
a.  There shall be a minimum of two (2) locking points on each door; or 
b.  On single doors, panic hardware may have one (1) locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the door frame. The door shall have an astragal, constructed of steel 0.125 inches thick which shall be welded or attached with non-removable bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal shall extend a minimum of two (2) inches wide and extend a minimum of one (1) inch beyond the edge of the door; or 
c.  Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them but not interfere with the operation of either door. 
10.  Exterior transoms or windows shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve (12) feet above ground or adjacent to any pedestrian walkway. Accessible windows and transoms not visible from a public or private thoroughfare and having a pane or opening exceeding: ninety-six (96) square inches shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
a.  Fully tempered or rated burglary resistant glazing shall be used; or 
b.  Interior steel or iron bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one-inch by one-quarter-inch (1" x ¼") flat steel or iron may be used if spaced not more than five (5) inches apart and secured by bolts which are non-removable from the exterior; or 
c.  Interior iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth (?) inch metal having a mesh of not more than one (1) inch may be used if secured with bolts which are non-removable from the exterior. 
Items a. and b. above shall not interfere with the operation of windows if such windows are required to be operable by this Code. The bars or grillwork shall be capable of quick opening from the inside only. 
11.  All hatchway openings on the roof of any building used for business purposes shall be secured as follows: 
a.  If the hatchway is of wooden material it shall be covered on the inside with a minimum sixteen (16) gauge sheet metal or its equivalent, attached with screws. 
b.  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolt. The slide bar or slide bolt shall automatically release when actuated by smoke or heat from a fire. 
c.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with non- removable pins and shall use non-removable screws for mounting. 
12.  All exterior air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six (96) square inches shall be secured by one of the following means: 
a.  Iron or steel bars of at least one-half (½) inch round or one-inch by one-fourth inch (1" x ¼") flat metal, spaced no more than five (5) inches apart and secured by bolts which are non-removable from the exterior; or 
b.  Iron or steel grills having a minimum thickness of one-eighth-inch, a mesh of net not more than one-inch, and secured by bolts which are non-removable from the exterior. 
c.  The above must not interfere with any venting requirements. 
13.  Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs shall be covered with sheet metal to a height of ten (10) feet. If the ladder protrudes more than six (6) inches from the building, the sidles must also be covered with sheet metal. The covering shall be locked against the ladder by means of a case-hardened hasp, secured with nonremovable bolts or screws. If hinges are of the pin type, they shall be equipped with non- removable pins. 
Padlocks shall have hardened steel shackles, heel and toe locking, a minimum of five (5) pin tumblers in its operation and a non-removable key when in an unlocked position. 
14.  All exterior commercial doors shall be illuminated with a minimum of one (1) footcandle of light. Such lights shall be maintained during hours of darkness and be protected by vandal resistant covers. 
15.  Open parking lots providing more than ten (10) parking places and for use by the general public shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface from dusk until the termination of business every operating day. 
16.  Every commercial building shall display an address number in a prominent position so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six (6) inches in height, of a color contrasting to the background and located so that they may be dearly seen and read. Any business which affords vehicular access to the rear of the building through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building. 
N104 Definitions. 
Approved. Approved by the Building Official as meeting the requirements of this Chapter with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or device. 
Auxiliary Locking Device. A secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security. 
Bolt. A metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or thrown) either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to prevent a door from moving or opening. 
Part. As distinguished from component, is a unit for subassembly, which combines with other units to make up a component. 
Primary Locking Device. The single locking system on a door or window unit whose function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion. 
Single Cylinder Deadbolt. A deadbolt lock which is activated from the exterior by a key and from the interior by a knob, thumbturn, lever or similar mechanism. 
Solid Core Door. A door composed of solid wood construction. 
Stile. A vertical framing member of a window or door. A meeting stile is one which mates with a stile of another sash or a vertical framing member of a door or window frame when the sash is in the closed position. 
Strike. A metal plate attached to or mortised into a door jamb to receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or deadbolt in order to secure the door to the jamb. 
Swinging: Door. A door hinged at the stile or pinned at the head and threshold. 
U.L. Listed. Tested and listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
N105 Keying Requirements. Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have locks using combinations which are interchange free from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies. This is intended to prohibit master keying. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8103 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE 
The 2016 California Residential Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section R301.2 "Climatic and geographical design criteria" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended by revising Table R301.2(1) to read as follows: 
  
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 mls. 
a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index: (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). 
c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4. 
e. Temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the Building Official. 
f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g. See City's FIRM maps for Flood Hazard Locations. 
h. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index {BF- days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index - USA Method (Base 32°)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index - USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www,ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone{s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
(b)  Section R313.1 "Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. See City of Tustin Fire Code, (TCC §§ 8100 & 8104). 
(c)  Section R313.2 "One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R313.2 One- and two-famlly dwellings automatic fire systems. See City of Tustin Fire Code, (TCC §§ 8100 & 8104). 
(d)  Section R313.3.6.2.2 "Calculation procedure" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure and California Fire Code Section 903.3.5.3. 
(The remainder of the section is unchanged) 
(e)  Section R319.1 "Address identification" of the 2016 California Residential Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R319.1 Site Address. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches in height with a stroke width of not less than a half inch (0.5 inch). Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained. 
(f)  Section R337.1.6 "Fuel: Modification Requirements for New Construction" is added to the 2016 California Residential Code to read as follows: 
R337.1.6 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map. 
2.  Final fuel; modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
3.1  The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity. 
4.  The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official. 
5.  All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code. 
(g)  Section R902 "Fire Classification" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Exceptions: 
(a)  Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck. 
(b)  Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks. 
R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B. 
R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs. 
(h)  Chapter 44 "Referenced Standards" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of two and one-half inch (2½") inlets shall be approved by the tire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the tire sprinkler density design requires more than five hundred (500) gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four, two and one-half inch (2½") inlets shall be provided. 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
(2)  Residential; sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
(3)  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
(4)  ESFR sprinklers 
(5)  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
(6)  Standard response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
(1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
(2)  Use a maximum of forty (40) psi, if available; 
(3)  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service one of the following methods: 
(1)  Central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
(2)  Local alarm service that causes the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended location. 
(3)  Valves that are locked open. 
(i)  Appendix O "Vehicular Gates" of the 2016 California Residential Code is amended to read as follows: 
Appendix O 
Vehicular Gates 
Appendix O Vehicular Gates is adopted with only the section indicated below: 
AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads is added to read as follows: 
AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads. The installation of gates or other barriers across a required fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. Gates or barriers shall be in accordance with Orange County Fire Authority Guideline B-09 "Fire Master Plans for Commercial and Residential Development". 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8104 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE 
The 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Section 109.4 "Violation penalties" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall result in penalties assessed as prescribed by the Tustin City Code and/or the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall! be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Section 109.4.2 "Infraction and Misdemeanor" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Section 202 "General Definitions" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to include the following definitions: 
OCFA. Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction. 
SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically made of paper, Mylar, or other lightweight material with a wood, plastic, or metal frame containing a candle, fuel cell, or other heat source that provides buoyancy. 
SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
(a)  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
(b)  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
(d)  Section 304.1.2 "Vegetation" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
(e)  304.1.2 Vegetation. Type, amount, or arrangement of weeds, Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property needing to comply with OCFA Guidelines, shall be thinned, and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline-Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program. Vegetation clearance requirement in a lawfully designated urban-wildland interface area shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. 
(f)  Section 307.6 "Gas-fueled devices" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
307.6 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices requiring a building permit that are fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202. 
(g)  Section 307.7 "Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code as follows: 
307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel requiring a building permit shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within fifteen (15) feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within twenty-five (25) feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308. 
(h)  Section 309.2.1 "Indoor charging of electric carts/cars" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars. Indoor charging of electric carts/cars where the combined volume of all battery electrolyte exceeds fifty (50) gallons shall comply with following: 
1.  Spill control and neutralization shall be provided and comply with Section 608.5. 
2.  Room ventilation shall be provided and comply with Section 608.6.1. 
3.  Signage shall be provided and comply with Section 608.7.1. 
4.  Smoke detection shall be provided and comply with Section 608.9. 
(i)  Section 320 "Fuel modification requirements for new construction" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
320 Fuel modification requirements for new construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation and officially designated within a Fuel Modification area shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical: Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
(j)  Section 321 "Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within ten (10) feet on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces. 
Exception: 
Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. 
(k)  Section 322 "Unusual circumstances" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
322 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Difficult terrain. 
2.  Danger of erosion. 
3.  Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species. 
4.  Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees. 
5.  Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical. 
(l)  Section 323 "Use of equipment" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
323 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 323.1 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
2.  Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition. 
(m)  Section 323.1 "Spark arresters" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
323.1 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with the following: 
1.  A spark arrester is a device constructed of nonflammable material specifically for the purpose of removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles over 0.0232 of an inch in size from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine that uses hydrocarbon fuels or which is qualified and rated by the United States Forest Service. 
2.  Spark arresters affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 322 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material. 
(n)  Section 324 "Sky Lanterns or similar devices" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices. The ignition and/or launching of a Sky Lantern or similar device is prohibited. 
(o)  All Sections of Chapter 4: "Emergency Planning and Preparedness" of the 2016 California Fire Code are deleted in their entirety except for the Sections listed below: 
1.  401 
2.  4011.3.4 
3.  401.9 
4.  402 
5.  403.2 
6.  404.5—404.6.6 
7.  407 
(p)  Section 407.5 "Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA's Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2. 
(q)  Section 501.1 "Scope" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, "Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development." Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, "Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas." 
(r)  Section 510.1 "Emergency responder radio coverage" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall! not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the local authority having jurisdiction's ordinance and this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed. 
2.  In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of that facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system. 
This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion, or when coverage is determined to be ineffective. 
2.  Elevators. 
3.  Structures that are three stories or less without subterranean storage or parking and that do not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet on any single story when an analysis determines that emergency responder radio coverage is unimpeded throughout the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official and OCFA. 
4.  Wood-constructed residential structures four stories or less without subterranean storage or parking that are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure when an analysis determines that emergency responder radio coverage is unimpeded throughout the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official and OCFA. 
5.  Should construction that is three stories or less that does not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas when an analysis determines that emergency responder radio coverage is unimpeded throughout the site to the satisfaction of the Building Official and OCFA. 
(s)  Section 510.2 "Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings" is deleted from the 2016 California Fire Code without replacement 
(t)  Section 510.4.2.2 "Technical criteria" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.4.2.2 Technical criteria. The fire code official shall maintain a document providing the specific technical information and requirements for the emergency responder radio coverage system. This document shall contain, but not be limited to, the various frequencies required, the location of radio sites, effective radiated power of radio sites, and other supporting technical information. 
1.  The frequency range supported from the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 851-869 MHz (base transmitter frequencies). 
2.  The frequency range supported to the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 806—824 MHz (radio field transmit frequencies). 
3.  A public safety radio amplification system shall include filters to reject frequencies below 851 MHz and frequencies above 869 MHz by a minimum of 35 dB. 
4.  All system components must be 100 percent compatible with analog and digital modulations after installation without adjustments or modifications. The systems must be capable of encompassing the frequencies stated herein and capable of future modifications to a frequency range subsequently established by the jurisdiction. 
5.  Active devices shall have a minimum of -50 dB 3rd order intermodulation protection. 
6.  All active in-building coverage devices shall be FCC Part 90 Type Certified. 
(u)  Section 510.5.1 "Approval prior to installation" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.5.1 Approval prior to installation. Amplification systems capable of operating on frequencies licensed to any public safety agency by the FCC shall not be installed without prior plan submittal, coordination and approval from Orange County Communications and a copy of the approved plan provided to the fire and building code officials. 
(v)  Section 510.5.2 "Minimum qualification of personnel" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.5.2 Minimum qualifications of personnel. The minimum qualifications of the system designer and lead installation personnel shall include both of the following: 
1.  A valid FCC-issued general radio operator's license. 
2.  Certification of in-building system training issued by a nationally recognized organization, school or a certificate issued by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed. 
(w)  Section 510.5.3 "Acceptance test procedure," item 7, of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure. When an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is not less than ninety percent (90%). The test procedure shall be conducted as follows: 
7.  As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at the time of installation and subsequent annual inspections by the FCC licensed technician hired by the property owner and an OCSD/Communications Division FCC-certified technician. 
(x)  Section 510.6.1 "Testing and proof of compliance" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance. The owner of the building or their representative shall have the emergency responder radio coverage system inspected and tested annually or where structural changes occur including additions or remodels that could materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall consist of the following: 
1.  In-building system components shall be tested to determine general functional operability. 
2.  Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. 
3.  Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional one (1)-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined. 
4.  Other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer's specifications. 
5.  If noncompliance is found, the FCC licensed technician will assess improvements necessary and provide such information to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
6.  At the conclusion of the testing, a certification report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to OCSO Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
(y)  Section 903.2 "Where required" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists, or is more than two stories in height. 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  When an addition exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet and the resulting building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: Additions to Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8(2). 
(z)  Section 903.2.8 "Group R" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
1.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
2.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the existing building area as defined in Section 202, and greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet within a two-year period; or, 
b.  An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor. 
2.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors. 
4.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of eighteen (18) years), or who is elderly (sixty-five (65) years of age or over). 
When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 of the California Building Code, an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies. 
An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies. 
(aa)  Section 903.3.5.3 "Hydraulically calculated systems" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the water supply capacity. 
Exception: 
When static pressure exceeds one hundred (100) psi, and required by the Fire Codie Official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3. 
  
(bb)  All Sections of Chapter 11 "Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings" of the 2016 California Fire Code are deleted in their entirety except for the sections listed below: 
1.  1103.7 
2.  1103.7.3 
3.  1103.7.3.1 
4.  1103.7.8—1103.7.8.2 
5.  1103.7.9—1103.7.9.10 
6.  1103.8—1103.8.5.3 
7.  1107 
8.  1113 
9.  1114 
10.  1115 
11.  1116 
(cc)  Chapter 25 "Fruit and Crop Ripening" of the 2016 California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(dd)  Chapter 26 "Fumigation and Insecticidal Fogging" of the 2016 California Fire Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(ee)  Section 2801.2 "Permit" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6. For Miscellaneous Combustible Storage Permit, see Section 105.6.29. 
(ff)  Section 2808.2 "Storage site" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval from the fire code official obtained before transferring products to the site. 
(gg)  Section 2808.3 "Size of piles" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, fifty (50) feet in width and one hundred (100) feet in length. 
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles. 
2.  Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile. 
3.  The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants. 
4.  Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained. 
5.  Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program. 
Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features. 
(hh)  Section 2808.4 "Pile separation" is amended to read as follows: 
2808.4. Pile separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of one hundred (100) feet from combustible vegetation. 
(ii)  Section 2808.7 "Pile fire protection" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a forty-percent (40%) to sixty-percent (60%) moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas. 
(jj)  Section 2808.9 "Material-handling equipment" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations. 
(kk)  Section 2808.11 "Temperature control" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2. 
(ll)  Section 2808.11.1 "Pile temperature control" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when the internal temperature readings are in excess of one hundred sixty-five (165) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(mm)  Section 2808.11.2 "New material temperature control" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding one hundred sixty-five (165) degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable. 
(nn)  Section 2808.12 "Water availability" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
2808.12 Water availability. Facilities with over twenty-five hundred (2,500) cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than five hundred (500) GPM @ twenty (20) psi for a minimum of one (1) hour duration for pile heights up to six (6) feet and two (2) hour duration for pile heights over six (6) feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of twenty-five hundred (2,500) gallons per pile (maximum thirty thousand (30,000) gallons) for piles not exceeding six (6) feet in height and five thousand (5000) gallons per pile (maximum sixty thousand (60,000) gallons) for piles exceeding six (6) feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s). 
(oo)  Section 2808.11 3 "Tipping area" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
Tipping areas shall comply with the following: 
1.  Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Material within a tipping area shall not exceed five (5) feet in height at any time. 
3.  Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a twenty (20) foot wide fire access lane. 
4.  A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area. 
5.  All material within a tipping area shall be processed within five (5) days of receipt. 
(pp)  Section 2808.14 "Emergency contact" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
2808.14 Emergency contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency. 
(qq)  Section 4906.3 "Requirements" of the 2016 California Fire Code, is amended by adding subsection 5 to read as follows: 
5.  OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
(rr)  Section 4908 "Fuel modification requirements for new construction" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
4908 Fuel modification requirements for new construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a locally designated wildfire risk area shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map. 
2.  Final fuel, modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  The fuel modification plans shall: meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel, Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline - Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
3.1  The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity. 
4.  The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modiication areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official. 
5.  All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code. 
(ss)  Section 5001.5.2 "Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include Orange County Fire Authority's Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information: 
1.  Product Name. 
2.  Component. 
3.  Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number. 
4.  Location where stored or used. 
5.  Container size. 
6.  Hazard classification. 
7.  Amount in storage. 
8.  Amount in use-closed systems. 
9.  Amount in use-open systems. 
(tt)  Section 5003.1.1.1 "Extremely hazardous substances" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
5003.1.1.1 Extremely hazardous substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property. 
(uu)  Section 5608.2 "Firing" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired. 
(vv)  Section 5608.3 "Application for permit" is added to the 2016 California Fire Code to read as follows: 
Section 5608.3 Application for permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on one hundred (100) feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA. 
(ww)  Chapter 80 "Referenced Standards" of the 2016 California Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
(1)  NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, "Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems" is amended as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of two and one-half inch (2½") inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than five hundred (500) gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four (4) two and one-half inch (2½") inlets shall be provided. 
8.3.3.1. When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
(2)  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
(3)  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
(4)  ESFR sprinklers 
(5)  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
(6)  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
(1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
(2)  Use a maximum of forty (40) psi, if available; 
(3)  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
(2)  NFPA 13D, 2016 Edition, "Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings and manufactured homes" is amended to read as follows: 
7.1.2 The system piping shall not have a separate control valve unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
(3)  NFPA 14, 2016 Edition, "Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems" is amended to read as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than eighteen (18) inches or more than twenty-four (24) inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than three (3) feet or more than five (5) feet above the finished floor. 
(4)  NFPA 24, 2016 Edition "Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances" is added to or amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 6.2.8.1 is added to read as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
(2)  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
(b)  Section 6.2.9 is amended to read as follows 
6.2.9 All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
(1)  A post indicator valve installed not less than forty feet (40 ft.) from the building. 
a.  For buildings less than forty feet (40 ft.) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than forty feet (40 ft.) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
(2)  A wall post indicator valve. 
(3)  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4. 
(4)  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than forty feet (40 ft.) from the building. 
a.  For buildings less than forty feet (40 ft.) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than forty feet (40 ft.) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
(5)  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior. 
(6)  Control valves in a fire rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior. 
(c)  Section 10.1.5 is added to read as follows: 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of twelve (12) inches and be sealed with two (2) inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
(d)  Section 10.4.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
(e)  Subsection 10.4.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
(f)  Section 10.4.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2A. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8105 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 
The 2016 California Plumbing is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 604.1 "Pipe, Tube, and Fittings" of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended by adding a new third paragraph to read as follows: 
All metallic pipe, fittings and parts of fixtures buried in the ground shall be protected by at least 40 mils plastic sleeve or equivalent wrapping. Ferrous piping shall not be permitted under floor slab within a building. 
(b)  Section 1208.5 "Acceptable Piping Materials and Joining Materials" of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended by adding a new second paragraph to read as follows: 
Approved polyethylene or other pipe material approved for underground installation shall be used in exterior buried piping systems. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8106 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE 
The 2016 California Electrical Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 300.5 "Underground Installations" of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended, by the addition of a new subsection (L) to read as follows: 
(L)  Earth within the City of Tustin is generally corrosive. The permittee may prove to the satisfaction of the Building Official the earth in the specific project area is not corrosive for the installation of the above noted electrical items in contact with or buried in the earth. Unless otherwise authorized by the Building Official, an such items embedded in the ground shall be protected by at least double, spiral wrapping, half overlapping with 10-mil plastic tape (total 40 mils cover), or approved equal. 
(b)  Section 310.10 "Uses Permitted" of the 2016 California Electrical Code is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Aluminum conductors No. 6 and smaller shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency for proper torquing of connections at their termination point and prior approval by the building official. 
(c)  Section 310.106(B) "Conductor Material" is amended by the adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured. 
(d)  Section 310.121 "Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring" is added to read as follows: 
310.121 Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring. Aluminum conductors of No. six (6) or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torque of connections at their termination point. 
(e)  Section 690.13 "Building or Other Structure Supplied by a Photovoltaic System" is amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either on the outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the system conductors. A single, visible-open, lockable AC disconnect shall be within three (3) feet of meter at the exterior of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8107 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
(a)  Whenever any property in any zone is developed with new or relocated buildings or structures, or whenever enclosed floor area in excess of two hundred (200) square feet is added to an existing building site in any zone, except zones permitted for single-family residential use, or whenever a residential building or use is converted to any purpose or use other than that which existed at the time of conversion, all electrical, telephone, community antenna, television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed, shall be installed underground within the exterior boundary lines of such property. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, may be placed above ground. 
(c)  The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section, and shall provide all necessary facilities on their premises so as to receive such services from the supplying utility or utilities subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(d)  Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter result from its literal interpretation or enforcement, the Planning Commission may waive, modify, or delay the application of any undergrounding requirement upon written request by a building site owner. Such request shall be filed with the Community Development Department and shall contain any and all facts which are offered in support. 
(e)  If the Planning Commission's action is to delay the installation of required undergrounding utilities, it may require the building site owner to file with the City a cash deposit, and/or record a covenant sufficient to provide for the future installation of the underground features which are to be delayed. The amount of the cash deposit shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8108 - AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE 
The 2016 California Green Building Standards Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Section 202 "Definitions" of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code is amended to include the following definition: 
SUSTAINABILITY. Consideration of present development and construction impacts on the community, the economy, and the environment without compromising the needs of the future. 
(b)  Section 301.1 "Scope" of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code is amended to read as follows: 
301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in this code. Voluntary green building measures are also included in this code the application checklists and may be included in the design and construction of structures covered by this code, but are not required unless they are adopted by a city or county as specified in Section 101.7. 
(c)  Section 301.1.1 "Additions and alterations" of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code is amended to read as follows: 
301.1.1 Additions and alterations. [HCD] The mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions or alterations of existing residential buildings. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work. 
Note: On and after January 1, 2014, residential buildings undergoing permitted alterations, additions or improvements shall replace noncompliant plumbing fixtures with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixture replacement is required prior to issuance of a certificate of final completion, certificate of occupancy or final permit approval by the local building department. See Civil Code Section 1101.1, et seq., for the definition of a noncompliant plumbing fixture, types of residential buildings affected and other important enactment dates. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8109 - AMENDMENT OF THE 1997 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 
The 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended as follows: 
(a)  Chapter 6, Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals, is amended as follows: 
Section 601.1 Hearing Examiners/Hearing Officers. The Board may appoint one or more Hearing Examiners or Hearing Officers or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners to conduct the hearings. The Examiner/Officer hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the board for decision. 
Section 601.1.1 Whenever used in this Code or by any other code referenced by this Code, the terms Hearing Officer and Hearing Examiner shall have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably. 
Section 601.1.2 Whenever the Board elects to appoint a Hearing Examiner or Hearing Officer pursuant to Section 601.1, said Examiner/Officer shall be selected pursuant to, and shall be subject to, the guidelines established by TCC section 1167. 
Section 604.8 In addition to the provisions of Sections 604.1 through 604.7, hearings conducted before a Hearing Officer or Hearing Examiner shall be subject to the provisions of TCC section 1168. 
Section 605.2 Where a case is heard by a Hearing Examiner or Hearing Officer the Examiner/Officer shall submit a written report to the Board consistent with the hearing officer guidelines established by TCC Section 1168 for consideration by the Board. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
8110 - AMENDMENT OF THE 1997 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE 
The 1997 Uniform Housing Code is amended as follows: 
(a)  Chapter 2, Enforcement, is amended as follows: 
Section 203 - Housing Advisory and Appeals Board/Building Board of Appeals 
Section 203.1: General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretations of this code, there shall be and is created a Housing Advisory and Appeals Board/Building Board of Appeals for the City of Tustin ("Board of Appeals") as set forth in 2016 CBC Section 113.1 as amended who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said Board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. Appeals to the Board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 1201 of this code. Copies of all rules of procedure adopted by the Board shall be delivered to the Building Official, who shall make them accessible to the public. 
203.2 Limitations of Authority. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provision of this Code and the Board shall not be empowered to waive requirements of this Code. 
(b)  Chapter 13, Procedures for Conduct of Hearing Appeals, is amended as follows: 
Section 1301.1 Hearing Examiners/Hearing Officers. The Board may appoint one or more Hearing Examiners or Hearing Officers or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners to conduct the hearings. The Examiner hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the board for decision. 
Section 1301.1.1 Whenever used in this Code or by any other code referenced by this Code, the terms Hearing Examiner and Hearing Officer shall have the same meaning and may be used interchangeably. 
Section 1301.1.2 Whenever the Board elects to appoint a Hearing Examiner or Hearing Officer pursuant to Section 1301.1, said Examiner/Officer shall be selected pursuant to and shall be subject to the guidelines established by TCC section 1167. 
Section 1304.8 In addition to the provisions of Sections 1304.1 through 1304.7, hearings conducted before a Hearing Examiner or Hearing Officer shall be subject to the provisions of TCC section 1168. 
Section 1305.2 Where a case is heard by a Hearing Examiner or Hearing Officer the Examiner/Officer shall submit a written report to the Board consistent with the Hearing Officer Guidelines established by TCC section 1168 for consideration by the Board. 
(Ord. No. 1475, Sec. 1, 11-1-16)  
CHAPTER 1A - RESIDENTIAL CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 1B - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 2 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS 
 
8200 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, CA Govt. Code Section 65850.5) to achieve timely and cost effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
8201 - DEFINITIONS 
Association. A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated homeowner's association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
Building Division. The Building Division of the City of Tustin. 
Building Official. The Building Official for the City of Tustin. 
City. The City of Tustin. 
Common interest development. 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
Electronic submittal. The utilization of one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Email. 
2.  The Internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
Expedited permitting and/or expedited review. The process outlined in Section 8205 entitled "Permit Review and Inspection Requirements." 
Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid a specific, adverse impact. Includes, but is not limited to, any cost effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
Board of Appeals. The Building Board of Appeals for the City of Tustin as provided in Section 113.1 of the Tustin City Code. 
Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten (10) percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten (10) percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten (10) percent as originally specified and proposed. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system. 
1.  A solar energy system that is not larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Tustin and all State of California health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as regulated by the City of Tustin. 
Solar energy system. 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device with a primary purpose to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building with a primary purpose to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
Specific, adverse impact. A significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
8202 - APPLICABILITY 
(a)  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
8203 - SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the State of California and the City of Tustin. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
8204 - APPLICATIONS AND DOCUMENTS 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the City website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, or the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  The Building Division shall prepare a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(d)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(e)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plan contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
8205 - PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  The Building Division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications, including the checklist and standard plan contained in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook. 
Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the application meets local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements. 
(b)  Denial may only occur when supported by written findings identifying substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals pursuant to the 2013 California Building Code, as amended by the Tustin City Code. 
(c)  When a complete application is submitted that meets the Building Division's approved checklist and standard plan, the Building Division shall accommodate a building permit application within three (3) business days. 
(d)  Any condition imposed in the approval of a complete application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The City shall not condition approval of an application to require the approval of an association as defined in Section 8201. 
(e)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(f)  Only one (1) inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
(g)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1456, Sec. 2, 7-21-15)  
CHAPTER 3 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITS 
 
8300 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with AB 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. This Chapter is designed to encourage the installation and use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install such systems. This Chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1476, Sec. 2, 8-1-17)  
8301 - DEFINITIONS 
"Building Division." The Building Division of the City of Tustin. 
"Building Official." The Building Official for the City of Tustin. 
"City." The City of Tustin. 
"Electric vehicle charging station." Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this Chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
"Electronic submittal." The utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email. 
2.  The Internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
"Expedited permitting" and/or "expedited review." The process outlined in Sections 8303 entitled "Application Submittal and Expedited Review." 
"Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid a specific, adverse impact." Includes, but is not limited to, any cost effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
"Specific, adverse impact." A significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1476, Sec. 2, 8-1-17)  
8302 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 
(a)  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the State of California and the City of Tustin. 
(b)  All electric vehicle charging stations shall require a permit issued by the Building Division that complies with the City's adopted California Building Codes, and issued pursuant to this Ordinance. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(c)  The Building Official shall adopt and implement and, as needed, update an administrative, nondiscretionary expedited permit process for electric vehicle charging stations. The process shall include a checklist that sets forth all requirements with which the electric vehicle charging station must comply in order to be eligible for expedited permit processing. 
(d)  The electric vehicle charging station permit process and checklist may refer to the recommendations in the checklist prescribed by the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" ("Guidebook") published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research, as may be periodically revised. 
(e)  The Building Official may periodically modify or update the checklist found in the Guidebook due to unique climactic, geological, seismological, or topographical conditions. The checklist and standards for electric vehicle charging stations adopted by the Building Official, as well as all other required permitting documentation shall be available from the Building Division or on the Building Division's website. If the Building Official modifies the checklist and standards found in the Guidebook, he shall document the unique climactic, geological, seismological or topographical conditions requiring such modifications and shall also include such documentation on the Building Division's website. 
(Ord. No. 1476, Sec. 2, 8-1-17)  
8303 - APPLICATION SUBMITTAL AND EXPEDITED REVIEW 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station shall be made available on the Building Division's website. The applicant may submit the application and related documentation for an electric vehicle charging station in person or by electronic submittal, with all required permit processing and inspection fees, as specified on the Building Division's website. 
(b)  Electronic signatures shall be accepted by the Building Division on all electronic submittals in lieu of a wet signature. 
(c)  An application for an electric vehicle charging station shall be deemed complete when the Building Division determines that the application is complete and satisfies all the information requirements in the checklist and standard plans and all fees are paid. 
(d)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be provided to the applicant for resubmission. 
(e)  Applications for electric vehicle charging stations shall be administratively reviewed and acted upon by the Building Division as nondiscretionary permits within a reasonable time following receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the Building Division's approved checklist, standard plans, and payment of all required permit plan check, processing and inspection fees. The Building Division's review shall be limited to whether the proposed electric vehicle charging station meets all health and safety requirements and that it will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. 
(f)  The Building Division may require changes to submitted applications to avoid adverse public health and safety impacts or may deny an application for electric vehicle charging stations based on substantial evidence, that the proposed electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. A "feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or alteration imposed or found acceptable by the Building Division. Any condition imposed by the Building Division shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Findings for denial shall be provided that include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Tustin Planning Commission. 
(g)  Approval of an application to install electric vehicle charging stations shall be accomplished through the issuance of a building permit or similar nondiscretionary permit. 
(h)  Approval of an application for an electric vehicle charging station shall not be based or conditioned on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. No. 1476, Sec. 2, 8-1-17)  
CHAPTER 4 - ELECTRICAL CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 5 - SWIMMING POOLS (REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 1386, SEC. 13, ADOPTED DEC. 7, 2010) 
   
CHAPTER 6 - SIGN CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 7 - HOUSING CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 8 - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 9 - GRADING AND EXCAVATION 
 
8901 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing the adverse effects of grading, cut and fill operations, water runoff, and soil erosion. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8902 - SCOPE 
A.  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including but not limited to fills and embankments, establishes administrative requirements for issuance of grading permits, maintenance of property, and contains provisions to allow City for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with the requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the building code regulations then in effect as adopted and modified by City Ordinance as well as water quality requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter. 
B.  In the event that a particular topic is not covered in either this chapter or the Grading Manual, provisions of the building code regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8903 - COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER 
No person shall commence grading upon any lot, parcel, or tract of land without complying with the applicable provisions of this chapter and all other regulations related to grading. Grading within any special flood hazard area shall also comply with Chapter 8 of Article 9, 9800 et seq. of the Tustin City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8904 - GRADING MANUAL 
A.  The Community Development Department shall formulate and modify as necessary such rules, procedures, definitions, and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this chapter. Such rules, procedures, definitions, and interpretations shall be referred to as the Tustin Grading Manual. 
B.  The Grading Manual shall include provisions to assure that the water quality requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter apply to all such activities. 
C.  In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the Grading Manual, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. The provisions of the Grading Manual, to the extent that they are made conditions of any permit by the City, shall be binding on the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8905 - DEFINITIONS 
[As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Approval shall mean a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer, geologist of record, or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work unless it specifically refers to the Building Official. 
Approved plans shall mean the current grading plans which bear the stamp of approval of the Building Official. 
Approved testing agency shall mean a facility whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a registered civil engineer and which is equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this Code, or the Grading Manual, as determined by the Building Official. 
Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or the storm water drainage system. Best management practices also include but are not limited to treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best management practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter. 
Bench shall mean a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
Building Official is that person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or his or her authorized representative. 
Civil engineer shall mean a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Civil engineering shall mean the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials for the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind. 
Clearing, brushing, and grubbing shall mean the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees, and similar plant types) by mechanical means. 
Code shall mean the Tustin City Code. 
Commercial coach is a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, and shall include a trailer coach. 
Compaction is the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
Dry season is that part of the calendar year wherein a lower potential for rain exists starting on May 1 and ending on September 30. 
Earth material is any rock, natural soil or fill, and/or any combination thereof. 
Engineering geologist shall mean a geologist certified in the State of California to practice engineering geology. 
Engineering geology shall mean the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
Erosion is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, and/or ice. 
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is a plan prepared, stamped, and signed by a civil engineer in accordance with the Grading Manual and the City's Local Implementation Plan which shows the various temporary, semi-permanent, and permanent erosion and sediment control devices and systems, and incorporates appropriate best management practices. The plan shall accommodate construction sequencing for both rainy and dry seasons. 
Erosion and Sediment Control System is a combination of desilting facilities and erosion protection, including effective planting, to protect property, watercourses, public or private facilities, and receiving waters from an abnormal deposition of sediment or dust. 
Excavation is the mechanical removal of earth material. 
Fill is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means. 
Grade shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface. 
(1)  Existing grade is the ground surface prior to grading. 
(2)  Finish grade is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved precise plan. 
(3)  Natural grade is the ground surface unaltered by artificial means. 
(4)  Rough grade is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. 
Grading is any excavation or fill or combination thereof. 
Grading contractor is a contractor licensed and regulated by the State of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work. 
Grading permit is an official document or certificate issued by the Building Official authorizing Grading activity as specified by approved plans and specifications. 
Hillside site is a site where the existing grade is twenty (20) percent or greater, and which may be adversely affected by drainage and/or stability conditions within or from outside the site, and/or which may cause an adverse effect on adjacent property. 
Mobilehome means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two (2) dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobilehome does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing. 
Owner or ownership i s any person, agency, firm, corporation, or entity having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property. 
Permanent erosion and sediment control devices are improvements which remain throughout the life of the development. They include terrace drains, down drains, slope landscaping, channels, storm drains, etc. 
Precise grading permit is a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which show the precise structure location, finish elevations, and all on-site improvements. 
Rainy season is that part of the calendar year wherein a higher potential for rain exists starting on October 1 and ending on April 30. 
Rough grading permit is a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans showing interim building pad drainage to the degree required by the Building Official. 
Semi-permanent erosion and sediment control devices are devices which are used primarily during construction and are not relocatable. They include earthen berms, concrete spillways, desilting basins, riser/outlet pipes, etc. 
Site is any lot or parcel or land or contiguous combination thereof under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
Slope is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
Soil is naturally occurring, surficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
Soil engineer or geotechnical engineer is a civil engineer duly registered in the State of California whose field of expertise is soil mechanics. 
Soil engineering or geotechnical engineering shall mean the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof. 
Special inspector is an inspector duly licensed by the Building Official to perform specialized inspections of asphalt concrete placement and related construction work or other grading related work as specified by the Building Official. 
Storm water permits are permits issued by a local, state, or federal regulatory agency regulating storm water flow over and from any project subject to this chapter including but not limited to NPDES permits and state general permits. 
Surveyor shall mean a professional surveyor or civil engineer registered in the State of California to practice land surveying. 
Temporary erosion and sediment control devices are devices that are removable and can be salvaged for subsequent reuse. In most cases they will last no longer than one rainy season. They include sandbags, gravel bags, plastic sheeting (visqueen), silt fencing, straw bales, and similar items. 
Terrace is a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
Water quality requirements are the requirements relevant to activities that are subject to this chapter found in the Tustin City Code regarding water quality, Section 4900 et seq., and the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan (DAMP), including all appendices and guidance documents included in the DAMP, as well as requirements relevant to the activities that are subject to this chapter found in storm water permits. 
Wet season shall mean rainy season. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8906 - PERMITS REQUIRED 
A.  No person shall conduct any grading, clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural or existing grade that is preparatory to grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the City. Exemptions to this requirement are as follows or as otherwise determined by the Building Official: 
1.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, mobilehome, retaining wall, swimming pool, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt from permit requirements any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported depth greater than five (5) feet after the completion of the structure. In these situations, the Building Official may require a soil or geology report for foundation design and inspect said fill or excavation when in the opinion of the Building Official potential hazard considerations warrant such information; 
2.  Cemetery graves; 
3.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations; 
4.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property or contribute sediment to adjacent properties. Such operations shall be subject to all requirements contained in Section 8916 of this chapter; 
5.  Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists; 
6.  Repealed by Ord. No. 1400, Sec. 2(1), May 3, 2011; 
7.  Excavation and backfill for installation and repair of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a City franchise or public property encroachment permit issued by the City; 
8.  An excavation which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one site and which: (1) is less than two (2) feet in vertical depth, or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than five (5) feet in vertical height; 
9.  A fill less than three (3) feet in depth placed on natural grade with a slope flatter than five (5) horizontal to one (1) vertical (5:1), which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one (1) site and does not obstruct a drainage course; 
10.  A fill less than three (3) feet in depth, not intended to support structures or mobilehomes, which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards on any one site and does not obstruct a drainage course; 
11.  Emergency work as authorized by the City necessary to protect life, limb, or property or to maintain the safety, use, or stability of a public right-of-way or drainage way; 
12.  Filling of soil for agricultural and horticultural purposes; 
13.  Resurfacing or maintenance of paved surfaces. 
B.  A grading permit in hillside areas as defined in Section 8915 of this chapter shall not be issued until approval of a hillside review application. 
C.  Grading permit, paving - No person shall construct pavement surfacing in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet on natural or existing grade for the purpose of a private road or commercial, industrial, or multi-residential parking lot or access driveway without a valid grading permit unless waived in writing by the Building Official. 
D.  Grading permit, watercourse alteration - No person shall alter an existing watercourse or channel by excavating, or placing fill, rock protection, or structural improvements without a valid grading permit unless waived by the Building Official or performed as interim protection under emergency flood fighting conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 1400, Sec. 2(1), 5-3-11)  
8907 - EXCAVATION BLASTING 
No person shall possess, store, sell, transport, or use explosives or blasting agents to do any excavation within the City. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8908 - TYPES OF GRADING PERMITS/RELATION TO BUILDING PERMITS 
A.  Either a rough grading permit or a precise grading permit may be issued for grading work upon completion of an application in accordance with the Grading Manual and approval by the Building Official. The selection of either a rough or precise grading permit is at option of the permittee provided that the plans satisfy the requirements of the Grading Manual. 
B.  Building permits may be issued for a site graded under a valid precise grading permit upon completion and approval of rough grade inspection as specified in the Grading Manual, site inspection by the Building Official. 
C.  Building permits shall not be issued for a site graded under a rough grading permit until an approved precise grading permit has been issued and the provisions of subsection B. of this section have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8909 - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
A.  To obtain a grading permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the Community Development Department. The permit application shall be accompanied by such information, plans and specifications, and reports as required by the Building Official and as specified in the Tustin Grading Manual. A separate permit shall be required for each site and may cover both excavations and fill. Each application for a grading permit for a construction site required to be covered under the state general construction stormwater permit shall include proof of the filing of a notice of intent with the State Water Resources Control Board. 
B.  Expiration of plan review. Applications for which no grading permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and become null and void. 
Plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or disposed of by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action for an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8910 - PERMIT ISSUANCE 
A.  The permit application and accompanying information as required by the Grading Manual and by the Building Official filed by an applicant for a grading permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the City to verify compliance with any applicable City requirements, laws, or ordinances. If the Building Official finds that the work described in the application for a grading permit and submitted plans, specifications, and other data filed conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws, ordinances, City requirements, and the Grading Manual and that the required fees have been paid, a grading permit shall be issued. 
B.  In issuing any grading permits under this chapter, the Building Official may attach any conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to protect the public welfare. This includes but is not limited to conditions to prevent danger to public or private property, to prevent hazards to life or property, to minimize adverse effects on the environment with conditions such as bonding, to ensure proper cleanup of operations, to recover cost for water quality enforcement, and to recover cost for construction hours enforcement. 
C.  When the Building Official issues a grading permit, plans and specifications will be endorsed in writing or stamped "APPROVED" by the Building Official. Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the Building Official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
D.  The issuance of a grading permit based upon plans, specifications, and other data shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications, and other data. 
E.  The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the grading permit, or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the Building Official. 
F.  Grading permits issued under the provisions of this section shall not relieve the applicant and/or owner of the responsibility for securing other permits or licenses that may be required from other departments or divisions of the City or other government entities. 
G.  The issuance of a grading permit shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter halting grading operations being carried on in violation of this Chapter, the Tustin City Code, or of any other laws. 
H.  One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the work at all times during the progress of grading work. One set of approved plans, specifications, and computations shall be retained by the Building Official until final approval of the work. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8911 - DENIAL OF PERMIT 
A.  Whenever in the determination of the Building Official the proposed work would create a hazard to human life or endanger property, or any public sewer, storm drain, watercourse, street, street improvement, or any other public property, the application shall be denied unless in the opinion of the Building Official the danger or hazard can be eliminated by specified methods. The Building Official may grant the grading permit upon condition that the specified protection and precautionary work be done to the Building Official's satisfaction, or upon condition that a specified method of performing the work be used or a bond be posted as deemed appropriate by the Building Official. 
B.  The Building Official may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed grading projects. The Building Official may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of a proposed grading project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a grading permit. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8912 - EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL 
A.  Every grading permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, or if the work is not completed within one year from the date of the permit or as otherwise indicated on the permit or in the improvement agreement. 
B.  After expiration of a grading permit and prior to work commencing, a new grading permit shall first be obtained and the fee thereof shall be ½ the amount required for a new grading permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
C.  Any permittee holding an unexpired grading permit may apply for an extension of the time to commence work when unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding two (2) successive periods of one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. 
D.  A grading permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership if the grading work thereon, for which said permit was issued, has not been completed, and a new permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If the time limitations of A. and B. of this section are not applicable and if no changes have been made to the plans and specifications, no charge shall be made for the issuance of the new permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the City, the provisions in subsection B. shall apply. 
E.  Subject to the provisions of Section 8911, the Building Official may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur from weather-related problems not considered at the time the grading permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8913 - SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 
A.  Whenever any work is being done in violation of this chapter, the Tustin City Code, or of any law, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served upon the person to whom the grading permit was issued, or agent or employee engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Office to proceed with the work. 
B.  The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for the stop work order. Notice may be given either by personal delivery or by first class mail. The permittee may file an appeal of the order in the manner prescribed in Section 8914. All work shall be stopped while the appeal is pending. 
C.  The Building Official may, in writing, immediately revoke a grading permit whenever the permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or was issued in violation of the Tustin City Code. 
D.  Any grading permit may also be revoked or suspended by the Building Official after written notice and hearing for: 
1.  Violation of any condition of the grading permit; 
2.  Violation of any provision of this chapter or any applicable law or ordinance relating to the work. 
3.  The existence of any condition related to grading which adversely affects the public health, welfare, or safety or which is injurious to property or improvements. 
4.  Written notice shall be served upon the person to whom the grading permit was issued, or agent or employee engaged in the work. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking or suspending the permit and shall specify a hearing date no sooner than ten (10) days after date of the notice. Notice may be given either by personal delivery or by first class mail. The permittee may file an appeal of the decision of the Building Official in the manner prescribed in Section 8914. All work shall be stopped while the hearing and appeal is pending. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8914 - APPEALS 
Any applicant for a grading permit, permittee, or other person who was aggrieved by any decision to deny or grant a grading permit, issued a stop work order, or who was aggrieved by any decision to revoke or suspend a grading permit may appeal said action to the Board of Appeals by filing with the Community Development Department a written notice thereof within seven (7) days from the date of mailing or receipt of notice of such action by the City, whichever occurs first. The aggrieved person shall be given a hearing before the Board of Appeals, after which the Board of Appeals shall have discretion to grant or deny the appeal or modify the decision of the Building Official and the decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final. The Board of Appeals may elect to have a Hearing Officer take evidence and submit a written report/proposed decision to the Board. The hearing, when conducted by a Hearing Officer, shall be subject to the Hearing Officer Guidelines adopted set forth in TCC section 1167. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 1428, Sec. 11, 5-7-13)  
8915 - HILLSIDE REVIEW 
A 
Purpose 
The purpose of hillside review is to provide supplementary regulations to ensure that grading, excavation, and development in hillside areas occurs in such a manner as to respect the natural and topographic character and identity of hillside areas as scenic resources and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by ensuring that development does not create geologic hazards, soil erosion, silting of lower slopes, slide damage, or flooding problems. 
B 
Applicability 
1.  Hillside review provisions of this chapter shall apply to: 
a.  All areas located within the boundaries of the hillside district as shown in the East Tustin Specific Plan. 
b.  Outside the East Tustin Specific Plan, provisions to any development Site where the average existing grade is twenty (20) percent or greater, a site which entails cut and/or fill grading of three (3) feet or more in vertical height below or above natural ground, or a combination of fill-over-cut slopes equal to or greater than five (5) feet in vertical height which may be altered or adversely affected by drainage or stability conditions within or from outside the site or which may cause an adverse effect on adjacent property. 
2.  Hillside review shall be required prior to or concurrently with approval of a tentative map or prior to issuance of a grading permit or building permit for any site located within a hillside area as defined in subsection B. of this section. 
3.  Hillside review shall not be required for any of the following: 
a.  Where a proposed building, improvement, or portion thereof does not in any way alter the ground coverage of a developed site, an existing building, or structure. 
b.  Grading pursuant to a permit for excavation in public streets. 
c.  Grading for a public improvement or public work for which inspection is provided by the City or another public agency. 
d.  Grading by a public utility or water company. 
e.  Tilling of the soil for agricultural and horticultural purposes. 
f.  Exemptions listed in Section 8906. 
C 
Procedure 
1.  Applications for hillside review shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development Department and shall contain detailed information as is determined by the Director of Community Development to be necessary in accordance with the Grading Manual. 
2.  Preliminary review. The applicant is encouraged to submit a preliminary application and drawings to the Community Development Department for preliminary staff review to determine compliance with specific hillside objectives and guidelines contained in this section and in the Grading Manual and to identify specific site concerns and problems at the earliest possible stage, to help reduce the chance of problems causing delays later in the approval process, and to facilitate the coordination of issues and concerns of individual City departments. 
3.  Applications for hillside review shall comply with the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code § 21000, et seq. (CEQA). 
4.  The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, deny, or refer to the Planning Commission hillside review applications determined to be minor in scope. Such projects include additions, landscaping projects, minor grading for access, and various other projects determined to be similar by the Director of Community Development. In order to be considered minor, the project must: 
a.  Involve less than two hundred (200) cubic yards (sum of cut and fill); or 
b.  Involve less than a five-foot deep cut; or 
c.  Involve less than a five-foot high fill. 
5.  Any hillside review application not considered minor shall be referred to the Planning Commission which shall have the authority to approve, deny, or conditionally approve the request. 
6.  Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
7.  Approval shall become null and void unless a grading permit is issued within twenty-four (24) months of the hillside review approval date or upon expiration of an approved tentative subdivision map, whichever occurs first. 
8.  In reviewing an application for hillside review, the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission, or City Council shall use guidelines for hillside grading contained in the Grading Manual and shall insure the attainment of the following objectives: 
a.  Compliance with guidelines established in the September 1976 Fire Protection Planning Task Force Report adopted by the Orange County Board of Supervisors and entitled "Fire Hazard Background Report and Recommendations for the Reduction of Fire Hazard at the Natural Open Space/Urban Development Interface Orange County, California." 
b.  Provision of fire resistant roofing materials, Class A minimum. 
c.  Assurance that visual, drainage, and slope erosion impacts created by any parcel or tract map and subsequent grading are within either the property owner's management and control or the homeowners' association, whichever is applicable. 
d.  Assurance that sites are planned in such a way so as to preserve or enhance important vistas and maintain the overall landform character of the land use area, particularly those seen from public places. 
e.  Preservation of the open space values of the Central Peters Canyon Ridge as identified in the East Tustin Specific Plan by excluding buildings and overhead utility lines from being developed on the top of the ridgeline and by careful siting of structures and landscaping adjacent to the ridgeline. 
f.  Assurance that, where feasible, grading and siting reflects the natural topography of the land, the natural drainage patterns of the land, and minimizes creation of excessively large leveled areas by grading. 
g.  Assurance that grading on hillside areas should soften hard edges left by cut and fill operations. Where an adverse visual impact may occur, rounded finished contours are required. 
h.  Assurance that grading slopes (cut or fill), including roadsides, will undergo permanent revegetation in a timely manner to minimize chance of erosion and siltation. 
i.  Adequate provision for drainage and erosion control made to avoid any damage to existing landform. 
j.  Provision and approval of an independent engineering study concerning the potential impact of slope instability, liquefaction, landslide and seismic potential for proposed development within a Geologic Hazard Special Study Zone. 
k.  The natural profile and landform character of the knoll identified in the East Tustin Specific Plan is maintained. 
l.  Assurance that roadway alignment and grading impacts in hillside areas are minimized and hillside roadways are designed consistent with guidelines contained in the Grading Manual. 
m.  Assurance that slope gradients will vary when adjacent to roadways to create open areas to be planted, thus softening the appearance of man-made slopes. 
n.  Preparation and recordation of a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions is provided for the development and maintenance of slopes and drainage devices shall be a condition of approval on tentative subdivision maps. Every grading permit shall also be conditioned upon the applicant and/or owner's warranty of all slopes through applicant's and/or owner's implementation of a slope warranty program subject to approval and review by the City Attorney and Planning Commission and subject to appeal to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 17, 11-17-09)  
8916 - HAZARDS 
A.  Whenever the Building Official determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life or limb, or endangers property or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of the property, upon receipt of written notice from the City, shall within the period specified therein, repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize any person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon their property, and compliance with the terms of this Section shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8917 - DEPOSITS OF EARTH, ROCK, OR EXCAVATED MATERIALS 
A.  No person shall dump, move or place any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone, or other excavated material or debris so as to cause the same to be deposited upon or unreasonably roll, blow, flow, or wash upon or over the premises of another without the express written consent of the owner of such premises so affected, or upon or over any public place or way. 
B.  When loading or transporting any earth, sand, ground, rock, stone, or other excavated material or debris, such material shall be prevented from blowing or spilling onto public right-of-way or adjacent private property. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of-way used for handling purposes in a condition reasonably free of dust, earth, or debris attributed to the grading operation. 
C.  If, due to a violation of subsection A. or B. of this section, any earth, sand, ground, rock, stone, or other excavated material is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, blow, or wash upon any public property or private property, the person and/or business responsible shall cause such material to be removed. 
D.  Appropriate security as determined by the Building Official or Public Works Director may be required to guarantee maintenance and repair of City streets damaged during grading and moving of import and export materials. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8918 - FEES AND BONDS 
A.  Prior to accepting a grading permit application and plans and specifications for plan checking, the Building Official shall collect a plan checking fee as approved by resolution of the City Council. 
B.  A permit fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of a grading permit with such fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
C.  The Building Official may require bonds or other security in such forms and amounts deemed necessary to assure that the work, if not completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions, or to recover cost for water quality, or construction hours enforcement, or to guarantee maintenance and repair of City streets pursuant to Section 8917 D. The Grading Manual should be referred to for bonding procedures and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8919 - CUT AND FILLS 
A.  Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless the owner furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, as required by the Building Official stating that the site has been investigated and giving the opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. All cuts shall conform to the Grading Manual. 
B.  Unless otherwise recommended by a soils engineering report approved by the Building Official, fills shall conform to provisions contained in the Grading Manual. Fill slopes shall also be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8920 - SETBACKS 
A.  Cut and fill slopes shall be setback from site boundaries in accordance with the Grading Manual. 
B.  The setbacks and other restrictions specified by provisions of the Grading Manual establish minimum requirements that may be increased by the Building Official, if necessary, for safety and stability or to prevent damage to structures or adjacent properties from sediment deposition, erosion, water runoff of the slopes, or to provide access for Slope and drainage structure maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8921 - DRAINAGE AND TERRACING 
Drainage and terracing shall conform to the provisions of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the Building Official on the approved grading plan. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8922 - ASPHALT/CONCRETE PAVEMENT 
A.  Asphalt or concrete pavement for surfacing of parking lots, private streets, or other similar uses shall conform to the Grading Manual and Minimum Design Standards and Construction Standards unless otherwise approved by the Building Official. 
B.  The Building Official or inspector may request that a site soil engineer or special inspector inspect construction of asphalt or concrete paved areas and verify to the Building Official that the work has been performed to compliance with City standards. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8923 - EROSION CONTROL AND WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENT SYSTEMS 
A.  The faces of cut and fill slopes and the project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of effective planting. The protection for slopes shall be installed as soon as practical and prior to calling for final approval. It is recommended that drought resistant plant materials be utilized wherever possible and fire retardant plants in hillside areas. Where slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the Building Official. 
B.  Where necessary, permanent or temporary erosion control devices such as desilting basins, check dams, cribbing, rip rap, or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety during the rainy season. 
C.  No grading work in excess of two hundred (200) cubic yards will be allowed between October 15th and April 15th on any single grading site under permit unless an erosion control system has been filed and approved or waived in writing by the Building Official. 
D.  Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition, free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. 
E.  Unless otherwise approved by the Building Official, the owner shall be required to retain a civil engineer who will be responsible for inspecting the erosion and sediment control systems, and for the initial approval of installation of permanent and semi-permanent erosion and sediment control devices during each rainy season until the work authorized by the grading permit is given final approval. The owner shall retain the civil engineer to periodically review the field conditions and modify, as needed to ensure effectiveness, the erosion and sediment control plan during the rainy season. Installation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment control devices shall be the responsibility of the owner. The civil engineer or other qualified individual who prepared the grading plan and the erosion and sediment control plan shall be responsible for inspection and any necessary plan revisions during the rainy season. 
F.  Desilting facilities shall be provided at drainage outlets from the graded site. 
G.  Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a minimum desilting capacity equal to the current City standards. 
H.  Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects whenever feasible when it provides improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather. 
I.  Desilting basins constructed of compacted earth shall be compacted to a relative compaction of ninety (90) percent of maximum density. A soil engineering report, prepared by the soil engineer, which includes the type of field testing performed, location, and results of testing shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval upon completion of the desilting basins. 
J.  During the rainy season, disturbed site areas that are not complete and that are not being actively graded shall be fully protected from erosion with appropriate BMPs. Standby erosion and sediment control BMPs sufficient to completely protect otherwise exposed portions of the site from erosion and to prevent sediment discharges shall be stored on site and shall be deployed prior to a storm event. 
K.  During the dry season, standby materials for sediment control BMPs sufficient to completely protect exposed portions of the site from discharging sediment shall be stored on site. Exposures shall be limited so that complete implementation of such BMPs may be effected within forty-eight (48) hours of a predicted storm event (a predicted storm event is defined as a forecasted, fifty (50) percent chance of rain). 
L.  Erosion protection shall include effective planting of all slopes in excess of five (5) feet high unless otherwise approved by the Building Official. Slopes exceeding fifteen (15) feet high may require an adequate irrigation system, as determined by the Building Official. Protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable, which may be prior to rough grade approval. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated, and effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval unless otherwise approved by the Building Official. 
M.  The erosion and sediment control provisions shall take into account drainage patterns during the current and future phases of grading throughout the rainy season. 
N.  All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds forty (40) percent. 
O.  Graded areas around the tract perimeter must drain away from the face of slopes at the conclusion of each working day. 
P.  In addition to the requirements specified above, the permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the water quality requirements. 
Q.  Any violation of an applicable federal or state-issued storm water permit, or failure to conform to the City's Water Quality Requirements prepared pursuant to such a permit or pursuant to this chapter, or failure to comply with storm water related provisions of a City-issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit, is also a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8924 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENT SYSTEM MAINTENANCE 
A.  After each rainstorm, silt and debris shall be removed from check berms and desilting basins and the basins pumped dry following approved Best Management Practices for storm water disposal and state discharge requirements. 
B.  After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion and sediment control system shall be evaluated and repaired as necessary. If the design is found to be ineffective, the erosion and sediment control plan shall be revised by the civil engineer responsible for the design and approved by the Building Official. 
C.  The contractor shall be responsible for and shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition. 
D.  The contractor and permittee or project owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of all erosion and sediment control devices as required by the erosion and sediment control plan. In the event of failure or refusal by the contractor, permittee, or project owner to properly maintain the devices, the Building Official may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property and environmental resources. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost plus the cost of doing the work. 
E.  In the event the Building Official must cause emergency maintenance to be done, the Building Official may revoke the grading permit in writing. The grading permit shall not be renewed until an erosion and sediment control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements approved by the Building Official are installed and any penalty fee has been paid by the owner. 
F.  If any grading subject to Section 8906 A of this chapter has commenced without a grading permit, the property owner may be required to prepare and implement an erosion and sediment control system plan as well as other plans required under the water quality requirements which have been approved by the Building Official. In the event of failure by the property owner to install an approved erosion and sediment control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements, the Building Official may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 1400, Sec. 2(2), 5-3-11)  
8925 - GRADING INSPECTION AND COMPLETION OF WORK 
A.  Grading operations for which a grading permit is required shall be subject to inspection pursuant to provisions of the Grading Manual. 
B.  Upon completion of rough or precise grading work, the Building Official may require written approvals, reports, drawings, and supplements specified in the Grading Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8926 - LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES DISCLAIMER 
The City, its offices, or agents shall not be responsible for any condition or damages resulting from grading or excavation work whether or not a grading permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
8927 - RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE 
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable about the provisions of this chapter, conditions, and/or restrictions of its grading permit, the Grading Manual, the approved grading plans and the approved soil and geology reports. 
(Ord. No. 1280, Sec. 1, 11-17-03)  
CHAPTER 9A - CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1435, ADOPTED DECEMBER 3, 2013 
   
CHAPTER 10 - PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO SYSTEM COVERAGE 
 
8950 - INTENT AND PURPOSE 
The intent of the chapter is to provide a regulatory framework for the purpose of providing effective 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communication System coverage throughout the City for police and fire emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8951 - DEFINITIONS 
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a differing meaning: 
City of Tustin Public Safety Radio System Coverage Specifications: Those specifications designed to provide optimum coverage and radio effectiveness within buildings and structures under the Countywide Coordinated Communication System. 
Countywide Coordinated Communication System: That radio system used by local law enforcement, fire, lifeguard, and public works departments within the County of Orange for emergency and non-emergency radio communication on the 800 MHz radio band. 
FCC-certified technician: An individual who is qualified with a General Radiotelephone Operator License (GROL/PG), or equivalent, to review design plans and perform tests in affected structures to measure conformance with City of Tustin Public Safety Radio System Coverage Specifications. 
TPD: Tustin Police Department. 
OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority. 
OCSD/Communications: Orange County Sheriff-Coroner Department/Communications Division. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8952 - USE AND OCCUPANCY 
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall own, erect, construct, or occupy any building or structure, or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done, which fails to support adequate radio coverage for City emergency service workers operating on the 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communication System. Further, owners must maintain a reasonable standard of reliable radio communication within their buildings and structures once a certificate of occupancy is issued or a final inspection is conducted. For the purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall include those specifications in the City of Tustin Public Safety Radio System Coverage Specifications set forth in Section 8958 (City of Tustin Public Safety Radio System Coverage Specifications). 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8953 - EXEMPTIONS 
This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Existing buildings or structures; 
B.  Elevators; 
C.  Structures that are three (3) stories or less without subterranean storage or parking; and 
D.  Wood-constructed residential structures four (4) stories or less without subterranean storage or parking. 
Should construction that is three (3) stories or less include subterranean storage or parking, this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8954 - TESTING PROCEDURES 
Initial and annual tests of radio coverage shall be conducted to show compliance pursuant to those procedures and specifications in section 8958. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8955 - AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS PERMITTED 
Buildings and structures that cannot support the required level of radio coverage shall be equipped with amplification systems as specified in the City of Tustin Public Safety Radio System Coverage Specifications, set forth in Section 8958, or any other system approved by the OCSD/Communications, in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8956 - COSTS 
The FCC certified technician shall be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or agent of the owner, but not the contractor or any other person responsible for the building or structure construction. Payment of the FCC certified technician's fee and costs shall not be made contingent upon the passage of the test. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8957 - NONCOMPLIANCE 
After discovery of noncompliance, the building owner is provided ninety (90) days to remedy the deficiency and gain compliance. If the building owner fails to comply fully with the ordinance within ninety (90) days after discovery of noncompliance, it is considered a misdemeanor. An administrative penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for non-compliance shall be accrued each day after the ninety (90) day remedy period has expired every day until compliance is obtained. This penalty with be placed as a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
8958 - CITY OF TUSTIN PUBLIC SAFETY RADIO SYSTEM COVERAGE SPECIFICATIONS 
A.  Performance. Specifications are provided to assist property owners in satisfying a delivered audio quality (DAQ) of three (3) with a ninety (90) percent reliability factor for emergency personnel using radio communication in their buildings and structures. Property owners who can demonstrate full compliance with the reliability factor without adhering to all of the following specifications may be excused from all or part of these provisions. Property owners who adhere to all of the specifications and fail to reach the reliability factor must employ all resources necessary to ensure full compliance. Performance and compliance shall be inspected annually as part of the local fire department's inspection. 
B.  Signal strength, signal rejection, modulation compatibility, and delivered audio quality. The following defines the minimum required level of radio signal strength: 
1.  Minimum signal strength of (-95 dBm) in ninety (90) percent of the area of each floor of the building from both the 800 MHz Countywide Communications Systems and from within the building is required. 
2.  The frequency range supported from the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 851—869 MHz (base transmitter frequencies). 
3.  The frequency range supported to the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 806—824 MHz (radio field transmit frequencies). 
4.  A public safety radio amplification system shall include filters to reject frequencies below 851 MHz and frequencies above 869 MHz by a minimum of 35 dB. 
5.  All system components must be one hundred (100) percent compatible with analog and digital modulations after installation without additional adjustments or modifications. The systems must be capable of encompassing the frequencies stated herein and capable of future modifications to a frequency range subsequently established by the City of Tustin. If the system is not capable of modification to future frequencies, then a new system will need to be installed to accommodate the new frequency band. 
6.  Active devices shall have a minimum of -50 dB 3rd order intermodulation protection. 
7.  All active in-building coverage devices shall be FCC Part 90 Type Certified. 
8.  UL listing is required for any AC-operated power supplies. 
9.  Active devices shall include a minimum of twelve (12) hours of battery backup power. 
10.  Any in-building coverage system shall be installed by a City-approved, manufacturer-trained, and certified installer. 
The delivered audio quality is defined below: 
DAQ 
Delivered 
Audio 
Quality 	Subjective Performance Description 
1 	Unusable, speech present but unreadable. 
2 	Understandable with considerable effort. Frequent repetition due to noise/distortion. 
3 	Speech understandable with slight effort. Occasional repetition required due to noise/distortion. 
3.5 	Speech understandable with repetition only rarely required. Some noise/distortion. 
4 	Speech easily understood. Occasional noise/distortion. 
4.5 	Speech easily understood. Infrequent noise/distortion. 
5 	Speech easily understood. 
 
C.  Remedies to achieve compliance (acceptable amplification systems). If needed to ensure compliance with the ninety (90) percent reliability factor, the property owner must install each of the following: 
1.  An in-building coverage system composed of a radiating cable system or an internal multiple antenna system with FCC-certified bi-directional 800 MHz amplifier(s), distribution system, and subcomponents. 
2.  Any active devices (e.g. signal booster(s)) must be encased in a NEMA 4 (or equivalent) dust/waterproof case and clearly labeled "City of Tustin Public Safety Radio." 
3.  Multi-band pass filters as required. 
In the event of a power outage, all electrical components must be equipped with independent auxiliary battery power or generators to function at full capacity for at least twelve (12) hours. 
Once a system is installed, a spectrum analyzer shall be used to evaluate the system for harmful interference to the 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communications System backbone initially, and annually thereafter by an OCSD/Communications Division FCC-certified technician. Any interference must be identified and removed before the system can be accepted. 
D.  Applicable Federal Communications Commission rule compliance. All active devices used to provide extended coverage must be FCC-certificated. 
1.  Test standards. Design review and certification. 
2.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall: 
a.  Retain an FCC-certified technician who will review construction plans in order to ensure that such plans meet aforementioned radio communication criteria; and recommend, if needed, an in-building solution for reliable radio communication; 
b.  Submit copies of plans certified with the signature of the technician to the Building Official of the City of Tustin, OCFA, and OCSD/Communications. 
3.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall: 
a.  Retain an FCC-certified technician who will test all areas of the building or structure, verify installation and operation of in-building solutions, if needed, and certify all of the findings stated herein on the date of inspection with his/her signature. A passing test is one that demonstrates DAQ 3 with a ninety (90) percent reliability factor on each floor. Owners of buildings or structures that fail to meet this standard will not be in compliance with this ordinance. 
b.  The building owner shall retain all records of initial and annual inspections and submit copies to the Building Official of the City of Tustin, OCFA, and OCSD/Communications. 
4.  Initial test procedure. The initial test for 800 MHz coverage shall be conducted by an FCC-certified technician employed by the owner of the building, and it shall be the owner's responsibility to comply with all sections of the ordinance. 
For purposes of testing, each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately twenty (20) equal areas. A maximum of two (2) nonadjacent areas shall be permitted to fail the test. In the event that three (3) of the areas fail the test, and to provide greater statistical accuracy, the floor may be divided into forty (40) equal areas. In such an event, a maximum of four (4) nonadjacent areas shall be permitted to fail the test. As specified by the authority having jurisdiction, the test shall be conducted by using a Motorola XTS 3000/XTS 5000 or equivalent portable radio talking through the 800 MHz Countywide Coordinated Communications System. A spot located approximately in the center of a grid area shall be selected for the test. The radio will then be keyed to verify two-way communication to and from the outside of the building through the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot within the grid area will not be permitted. 
All auxiliary power systems shall be tested under load for a period of one (1) hour to verify that the system will operate properly in the event of a power outage. The testing technician reserves the discretion to determine whether or not the battery exhibits symptoms of failure. 
5.  Annual test procedure. All required buildings shall be tested at least once per calendar year by the OCFA who will test the in-building system components to determine general functional and operability. If noncompliance is found, the building owner shall be required to either install signal boosting equipment, or modify existing signal boosting equipment to provide acceptable signal coverage within the structure. Once one (1) of these actions has been taken, a verification test shall be conducted by an FCC-certified technician. This test shall follow the procedures outlined in the initial test procedures above, and the findings which must show compliance with the above standards shall be submitted to the City's Building Official. 
6.  Every two (2) years battery back-up systems shall be replaced per manufacturer's specifications. 
E.  Additional equipment feature requirements. Active devices shall be alarmed. A phone line shall provide dial tone to an alarm device. The alarm device shall be programmed to activate a pager on the County of Orange's 900 MHz paging system. Access to the active components of the in-building coverage system (if any) shall be accessible twenty-four (24) hours a day by County technicians/engineers. At a minimum the alarms will indicate loss of either electrical power or operational failure. The device shall also have modem access to allow remote monitoring. 
F.  New building construction. All new building construction shall have a two-inch conduit, the material for this conduit shall be approved by the City Building Official, installed between the first and bottom subterranean floor and said conduit shall extend along the center of the building to the roof, the conduit shall be made easily accessible. All subterranean parking garages shall have a similar conduit installation. 
(Ord. No. 1337, Sec. 1, 5-1-07)  
ARTICLE 9 - LAND USE  
CHAPTER 1 - INCENTIVES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1484, adopted Oct. 3, 2017, amended Article 9, Ch. 1, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1320, Sec. 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2006; and Ord. No. 1372, adopted Jan. 19, 2010.  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
9111 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide incentives for the production of housing for very low-, low-, moderate-income, senior citizens, transitional foster youth, disabled veterans and homeless persons in accordance with California Law pertaining to density bonuses. In addition, it contains provisions for a density bonus or development incentive/concession when a child care facility is to be included in an affordable housing development, or when land is donated for affordable housing under specified conditions. The intent of this Chapter is to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the City's Housing Element. 
The regulations and procedures set forth in this Chapter shall apply throughout the City with the exception of area identified as the "MCAS Tustin Specific Plan." Sections of the Government Code referenced in this Chapter and application forms for complying with this Chapter, shall be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 2, 10-3-17)  
9112 - DEFINITIONS 
Whenever the following terms are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section: 
"Affordable Housing Cost", means as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5. The term applies to for-sale units. In the Housing Incentive Agreement, in its sole discretion, the City or the Housing Authority, as applicable, shall exercise the options specified in Section 50052.5(b)(3) and/or (4), and if the Department of Housing and Community Development adopts regulations pursuant to Section 50052.5(c), the City or the Housing Authority shall consider the regulations for purposes of determining Affordable Housing Cost. 
"Specific Adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct or unavoidable impact based on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
"Affordable Rent" means as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50053. The term applies to rental units. 
"Applicant" means a developer or owner who desires to construct five (5) or more dwelling units. 
"Child Care Facility" means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers. 
"Common Interest Development" means a community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, or a stock cooperative as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
"Concession or Incentive" means the concession(s) and incentive(s) as specified in Government Code Section 65915(k) and Section 9123. 
"Density Bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density, as of the date of application by the applicant to the City. The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 9121. 
"Density Bonus Units" means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter which exceed the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the development site. When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any fractions of units shall be rounded to the next whole number. 
"Development Standards" includes a site or construction conditions, including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an onsite open space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. 
"Director" means the City's Director of Community Development or designee. 
"Housing Authority" means the Tustin Housing Authority. 
"Housing Development" means construction projects consisting of five (5) or more residential units, including single-family, multifamily units, and mixed-use developments for sale or for rent. "Housing development" also includes a subdivision or common interest development, approved by the City and consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 65863.4 of the Government Code, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase of at least five (5) or more residential units. The residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one (1) development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located. 
"Housing Incentive Agreement" means a legally binding agreement between an applicant and the City and/or the Housing Authority to ensure that the requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. The agreement among other things shall establish the number of targeted units, size, location, terms and conditions of afford ability, production schedule, and may be part of a larger disposition and development or regulatory agreement. 
"Lower Income Household" means households whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Orange County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Major Transit Stop" means a site containing an existing rail station or the intersection of two (2) or more major bus routes with a frequency of service interval of fifteen (15) minutes or less during the morning and afternoon peak commute periods, and includes any major transit stop that is included in an applicable regional transportation plan. 
"Maximum Allowable Residential Density" means the density allowed under the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail with the exception of the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan, which excludes the density bonus allowed by this Chapter. 
"Non-Restricted Unit" means all units within a housing development excluding the targeted units. 
"Persons and Families of Moderate Income" means persons and families of low or moderate income whose income exceeds the income limit for lower income households and as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093. 
"Persons and families of Low or Moderate Income" means persons and families whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of area median income adjusted for family size by the State Department of Housing and Community Development in accordance with adjustment factors adopted and amended from time to time by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
"Senior Citizen" means, a person sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or fifty-five (55) years of age living in a senior citizen housing development. 
"Senior Citizen Housing Development" means, as more fully defined in Civil Code Section 51.3 and 51.12, a residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least thirty-five (35) dwelling units. 
"Special Needs Housing" means any housing, including supportive housing, intended to benefit, in whole or in part, persons identified as having special needs relating to any of the following: Mental health; physical disabilities; developmental disabilities, including, but not limited to, intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism; and risk of homelessness, or housing intended to meet the housing needs of persons eligible for mental health services funded in whole or in part by the Mental Health Services Fund, created by Section 5890 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 
"Targeted Unit(s)" means a dwelling unit(s) within a housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and is made available at an affordable rent or affordable housing cost to very low, low, or moderate households, or is(are) units in a senior housing development. 
"Unobstructed Access" means a resident is able to access a major transit stop without encountering natural or constructed impediments. 
"Very Low Income Households" means households whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Orange County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 3, 10-3-17)  
PART 2 - IMPLEMENTATION AND INCENTIVES 
 
9121 - IMPLEMENTATION 
A housing development meeting the requirements of this section is eligible for a density bonus. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. 
(a)  The City shall grant one (1) density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in Section 9122, concession(s) or incentive(s), as described in Section 9123, waivers or reductions of development standards, as described in Section 9124, and parking ratios, as described in Section 9131(h), when an applicant seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this Chapter, that will contain at least any one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of the total units of the housing development as targeted units affordable to lower income households; or 
(2)  Five (5) percent of the total units of the housing development as targeted units affordable to very low income households; or 
(3)  Senior citizen housing development or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799,5 of the Civil Code. For housing developments meeting such criteria, the density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent of the number of senior housing units; or 
(4)  Ten (10) percent of the total units in a common interest development for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. 
(5)  Ten (10) percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth as defined in Section 66025.9 of the Education Code, disabled veterans, as defined in Section 18541 of the Government Code, or homeless persons, as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 11301 et seq.). The units described in this subparagraph shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five (55) years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low income units. 
(6)  For purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus pursuant to Section 9121, the applicant who requests the density bonus pursuant to this subsection shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subparagraph (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this subsection. 
(7)  For the purposes of this Section, "total units" or "total dwelling units" do not include units added by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this Section or any local law granting a greater density bonus. 
(b)  When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the City as provided for in this subsection, the City shall grant a density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in Section 9122. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by subsection (a), up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of thirty-five (35) percent if an applicant seeks both the increase required pursuant to this subsection and subsection (a). All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the City to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this subsection if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. 
(2)  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development. 
(3)  The transferred land is at least one (1) acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Government Code Section 65583.2 for development of affordable housing on land suitable for residential development, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of affordable units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the residential development, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land, except that the City may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision (i) of Government Code Section 65583.2 if the design is not reviewed by the City prior to the time of transfer. 
(4)  The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with subsections 9131(d) and (e) which shall be recorded on the property at the time of dedication. 
(5)  The land is transferred to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. The City may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer. 
(6)  The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the City agrees, within one-quarter (¼) mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
(7)  A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. 
(c)  When an applicant agrees to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 9121(a) and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The City shall grant either of the following, unless it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities: 
(i)  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility, or 
(ii)  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
(2)  The City shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development that the following occur: 
(i)  The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the targeted units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 9131(d) and (e). 
(ii)  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, low income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, low income households, or families of moderate income pursuant to Section 9121(a). 
(d)  When an applicant to convert apartments to a condominium project pursuant to Section 9274 of this Code agrees to provide at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income, or fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households, and agrees to pay reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the City, the City shall grant either of the following, unless the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were previously provided under Government Code Section 65915: 
(1)  A density bonus to increase the number of units by twenty-five (25) percent over the number of apartments within the existing structure(s) proposed for conversion; or 
(2)  Other incentives of equivalent financial value, which may include the reduction or waiver of requirements which the City may otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. 
(3)  The City may place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households. 
(4)  The application to convert apartments to a condominium project may be submitted to the City for preliminary review prior to submittal of formal request for subdivision map approvals pursuant to Section 9141. The City shall notify applicant in writing of the manner in which City will comply with this subsection (d) within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal. 
(5)  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives or concessions under this subsection (d) if the apartment complex proposed for conversion includes a parcel(s) on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance or law that restricts rents to a level affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income; are subject to any form of rent or price control through the City's valid exercise of its police power; or are occupied by lower or very low income household unless the proposed condominium project replaces those units in accordance with Section 65915(c)(3)(B) of the Government Code and either of the following applies: 
(i)  The proposed condominium project, inclusive of the units replaced, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Section 9121(a), or 
(ii)  Each unit in the development, exclusive of manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household. 
(e)  When an applicant for a commercial development has entered into an agreement for partnered housing as described in paragraph (2) below, the City shall grant a development bonus to the commercial developer in accordance with Section 65915.7 of the Government Code and the following shall apply: 
(1)  Housing shall be constructed either on the site of the commercial development or on a site that meets the following criteria: 
(i)  Within the City of Tustin limits, 
(ii)  In close proximity to public amenities such as schools and employment centers, 
(iii)  Within one-half (½) mile of a major transit stop, and 
(2)  The agreement for partnered housing shall be between the commercial developer and the housing developer, shall identify how the commercial developer will contribute affordable housing, and shall be approved by the City. 
(3)  Affordable housing may be contributed by the commercial developer in one (1) of the following manners: 
(i)  The commercial developer may directly build the units. 
(ii)  The commercial developer may donate a portion of the site or property elsewhere to the affordable housing developer for use as a site for affordable housing. 
(iii)  The commercial developer may make a cash payment to the affordable housing developer that shall be used toward the cost of constructing the affordable housing project. 
(4)  In order to qualify for a development bonus under this section, a commercial developer shall partner with a housing developer that provides at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for low-income households or at least fifteen (15) percent of the total units for very-low income households. 
(5)  A development bonus pursuant to this section shall not include a reduction or waiver of any City requirement for payment of any fee payable by a commercial developer for the promotion or provision of affordable housing. 
(6)  The development bonus granted to the commercial developer shall mean incentives, mutually agreed upon by the developer and the City and may include any of the following: 
(i)  Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum allowable intensity in the General Plan. 
(ii)  Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum floor area ratio. 
(iii)  Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum height requirements. 
(iv)  Up to a twenty-percent reduction in minimum parking requirements. 
(v)  Use of a limited-use/limited-application elevator for upper floor accessibility. 
(vi)  An exception to the zoning ordinance or other land use regulation. 
(vii)  Other allowances or incentives offered to developers by the City pursuant to law or regulation. 
(7)  If the developer of the affordable units does not commence with construction of those units in accordance with the timelines provided in the agreement for partnered housing, the City may withhold certificates of occupancy for the commercial development under construction until the developer has completed construction of the affordable units. 
(8)  For purposes of this section, "partner" shall mean formation of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity recognized by the State of California in which the commercial development applicant and the affordable housing developer are each partners, members, shareholders or other participants, or a contract or agreement between a commercial development applicant and affordable housing developer for the development of both the commercial and affordable housing properties. 
(9)  This section shall be applicable to development projects submitted prior to January 1, 2022. As of January 1, 2022, Section 9121(e) is repealed in accordance with Section 65915.7 of the Government Code, as may be amended. 
(f)  A proposed housing development which includes a parcel or parcels which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five (5) year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to persons or families of lower or very low income shall be ineligible for a density bonus, or any other incentives or concessions under this Part unless the proposed housing development replaces those units in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(c)(3)(B), and either of the following applies: 
(1)  The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced pursuant to this paragraph, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Section 9121(a), or 
(2)  Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager's unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low income household. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 4, 10-3-17)  
9122 - DENSITY BONUS 
(1)  The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 9121(a) as follows: 
Target 
Group 	Percentage 
of 
Target Units 
(excluding Density 
Bonus Units) 	Density 
Bonus 	Additional 
Target 
Units 	Additional 
Density 
Bonus 
Low-Income 1 	10 percent 	20 percent 	Each 1 percent increase 	1.5 percent, maximum 35 percent 
Very Low Income 2 	5 percent 	20 percent 	Each 1 percent increase 	2.5 percent, maximum 35 percent 
Moderate Income 3 	10 percent 	5 percent 	Each 1 percent increase 	1.0 percent, maximum 35 percent 
Senior Citizen 
Housing 4 		20 percent 	N/A 	N/A 
Transitional foster youth, disabled veterans or homeless persons 5 	10 percent 	20 percent 		
Very Low Income 
under Land Donation 6 	10 percent 	15 percent 	Each 1 percent increase 	1.0 percent, maximum 35 percent 
 
1  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a)(1) 
2  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a)(2) 
3  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a)(4) 
4  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a)(3) 
5  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a)(5) 
6  For housing development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(b) 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 5, 10-3-17)  
9123 - INCENTIVES OR CONCESSIONS 
(a)  An applicant for a density bonus may submit to the City a proposal for the specific concession(s) or incentive(s) that the applicant requests pursuant to this Chapter, and may request a meeting with the City. The City must grant the concession(s) or incentive(s) requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following: 
(1)  The concession or incentive does not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 9131. 
(2)  The concession(s) or incentive(s) would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate- income households. 
(3)  The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law. 
(b)  The applicant shall be entitled to receive the following number of concessions or incentives: 
Target Group 	Target Units 
(Percent) 	Maximum Incentives 
Very Low Income 	5 	1 
	10 	2 
	15 	3 
Low Income 	10 	1 
	20 	2 
	30 	3 
Moderate Income 
(Condominium only) 	10 	1 
	20 	2 
	30 	3 
 
(c)  Incentives or concessions may include the following: 
(1)  A reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual costs reductions, including, but not limited to: 
a)  Reduced minimum lot size. 
b)  Reduced minimum setbacks. 
c)  Reduced minimum street standards such as reduced minimum street width. 
d)  Increased maximum lot coverage. 
e)  Increased building height. 
f)  Reduced ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required. 
(2)  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area, including the City's General Plan, where the proposed housing project will be located; or 
(3)  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
(4)  The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. This provision is declaratory of existing law. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 6, 10-3-17)  
9124 - WAIVERS OR REDUCTIONS 
(a)  An Applicant may submit to the City a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards and may request a meeting with the City. A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 9123. 
(b)  The waiver or reduction shall be granted unless the City Council adopts a written finding, based on substantial evidence, of either the following: 
(1)  The waiver or reduction of development standards would have a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. 
(2)  The waiver or reduction of development standards would have a specific adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 7, 10-3-17)  
9125 - OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL ASSISTANCE 
The City may approve additional assistance to facilitate the inclusion of more Targeted Units than are required by this Chapter. The City Council may approve any of the following in its sole discretion, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  A density bonus greater than that required in Section 9121 of this Chapter. 
(b)  A proportionately lower density bonus than what is required by this Chapter when the housing development does not meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
(c)  Waived, reduced, or deferred planning, plan check, building permit and/or development impact fees. 
(d)  Direct financial aid (e.g., housing set-aside funds, community development block grant funds) in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on or off site improvements, contribution to land, or construction costs. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 8, 10-3-17)  
PART 3 - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
9131 - STANDARD REQUIREMENTS 
(a)  Targeted units shall be built on-site, and be integrated within the housing development except those units built in conjunction with the donation and transfer of land pursuant to Section 9121(b). 
(b)  Targeted units shall be constructed concurrently with non-restricted units unless both the City and the applicant agree in the housing incentive agreement described in Section 9142 to an alternative schedule for development. 
(c)  Except for a senior citizen housing development, the number of bedrooms of the targeted units shall be generally equivalent to the bedroom mix of the non-restricted units of the housing development, as determined by the director and embodied in a housing incentive agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the applicant may include a higher proportion of targeted units with more bedrooms than the non-restricted units. 
(d)  An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure, continued affordability of all low- and very low income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for at least fifty-five (55) years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent. Owner-occupied units shall be available at an affordable housing cost. 
(e)  An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure that, the initial occupant of all for-sale units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus are persons and families of very low, low or moderate-income, as required, and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost. The City shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following apply to the equity-sharing agreement: 
(1)  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within five (5) years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote homeownership. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection, the City's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. 
(3)  For purposes of this subdivision, the City's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
(f)  The design and appearance of the targeted units shall be consistent with the design of the total housing development. Housing developments shall comply with all development standards applicable to housing in the City, except those which may be modified as provided by this Chapter. 
(g)  A housing incentive agreement shall be entered into between the applicant and City and/or the Housing Authority to memorialize among other things, the applicant's commitment to provide targeted units in accordance with this Chapter and other applicable provisions of State Law. The agreement shall be made a condition of the development permits (e.g., tract maps, parcel maps, site plans, planned development, conditional use permits, etc.) for all housing developments pursuant to this Chapter. 
(h)  Upon the request of the developer, the vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of disabled access and guest parking, of a development meeting the criteria of Section 9121(a), shall not exceed the following ratios: 
Number of Bedrooms 	Parking Ratio 
0—1 	1 space 
2—3 	2 spaces 
4 or more 	2.5 spaces 
 
(i)  Notwithstanding paragraph (h) above, if a development includes the maximum percentage of low- or very low income units provided for in Section 9122 and is located within one-half (½) mile of a major transit stop and there is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development, the developer may request the City not impose a vehicular parking ratio that exceeds one-half (0.5) spaces per bedroom, including handicapped and guest parking. 
(j)  If the development consists solely of rental units with an affordable housing cost to low income families, exclusive of a manager's unit(s), then the developer may request the City not impose a vehicular parking ratio, including handicapped and guest parking that exceeds the following ratios, if the development is: 
Located within one-half mile of a major transit stop with unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development 	Not to Exceed 0.5 spaces per unit 
For-rent Senior Citizen Housing Development as defined in Section 9112, and has either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile to fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day 	Not to Exceed 0.5 spaces per unit 
Special Needs Housing, as defined in Section 9112, and has either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile to fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day 	Not to exceed 0.3 spaces per unit 
 
(k)  If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not on-street parking. 
(l)  If the development meets the requirements of Section 9121, an applicant may request parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in Section 9122. A request pursuant to this subdivision shall not increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 9123(b). 
(m)  The City may, in its discretion, reduce or eliminate a parking requirement for developments of any type in any location. 
(n)  The City may impose a higher parking ratio not to exceed the ratio described in Section 9131(h)(1) if, based on substantial evidence found in a parking study prepared by the City within seven (7) years preceding the proposed project and which includes an analysis of parking availability, differing levels of transit access, walkability access to transit services, the potential for shared parking, the effect of parking requirements on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments, and the lower rates of car ownership for low- and very low income individuals, including seniors and special needs individuals. The City shall make findings, based on the parking study supporting the need for a higher parking ratio. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 9, 10-3-17)  
PART 4 - APPLICATION AND HOUSING INCENTIVES AGREEMENT 
 
9141 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW 
(a)  An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this Chapter, shall submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a permit for a housing development. Applicants are encouraged to schedule a pre-application conference with the director to discuss and identify potential application issues. No charge will be required for the pre-application conference. A preliminary application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Existing land uses on the property, including any existing rental unit(s). 
(2)  A request for density bonus by specifying the code section of which the density bonus shall be awarded. 
(3)  A description of the proposed housing development including the total number of units, targeted units by income category, and density bonus units bedroom mix. 
(4}  The zoning and general plan designations and assessor's parcel number(s) of the project site. 
{5)  The location of the targeted units within the housing development. 
(6)  The number of additional housing units requested as the density bonus for the housing development. 
(7)  A vicinity map and preliminary site, floor, and elevation plans, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway, and parking layout. 
(8)  A description of any requested concession(s), incentive(s), waiver(s), modified parking standards, and/or development bonus requested and an explanation of why each is needed. In requesting a concession, incentive, waiver, modified standard of parking or waiver or reduction of development standards, the applicant shall provide substantial facts in the form of a development pro-forma that the waiver or modification will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions. At a minimum, the development pro-forma shall include information identifying capital costs, equity investment, debt service, discount rate, revenues, vacancy allowance, operating expenses, net income or net operating income, pre-tax cash flow, after-tax cash flow, and return on investment and the actual cost reductions to be achieved. 
(9)  If a density bonus is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the conditions included in Section 9121(b) can be met. 
(10)  If an additional density bonus or concession or incentive is requested for a child care facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and provide evidence that each of the conditions in Section 9121(c) can be met. 
(11)  The applicant shall acknowledge in writing that a housing incentive agreement is required. 
(b)  An application for a density bonus and/or concession or incentive pursuant to this Chapter shall be processed concurrently with any other permit application(s) required for the housing development. At a minimum, the application shall contain all the information described in Section 9141(a) plus all other required information. Final approval or disapproval of an application shall be made by the City Council; upon recommendation of the Planning Commission for those housing developments which require Planning Commission entitlements; except that no approval shall be effective until the City or the Housing Authority (as applicable) and applicant have executed a housing incentive agreement. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the preliminary application, the City shall provide the applicant with a letter which identifies project issues of concern and the proposed concession or incentive that the director would recommend to the Planning Commission and City Council and the procedures for compliance with this Chapter. 
(d)  Where the applicant proposes that the City provide optional additional assistance as described in Section 9125 herein, the proposal shall be considered by the Planning Commission for recommendation to the City Council, or the Housing Authority where the Housing Authority funds are requested, for their preliminary approval unless such housing development does not require Planning Commission entitlements in which case, the City Council or the Housing Authority, as applicable, can authorize such assistance. A preliminary approval shall indicate the City Council's approval of the proposal for processing, but no optional additional assistance shall be deemed approved until embodied in the housing incentive agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 11, 10-3-17)  
9142 - HOUSING INCENTIVE AGREEMENT 
(a)  Once an application for a density bonus and/or concession or incentive is approved pursuant to Section 9141(b), a housing incentive agreement shall be prepared consistent with any conditions of approval related thereto subject to review and approval as to form by the City Attorney. The City (or the Housing Authority) approval and execution responsibilities for such agreement shall be as identified in the approval of the housing development application pursuant to Section 9141(b). Where such identification is not made by the City Council, such agreement shall be subject to approval by the City Council. 
(b)  The final approval of any documents as required by the agreement shall take place prior to or concurrent with final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for any parcels in the housing incentive agreement. The agreement shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder concurrent with the recording of the final map or within thirty (30) days of approval if a map is not processed and shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. 
(c)  The agreement shall include at least the following: 
(1)  The total number of units approved for the housing development including the number of targeted units. 
(2)  A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable housing cost. 
(3)  The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of targeted units. 
(4)  Affordability restrictions for low and very low income targeted units for at least fifty-five (55) years from the date the building(s) is first occupied or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, rental subsidy program. 
(5)  A schedule for completion and occupancy of the targeted units. 
(6)  A description of the concessions or incentive(s), or optional additional assistance being provided by the City or the Housing Authority. 
(7)  A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the City may identity tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement). 
(8)  Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this Chapter and State Law. 
(d)  In the case of for-sale housing developments or conversion of apartments to a condominium project consistent with this Chapter, the agreement shall provide for the following regarding the initial sale and use of targeted units during the applicable use restriction period and for the respective affordability period: 
(1)  Targeted units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible very low income households, low income households or persons and families of moderate income consistent with this Chapter or as approved by the City Council at an affordable housing cost or be made available to qualified residents in a senior citizen housing development. 
(2)  Targeted units shall be initially owner-occupied by eligible very tow, low income, or moderate income households, or by senior citizens in the case of a senior citizen housing development or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons. 
(3)  The agreement shall provide for the continued affordability of the low income and very low income targeted units for the applicable affordability period. 
(4)  The agreement shall provide for the recapture by the City of its proportionate share of appreciation upon resale of moderate income targeted units in accordance with this Chapter. 
(e)  In the case of rental housing developments, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of targeted units during the affordability period: 
(1)  The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining targeted units for qualified tenants; 
(2)  Provisions requiring the owner to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter and State Law. 
(Ord. No. 1484, Sec. 11, 10-3-17)  
CHAPTER 2 - ZONING  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
9211 - ADOPTION OF ZONING PLAN 
There is hereby adopted a Precise Zoning Plan for the City of Tustin. This Chapter shall be known by the following short title: "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Tustin." (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 1)  
9212 - PURPOSE OF CHAPTER 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for regulations for the systematic execution of the Land Use element of the Master Plan for the physical development of the City. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 2)  
9213 - DIVISIONAL DISTRICTS 
a 
Land Use Districts Enumerated 
There are hereby established districts into which the City is divided and which are designated as follows: 
Residential Districts 
R-A 	Residential Agricultural District 
E-4 	Residential Estate District 
R-1 	Single Family Residential District 
P-D 	Planned Development District 
R-2 	Duplex Residential District 
R-3 	Multiple Family Residential District 
MPH 	Mobilehome Park District (Ord. No. 329) 
R-4 	Suburban Residential District (Ord. No. 202) 
 
Commercial Districts 
Pr 	Professional District (Ord. No. 200) 
C-1 	Retail Commercial District 
C-2 	Central Commercial Districts 
C-3 	Heavy Commercial District 
C-G 	Commercial General District (Ord. No. 654) 
 
Industrial and Other Districts 
PM 	Planned Industrial District 
M 	Industrial District 
U 	Unclassified District 
P-C 	Planned Community District (Ord. No. 335) 
P&I 	Public and Institutional District (Ord. No. 525) 
 
(Ord. No. 157, Sec. 3) 
b 
Parking District Combined with Other Districts 
In addition to the districts established, there is hereby established one combining district which may be combined with any of the districts set forth; said district to be designated as follows: Combining Parking Districts or "P" Districts. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 3.1) 
c 
District Boundaries 
The boundaries of the districts designated and established herein are as shown on that certain map entitled "ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF TUSTIN" incorporated herein and made a part of this Chapter by reference as if herein fully set forth and to which reference is hereby made for full particulars as to the location of the areas shown within said districts. The Districts shown are hereby declared to be subject to the regulations pertaining to such designated districts as said regulations are set forth in Parts 2, 3, 4 and 5. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 3.2) 
d 
Uncertain Boundaries 
Where the exact boundaries of a district cannot be readily or exactly ascertained by reference to the Zoning Map of the City of Tustin, the boundary shall be deemed to be along the nearest street or lot line, as the case may be. If a district boundary line divides or splits a lot, the lot shall be deemed to be included within the district which is the more restrictive. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to acreage. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 3.3) 
e 
Prezoning of Unincorporated Territory 
Said Zoning Map of the City of Tustin may also contain, from time to time, zones designated for areas not lying within the corporate boundaries of the City of Tustin. The designations of zones fixed by prezoning pursuant to this Section of any unincorporated territory adjoining the City shall become the effective designated zone of said property at the same time that the annexation of such territory becomes effective. Any territory hereafter included within the City of Tustin, which, at the time its annexation becomes effective does not have a zone designated by prezoning, shall be designated by the zone which the territory bore under the County Zoning Ordinance, provided this Chapter has a district bearing the same designation. Any such land which did not bear a designation under the County Zoning Ordinance which is contained in this Chapter shall be designated as being in the "U", or Unclassified district. (Ord. No. 303, Sec. 1)  
9214 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Except as provided in Parts 2, 3 and 4, no structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or moved; nor shall any building or land be used except as hereinafter specifically provided and allowed in the districts in which such structure and land are located. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4)  
PART 2 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
9220 - RESIDENTIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Site Development Standards for primary residential uses by Zoning District. Site development standards for primary residential uses shall comply with the standards listed in Table 1, unless otherwise noted. For site development standards for additional permitted or conditionally permitted uses refer to districts in Part 2 of this Chapter. 
Table 1: Primary Residential Uses 
Zoning 	Minimum Lot 
Area/Per 
Family Unit 	Minimum Lot Width 	Lot 
Coverage 	Building 
Height 	Front 
Yard (1) 	Interior Side Yard (1) 	Corner Side Yard (1) 	Rear Yard (1) 
RA Residential Agricultural District (Sec. 9221) 	7,200 sq. ft./7,200 sq. ft. 	Linear frontage 60 feet/Cul-de-sac frontage 40 feet 	40 percent 	30 feet 	20 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 	5 feet, but no less than 1,000 sq. ft. clear and unobstructed usable open space on rear 1/3 of lot 
E4 Residential Estate District (Sec. 9222) 	10,000 sq. ft./7,500 sq. ft. 	80 feet 	40 percent 	30 feet 	20 feet 	10 percent of lot width 	10 percent of lot width 	20 percent lot depth, but no less than 1,000 sq. ft. clear and unobstructed usable open space on rear 1/3 of lot 
R1 Single-Family Residential District (2) (Sec. 9223) 	7,200 sq. ft./7,200 sq. ft. 	60 feet 	40 percent 	30 feet 	20 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 	5 feet, but no less than 1,000 sq. ft. clear and unobstructed usable open space on rear 1/3 of lot 
R2 Duplex Residential District (2) (Sec. 9225) 	7,200 sq. ft./3,500 sq. ft. 	60 feet 	50 percent 	35 feet (See 9225c) 	20 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
R3 Multiple Family Residential District (2) (Sec. 9226) 	7,000 sq. ft./1,750 sq. ft. 	70 feet 	65 percent 	35 feet (See 9226c) 	15 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
R4 Suburban Residential District (Sec. 9228) 	7,200 sq. ft./3,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	2 stories or 35 feet (See 9228c) 	20 feet 	5 feet 	10 feet 	25 feet 
MHP Mobile Home Park District (see Section 9227b for additional development standards) (Sec. 9227) 	Minimum 5-acre site for mobile home park. Travel trailers shall not exceed 10 percent of total spaces in mobile home park 	N/A 	75 percent 	30 feet 	Trailer park - None. Individual lot - 5 feet (measure from curb to actual structure, hitch excluded) 	Trail park - None. Individual lot - 3 feet 	Trail park - None. Individual lot - 3 feet 	N/A 
PD Planned Development District (see Section 9224e and 9224f for additional development standards (Sec. 9224)) 	10,000/- 	N/A 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 	As determined with adoption of P-D District 
 
(1) If front on to secondary or primary highway refer to section 9271u 
(2) If development is located within the Cultural Resources District (CR), refer to Section 9252j for additional standards 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.1, 5-21-13)  
9221 - RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (RA) 
a 
Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
In the Residential Agricultural District (RA) only the following uses, (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as otherwise specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Light farming, except commercial dairies, commercial kennels, commercial rabbit, fox, goat or hog farms, or commercial chicken or poultry ranches. 
3.  Accessory uses normally incidental to a single-family dwelling or light farming. This is not to be construed as permitting any commercial use. 
4.  Crop and tree farming. 
5.  Home occupations in accordance with this Chapter. 
6.  Large family day care homes (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa). 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Residential Agricultural District (RA) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Places of Worship, schools, parks, playgrounds, public utility. 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 20,000 square feet for Places of Worship, 5 acres for schools, public utility and other uses as specified in a Conditional Use Permit. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet, unless otherwise indicated by Zoning Map. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. 
2.  The maintenance of not over two horses or cows for private use provided that minimum land area be 30,000 square feet. 
(a)  Minimum building site: 30,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet, unless otherwise indicated by Zoning Map. 
(d)  Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet. 
3.  The maintenance of not more than 25 rabbits or similar small animals or commercial chicken raising. 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 1 acre. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet, unless otherwise indicated by Zoning Map. 
(e)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 20 feet. 
Interior lot line: 10 feet. 
(f)  Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.2, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.1; Ord. No. 299, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a; Ord. No. 911, Sec. 1, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10.  
9222 - RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT (E4) 
a 
Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
In the Residential Estate District (E4) only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Accessory buildings only if constructed simultaneously with or subsequent to the main building on the same lot, and accessory uses normally incidental to single-family residences. This is not to be construed as permitting any commercial uses. 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(b)  Maximum lot coverage: 30 percent of rear yard. 
(c)  Minimum side yard setback: 1 foot. 
(d)  Minimum rear yard setback: 1 foot except 5 feet required on an alley. 
3.  Home occupations in accordance with this Chapter. 
4.  Large family day care homes (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa). 
5.  Accessory dwelling units (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271jj). (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 2, 4-4-17) 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Residential Estate District (E4) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Places of Worship, schools, parks, playgrounds, public utility, crop and tree farming. 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 20,000 square feet for Places of Worship; 5 acres for schools, public utility and other uses as specified in a Conditional Use Permit. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet, unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 10 percent of lot width. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 percent of lot depth. 
2.  Accessory buildings used as guest quarters or guest houses, provided no cooking facility is installed or maintained and no compensation in any form is received in exchange for lodging in the guest quarters or guest house, subject to a recorded deed restriction approved by the City. (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 3, 4-4-17) 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(b)  Maximum lot coverage: 30 percent of rear yard. 
(c)  Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(d)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard setback: 5 feet. 
(f)  Accessory buildings used as guest quarters or guest houses shall not be allowed on lots developed with an accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 3, 4-4-17) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.3, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.3; Ord. No. 892, Sec. 2, 8-15-83; Ord. No. 911, Sec. 2, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1271, Sec. II, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10.  
9223 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R1) 
a 
Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
In the Single-Family Residential District (R1) only the following uses (or uses which in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Single-Family dwellings. 
2.  Accessory buildings only if constructed simultaneously with or subsequent to the main building on the same lot. 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width at property line: 40 feet on cul-de-sacs at property line. 
(c)  Maximum lot coverage: 30 percent of rear yard. 
(d)  Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard setback: 5 feet, but not less than 1,000 square feet clear and unobstructed on rear 1/3 of lot. 
3.  Accessory uses normally incidental to single-family residences. This is not to be construed as permitting any commercial uses. 
(a)  Minimum side yard setback: 1 foot. 
(b)  Minimum rear yard setback: 1 foot except 5 feet required on an alley. 
4.  Small family day care home subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa. 
5.  Home occupations in accordance with this Chapter. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a) 
6.  Large family day care homes (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271 aa). 
7.  Accessory dwelling units (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271jj - see Section 9252j2 for standards applicable to accessory dwelling units in the cultural resource district). (Ord. No. 1454, Sec. 2, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 4, 4-4-17) 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Single-Family Residential District (R1) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Places of Worship, schools, parks, playgrounds, public utility, crop and tree farming. 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 20,000 square feet for Places of Worship, 5 acres for schools, public utility and other uses as specified in Conditional Use Permit. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet, unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. 
2.  Accessory buildings (except in the cultural resource district) used as guest quarters, or guest houses, provided no cooking facility is installed or maintained and no compensation in any form is received in exchange for lodging in the guest quarters or guest house, subject to a recorded deed restriction approved by the City. (Ord. No. 1454, Sec. 3, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 5, 4-4-17) 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(b)  Maximum lot coverage: 30 percent of rear yard. 
(c)  Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet, unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(d)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard setback: 5 feet. 
(f)  Accessory buildings used as guest quarters shall not be allowed on lots developed with an accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 5, 4-4-17) 
3.  Public or private parking lots for automobiles when adjacent to any "C" or "M" District, subject to the requirements of the City's parking regulations, identified in Part 6 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.4, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.2; Ord. No. 299, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a; Ord. No. 563; Ord. No. 911, Sec. 2, 8-3-87; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1271, Sec. III, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10.  
9224 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (P-D) 
a 
Purpose 
The P-D, Planned Development District, is hereby authorized to provide for garden apartment development, regulated so as to cover a minimum of ground area and provide a maximum of open space. This zone will provide most of the desirable residential characteristics found in single family residence areas. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar), with the exception of home occupations (which are a permitted use), may be conditionally permitted in the Planned Development District (P-D) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  Any use permitted or conditionally permitted in any residentially zoned district is conditionally permitted in the Planned Development District (PD) (except accessory dwelling units are not permitted). (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 6, 4-4-17) 
2.  Apartment houses. 
3.  Bungalow courts. 
4.  Condominiums (as defined in the Civil Code). 
5.  Community apartment projects (as defined in the Business and Professions Code). 
6.  Day care center (subject to Section 9271aa2). 
7.  Large family day care home (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa). 
8.  Manager's office - one (1) permanent resident manager's office devoted solely to the rental of the dwelling units on the same parcel, provided said office and surrounding grounds retain a residential character. 
9.  Rest homes, extended care facilities, convalescent hospitals and sanitariums (provided all provisions are complied with as set forth for this district). 
10.  Stock cooperatives (as defined in the Business and Professions Code). 
(Ord. No. 175, Secs. 2, 8; Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a; Ord. No. 372, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 553, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 790, Sec. 1, 2-20-79; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
c 
Submittal of Preliminary Drawings 
1.  Except as provided in Section 9299 of this Code a use authorized through a Conditional Use Permit in this district shall comply with Section 9291. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.5, 5-21-13) 
2.  Ingress and egress of firefighting equipment, fire hydrants and other fire protection facilities are subject to approval of the Fire Chief. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
d 
Submittal of Final Development Plans. Detail to be shown: 
1.  Every application for a building permit for the development of property in the P-D District shall be re-submitted for approval to the Planning Commission, and shall be accompanied by detailed architectural drawings, and plot plans, all to a workable scale, showing the elevation and location of the proposed buildings; proposed location and type of landscaping; use and treatment of grounds around such buildings or structures; off-street parking, physical features such as trees, hydrants, electric and telephone poles, flood lights, driveways, fences, signs, proposed drainage, sewage disposal facilities and any other pertinent information considered appropriate by the applicant or Planning Commission to bring the development within the purpose of this district. 
2.  All plans shall show thereon hose cabinets, wet stand pipes with siamese connections and any other facilities considered to provide adequate fire protection. Said location and type of such facilities shall be approved by the Fire Chief of the City of Tustin prior to the approval of the development plans by the Planning Commission as set forth in this Section. 
3.  Water drainage and run-off shall, also, be approved by the City Engineer of Tustin, prior to approval of development plans by the Planning Commission. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
e 
Development Standards 
1.  Any development in this District shall be surrounded by a solid redwood or cedar fence or masonry wall or combination thereof. However, nothing herein shall require the construction of the aforementioned fence along any property line abutting a street, alley or at driveway entrances and exits. 
2.  All required yards shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
3.  If any parcel zoned P-D is to be developed in accordance with the provisions set forth for this District and said parcel abuts a street not improved to City standard, the owner shall dedicate the necessary street easement to the City and improve said street so as to be in accordance with the design standards and specifications of The City prior to the issuance of a utility release by the Building Department. 
4.  All trash collection and garbage collection areas shall be surrounded on at least three (3) sides by a five-foot fence or block wall, with adequate access to and from these areas for trash and garbage collection vehicles. 
5.  Due to the complexity of Planned Development, it is illogical and impractical to define herein an exact pattern for the arrangement of group dwellings for a parcel involving two (2) or more main dwellings; however, it is the intent of this District to provide a functional and non-monotonous orientation of buildings with a maximum of open space around each main building consisting of courts, parkways and patio areas all oriented so as to provide separation of vehicular traffic from play areas and recreational areas for children and adults. 
6.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
7.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
8.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
9.  All interior streets and private drives shall be constructed to the standard set forth by the City prior to the dedication of any such streets to the City. Streets not so constructed need not be accepted by the City. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
f 
Approval of Final Development Plans by Planning Commission 
The Planning Commission shall approve or cause to be approved the aforementioned development plans, as set forth in Paragraph d above, if all provisions for this District are complied with and the development is within the spirit and intent of this District, as determined by the Planning Commission. All development shall be in accordance with the approved plans prior to a utility release by the Building Department. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
g 
Specific Standards 
1.  Height limit 
(a)  None, except as limited herein below. 
(b)  When a lot in the PD district abuts at any point along its property lines or is directly across a street or alley from property zoned R-A, E-4 or R-1 (developed or undeveloped), no main building shall be erected on said PD lot to a height to exceed one (1) story, and/or twenty (20) feet, whichever is more restrictive, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said R-A, E-4 or R-1 zoned property, unless the Planning Agency shall grant a conditional use permit thereof. 
(c)  Further, no main building shall be erected on said PD lot to a height to exceed three (3) stories, and/or fifty (50) feet, whichever is more restrictive, within three hundred (300) feet of said R-A, E-4 or R-1 zoned (developed or undeveloped) property, unless the Planning Agency shall grant a conditional use permit thereof. (Ord. No. 248, Sec. 4; Ord. No. 862, Sec. 2, 12-21-81) 
2.  Side yard 
(a)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the district abuts property in the R-A, E-4 or R-1 District, each dwelling shall have a required side yard along said property line of not less than fifteen (15) feet with landscaping. 
(b)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the P-D District abuts property in the P-D District or any other District not set forth in Paragraph (a) above, there shall be a required side yard along that side property line of not less than five (5) feet regardless of the height of the dwelling on the lot. 
(c)  When any interior side property line of a lot in the District abuts a lot or lots having zone classifications of R-A, E-4, or R-1 and any other District, Paragraph (a) above shall apply in the determination of the required side yard along that entire interior side property line. 
(d)  On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than ten (10) feet. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
3.  Rear yard 
(a)  When any lot zoned P-D has a rear property line abutting property in the R-A, E-4 or R-1 District, each dwelling shall have a required rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet with landscaping. 
(b)  When any lot zoned P-D has a rear property line abutting a lot in any other district not set forth in paragraph (a) above, there shall be a required rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(c)  When any lot in the P-D District has a rear property line common to a property line of a lot or lots having zone classification of R-A, E-4 or R-1 and any other district, paragraph (a) above shall apply in the determination of the required rear yard along that entire rear property line. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8) 
4.  Minimum gross floor area 
(a)  The following uses shall be subject to the following minimum square feet of gross floor area per unit exclusive of garages, carports and unenclosed porches and patios. 
Bachelor units: 450 square feet 
One bedroom units: 650 square feet 
Two bedroom units: 800 square feet 
(b)  Further, for each additional bedroom in excess of two (2) bedrooms in an apartment unit, there shall be an additional one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8; Ord. No. 790, Sec. 2, 2-20-79) 
5.  Minimum number of square feet required for each housekeeping unit 
There shall be no minimum lot size established in any P-D Planned Development. However, the minimum number of square feet of land required for each family or housekeeping unit in a Planned Development shall be as designated by the number following the symbol "P-D" on the particular Official Zoning Map. This provision shall not govern any P-D Planned Development Zone established prior to the adoption of this Subsection. (Ord. No. 248, Sec. 3) 
6.  Open space requirement 
A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of open space recreation area shall be provided per dwelling unit within a common designated recreation area. Private attached ground level patios may be credited toward the open space requirement if restricted to only permit covers open on three (3) sides. In addition to the recreation area requirement, all structural setback areas, excluding driveways and walkways shall be landscaped. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8; Ord. No. 851, Sec. 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 906, Sec. 1, 2-21-84) 
7.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 573, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 906, Sec. 2, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
8.  Subdivision of property development under the district 
Upon completion of a property development in the P-D District, no portion of the property involved in said development shall be severed or sold, unless said severed parcel and the development thereon complies with all provisions set forth for the P-D District and is approved by the Director of Community Development prior to such subdivision. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 8; Ord. No. 906, Sec. 3, 2-21-84) 
9.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9225 - DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2) 
a 
Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
In the Duplex Residential District (R-2), only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses permitted in the R-1 District, subject to the development standards specified in the R-1 District, unless otherwise listed. 
(a)  Minimum lot area per family unit: 3,500 square feet. 
2.  Duplexes or two detached single-family dwellings on the same lot. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.6, 5-21-13) 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Duplex Residential District (R2) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses conditionally permitted in the R1 District, subject to the development standards specified in the R1 District, unless otherwise listed. 
2.  Triplexes (single structure): 
(a)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site area: 7,200 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 60 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 50 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet. 
(h)  Minimum lot area per family unit: 3,500 square feet. 
3.  Day care center (as defined in the Health and Safety Code). (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.7, 5-21-13) 
Prior History of Secs. a, b.—Ord. No. 299, Sec. 4; Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a; Ord. No. 733, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1271, Sec. V, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10 
c 
Maximum Height, Exception 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this Section 9225, when a lot in the R-2 District abuts at any point along its property lines or is directly across a street or alley from property zoned R-A, E-4 or R-1 (developed or undeveloped), no main building shall be erected on said R-2 lot to a hight to exceed one (1) story, and/or twenty (20) feet, whichever is more restrictive, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said R-A, E-4 or R-1 zoned property, unless the Planning Agency shall grant a conditional use permit therefor. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.5; Ord. No. 862, Sec. 2, 12-21-81)  
9226 - MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R3) 
a 
Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
In the Multifamily Residential District (R3), only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses permitted in the R2 District, subject to the development standards specified in the R2 District, unless otherwise listed. 
(a)  Minimum landscape open space: 35 percent. 
(b)  Minimum lot area per family unit: 1,750 square feet. 
2.  Multiple family dwellings, apartment houses. 
3.  Accessory building normally incidental to any of the above. This shall not be construed as permitting any commercial use or occupation other than those specifically listed. 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses and Development Standards 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Multiple Family Residential District (R3) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses conditionally permitted in R-2 District, subject to the development standards specified in the R-2 District, unless otherwise listed. 
2.  Boarding houses. 
(a)  Maximum height: 2 stories or 35 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 7,500 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 70 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 75 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
(h)  Minimum common open space for boarding houses: Three hundred (300) square feet per boarding or rooming house and fifty (50) square feet per occupant. Common open space shall consist of unenclosed or partially enclosed areas set aside for passive and active recreational uses. Common open space shall not include driveways, parking areas, or required front and side yard setback areas. 
(i)  Minimum private open space for boarding houses: Twenty-five (25) square feet per occupant. Private open space shall consist of partially enclosed areas set aside for passive and active recreational uses that are assigned to individual occupants and/or rooms, such as private patios or balconies. 
3.  Community centers, social halls, lodges, clubs. 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 20,000 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet, unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. 
4.  Rest homes, extended care facilities, convalescent hospitals, and sanitariums: 
(a)  Maximum height: 40 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 7,500 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 70 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 75 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet. 
5.  Condominiums (as defined in the Civil Code), Community Apartment Projects (as defined in the Business and Professions Code), and Stock Cooperatives (as defined in the Business and Professions Code) when developed, or to be developed, pursuant to the criteria of the Planned Development District. 
6.  Professional office use: 
(a)  Maximum height: 40 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 7,000 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 70 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: 75 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet (unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Maps). 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet; 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet. 
7.  Swim schools. 
c 
Maximum Height, Exception 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this Section 9226, when a lot in the R3 District abuts at any point along its property lines or is directly across a street or alley from property zoned RA, E4 or R1 (developed or undeveloped), no main building shall be erected on said R3 lot to a height to exceed one (1) story, and/or twenty (20) feet, whichever is more restrictive, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said RA, E4 and R1 zoned property, unless the Planning Agency shall grant a conditional use permit thereof. 
d 
Minimum Open Space Requirements 
1.  Private outdoor open space - Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum private open space of one hundred (100) square feet per dwelling unit. This shall be provided in the form of an appurtenant private patio, deck or balcony. 
2.  Common open space - Three hundred (300) square feet per dwelling unit located within common, designated recreational areas. Private attached ground level patios may be included if open on three (3) sides. Areas not available for open space credit include driveways, parking lots or required front and side yard setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.8, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2a; Ord. No. 553, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 733, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 790, Sec. 3, 2-20-79; Ord. No. 805, Sec. 1, 7-2-79; Ord. No. 906, Sec. 6, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1271, Sec. V, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
9227 - MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP) 
a 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
In the Mobile Home Park District (MHP), only the following uses (or uses which in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission are similar) may be permitted subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and the development standards of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
1.  Accessory buildings and service structures (permanent) 
2.  Mobile home park 
3.  Travel trailer parks 
(Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
b 
Development Standards 
Development standards shall be the following: 
1.  Minimum building site: 
(a)  Mobile home park or travel trailer park: five (5) acres. 
(b)  Individual lot: The total area of all trailer and/or mobile home spaces shall be equal to or greater than the product of the total number of spaces multiplied by two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet. 
(c)  Travel trailer spaces, with a minimum lot size of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, shall not exceed ten percent of the total spaces in a mobile home park. 
2.  Maximum density: 
(a)  Mobile home park: ten (10) dwelling units per net acre (public streets excluded). 
(b)  Travel trailer park: fifteen (15) dwelling units per net acre. 
(c)  Any lawfully established and developed parcel which is legal and conforming or legally nonconforming as of the date of the adoption of this subsection, and with the acquisitions of public rights-of-way by a public agency would result in densities exceeding the density permitted by the Zoning Code or would result in an increased nonconformity with regard to density shall not be considered legal nonconforming pursuant to Section 9227b2 and Section 9273 of the Zoning Code with regard to density only, provided that all other provisions of the Zoning Code are satisfied. 
3.  Maximum height: 30 feet. 
4.  Minimum yards and setbacks. 
(a)  Front yard: 
Trailer park - None 
Individual lot - Five (5) feet (measured from curb to actual structure, hitch excluded) 
(b)  Side yard: 
Trailer park - None 
Individual lot - Three (3) feet 
5.  Maximum lot coverage - 75 percent 
6.  Recreation area required: 
A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of recreational space shall be provided for each trailer or mobile home lot in the park. If more than twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces in the park are occupied by persons having one (1) or more children under the age of fifteen (15), an additional fifty (50) square feet of recreational space shall be provided for each trailer or mobile home lot so occupied. 
7.  Fences and walls: 
Any mobile home or travel trailer park shall be surrounded by a six-foot, sight-obscuring fence or wall, of uniform treatment, except within twenty-five (25) feet of an entrance to, or exit from, a public street where such fence or wall shall have a maximum height of three (3) feet unless greater height is specifically approved in the conditional use permit. 
8.  Clothes drying: 
An enclosed area screened from view shall be provided for the outdoor drying of clothes. No clothes drying shall be permitted on the individual lot unless done within an enclosed structure. 
9.  Irrigation of landscaped areas: 
All landscaped areas, other than on individual spaces, shall be provided with an irrigation system. 
10.  Architectural approval: 
All recreational and service structures, landscaping and the exterior fence constructed in a mobile home or travel trailer park shall be approved by the Architectural Committee. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.9, 5-21-13)  
9228 - SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R4) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Suburban Residential District (R4) only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed, subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Accessory buildings or uses (see Sections 9223a2 and 9223a3 for development standards). 
2.  Farming (general) of agricultural crops on the land and grazing but not including, any poultry or animal raising enterprise conducted on a commercial basis. 
3.  Home occupations in accordance with this Chapter. 
4.  Recreation areas (public) and buildings, parks, playfields and playgrounds. 
5.  Residential uses (all of a permanent character, placed in permanent locations). 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Two (2) or more detached one-family dwellings. 
(c)  Two-family dwellings. 
(d)  Multiple-family dwellings and apartment houses. 
6.  Large family day care home (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa). 
7.  Accessory dwelling units, on lots development with one (1) single-family dwelling (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271(jj). (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 7, 4-4-17) 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Suburban Residential District (R4) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9220 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Boarding houses (see Section 9226b2 for additional development standards). 
2.  Day care center (subject to Section 9271aa2). 
3.  Parks (private) and recreation areas, recreation buildings, playfields and playgrounds, but not including amusement parks or other parks of a commercial nature. 
4.  Places of worship, museums, libraries, public schools and colleges, private schools and colleges. 
5.  Rest homes, extended care facilities, convalescent hospitals, and sanitariums. 
6.  Utility structures - Electric distribution substations, gas metering and regulating stations and other similar public utility structures and uses rendering direct services to the public in a local area. 
c 
Maximum Height, Exception 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this Section 9228, when a lot in the R4 District abuts at any point along its property lines or is directly across a street or alley from property zoned RA, E4 or R1 (developed or undeveloped), no main building shall be erected on said R4 lot to a height to exceed one (1) story, and/or twenty (20) feet, whichever is more restrictive, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said RA, E4 or R1 zoned property, unless the Planning Agency shall grant a conditional use permit thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.10, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 372, Secs. 3 and 4; Ord. No. 733, Sec. 6; Ord. No. 862, Sec. 4, 12-21-81; Ord. No. 906, Sec. 7, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 911, Sec. 5, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1225, Sec. 2, 1-17-00; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10.  
PART 3 - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 
9230 - COMMERCIAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Site Development Standards for Commercial uses by Zoning District. Site development standards for Commercial uses shall comply with the standards listed in Table 1, unless otherwise noted. For site development standards for additional permitted or conditionally permitted uses refer to districts in Part 3 of this Chapter. 
Table 1: Commercial Site Development Standards 
Zoning 	Minimum Lot Area 	Minimum Lot Width 	Lot 
Coverage 	Building Height 	Front Yard (1) 	Interior Side Yard (1) 	Corner Side Yard (1) 	Rear Yard (1) 
PR Professional Residential District (3) (Sec. 9231) 	7,200 sq. ft. 	N/A 	N/A 	Two stories or 35 feet 	20 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet for one (1) story building, 10 feet for two (2) story building 
C1 Retail Commercial District (Service Stations see Sec. 9232b26) 	5,000 sq. ft. 	50 feet 	N/A 	35 feet 	None 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 5 feet when property abuts "R" District 
C2 Central Commercial District (3) (Sec. 9233) 	200 sq. ft. 	N/A 	100 
percent (2) 	50 feet 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None 
C3 Heavy Commercial District (Sec. 9234) 	2,000 sq. ft. 	N/A 	100 
percent (2) 	50 feet 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 10 feet when property abuts "R" District 	None, 5 feet when abutting on an alley (4) 
CG Commercial General District (Sec. 9235) 	3,000 sq. ft. 	70 feet 	100 
percent (2) 	35 feet 	10 feet 	None, 10 feet from ultimate street right-of-way or adjoining residential lot 	None, 10 feet from ultimate street right-of-way or adjoining residential lot 	15 feet when abutting a Single-Family Dwelling, 5 feet when abutting an alley or private easement 
 
(1) If it fronts onto secondary or primary highway then refer to Section 9271u. 
(2) Less parking and landscaping requirements, subject to General Provisions for permitted uses only. 
(3) If development is located within the Central Resources District (CR), refer to Section 9252j for additional standards. 
(4) For Conditional Permitted Uses as specified in Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.11, 5-21-13)  
9231 - PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT (Pr) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Professional District (Pr), only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Accessory buildings and uses (except that no building site may be used simultaneously for residential and professional purposes). 
2.  Advertising agencies. 
3.  Automobile broker (office-use only). 
4.  Banks, financial institutions, and savings and loans (no drive-thru). 
5.  Collection agencies. 
6.  Home occupations in accordance with this Chapter. 
7.  Insurance agencies. 
8.  Interior decorator or artist studios. 
9.  Land and property management. 
10.  Management, technical or professional consultants. 
11.  Office uses, including professional and general (as defined in Section 9297). 
12.  Personnel agencies. 
13.  Pharmacies, dispensing and selling only drugs, medicines and health. 
14.  Photographers. 
15.  Single-family dwellings and those accessory structures, buildings and uses normally incidental to the uses of a building or premises for single-family occupancy subject to the requirements of the R1 District. 
16.  Social work. 
17.  Stock brokers. 
18.  Title insurance companies. 
19.  Travel agencies. 
20.  Tutoring facilities. 
b 
General Conditions and Regulations for Permitted Uses 
1.  General conditions and regulations of building and site use for all permitted uses except single-family dwellings and those accessory structures, buildings and uses normally incident to the uses of a building or premises for single-family occupancy, subject to the requirements of the R1 District: 
(a)  Except for parking areas, which may be unenclosed, all uses shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(b)  All storage shall be within an enclosed building, and shall be limited to the accessory storage of supplies utilized in the business conducted upon the premises. 
(c)  All portions of the building site, exclusive of structures, parking areas, driveways and walkways, shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(d)  No certificate of use and occupancy shall be granted until these requirements are met. 
c 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Professional District (Pr) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Adult entertainment booking agencies (as defined in Section 3141 and subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 9). 
2.  Chiropractic offices, where massage services are provided as an accessory use by anyone other than a state-licensed chiropractor or other exempted professional as defined in Section 3665 of the Tustin City Code (subject to Article 3, Chapter 6, Part 4 of the Tustin City Code). (Ord. No. 1462, Sec. V, 11-3-15) 
3.  Drive-thru facilities. (Ord. No. 1462, Sec. V, 11-3-15) 
4.  Professional, instructional, motivational and/or seminar schools. (Ord. No. 1462, Sec. V, 11-3-15) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.12, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 324; Ord. No. 957, Sec. 2, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 1170, Sec. 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
9232 - RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C-1) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Retail Commercial District (C1), only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  General retail businesses, exemplified by the following list, when conducted within a building: 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales (off-site) located within a building and permitted business with at least 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and where the alcoholic beverage sales area within the building occupies no more than 10 percent of the gross floor area. (Ord. No. 1493, Sec. 2, 9-4-18) 
(b)  Antiques and curios. 
(c)  Appliance stores (including repairs). 
(d)  Art galleries. 
(e)  Bakeries. 
(f)  Bicycle sales (including repairs). 
(g)  Books and stationeries. 
(h)  Ceramics (not including molding, casting or manufacturing by any process). 
(i)  Clothing. 
(j)  Confectioneries. 
(k)  Department stores. 
(l)  Drug stores (including sundries and notions). 
(m)  Dry goods. 
(n)  Florist shops. 
(o)  Food markets. 
(p)  Furniture sales (new or used/consignment). 
(q)  Hardware stores. 
(r)  Household goods and furnishings. 
(s)  Jewelry stores (including repair and watch making). 
(t)  Leather goods. 
(u)  Musical supplies and instruments. 
(v)  News stands. 
(w)  Office supplies and equipment. 
(x)  Paint and wallpaper supplies. 
(y)  Religious supplies. 
(z)  Secondhand sales without pawn. 
(aa)  Shoe stores. 
(bb)  Sporting goods (not including boat and motor sales). 
(cc)  Variety stores/gift shops. 
2.  Service businesses, exemplified by the following list, including any retail sales incidental thereto, when conducted within a building: 
(a)  Banks, financial institutions and savings and loans (including those providing drive-thru service). 
(b)  Barber shops. 
(c)  Beauty parlors. 
(d)  Body art facilities (as defined in Section 3141, and subject to the requirements of Part 4 of Chapter 1 of Article 4). 
(e)  Dry-cleaning or laundry agencies (pick-up and delivery only). 
(f)  Equipment rental business conducted within a building (light materials, i.e. party supplies, household appliances, small household tools, medical equipment, etc.). 
(g)  Instructional Studios. 
(h)  Laundromats or other self-service laundering facilities. 
(i)  Locksmiths. 
(j)  Massage establishments. 
(k)  Pet Grooming. 
(l)  Reprographics. 
(m)  Restaurants (not including drive-ins/drive-thru). 
(n)  Reverse vending machines (as defined by and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271(bb)). 
(o)  Seamstress or millinery shops. 
(p)  Shoe or luggage repair shops. 
(q)  Smog check stations with service bays in conjunction with approved service station. 
(r)  Tailor shops. 
(s)  Travel agencies. 
(t)  Tutoring facilities. 
3.  Office uses, including professional and general (as defined in Section 9297 and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271(ee)). 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Retail Commercial District (C1) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Adult entertainment booking agencies (as defined in Section 3141 and subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 9). 
2.  Alcoholic beverage sales establishments subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271(dd) and the Planning Commission's Guidelines for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments. 
3.  Animal hospitals or clinics (small animals). 
4.  Automotive supplies (installation of minor replacement parts and accessories within an enclosed building). 
5.  Bakeries (wholesale). 
6.  Bowling alleys. 
7.  Bulk reverse vending machines subject to the provisions of Section 9271(bb). 
8.  Car Wash. 
9.  Clubs and social halls. 
10.  Convenience stores. 
11.  Day care centers (subject to Section 9271(aa)2). 
12.  Donation centers ancillary to permitted and conditionally permitted commercial retail businesses. 
13.  Drive-thru Facilities (Drive-in and Drive-thru). 
14.  Fortune-telling businesses (as defined in Section 3141). 
15.  Fraternal organizations and lodges. 
16.  Gymnasiums and health clubs. 
17.  Hotel and Motels. 
18.  Large Recycling Locations occupying a permanent building or store front as defined by and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271(bb). 
19.  Mortuaries. 
20.  Office uses (new), development or construction of new building structures where more than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area or any portion of the ground floor area is designated for use by professional or general offices (as defined in Section 9297) subject to office use criteria as set forth in Section 9271(ee). 
21.  Parking lots (commercial). 
22.  Places of worship. 
23.  Rest homes, extended care facilities, convalescent hospitals, and sanitariums. 
24.  Public schools and uses, private schools. 
25.  Service stations. 
(a)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: 10,000 square feet. 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage by building or structures: 50 percent. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet unless otherwise indicated on Zoning Map. 
(f)  Minimum side yard setback: 8 feet. 
26.  Specialty stores. 
27.  Theaters. 
c 
Development Standards 
1.  None of the above listed uses or any other use determined to be permitted shall maintain any outside storage or work areas. 
d 
Use Criteria-Office Development 
1.  Office developments within the Retail Commercial District (C1) shall be constructed to conform with the parking standards for retail commercial uses on the first floor area of the building unless otherwise specifically exempted pursuant to the approved conditional use permit. 
2.  Findings, including, but not limited to, the following, shall be made by the Planning Commission prior to approving a Conditional Use Permit for construction of a building where greater than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area, or any portion of the ground floor area is designated for office use. 
(a)  Development or construction of professional or general office buildings would be more compatible with the surrounding uses in the area than permitted retail commercial uses on the subject property. 
3.  Development or construction of buildings restricted to a mixture of uses in which the retail commercial floor area exceeds fifty (50) percent of the total floor area is exempt from office development use criteria. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.13, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.7; Ord. No. 264, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 293, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 339, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 407; Ord. No. 699, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 896, Secs. 2, 3, 4, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 920, Sec. 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 958, Sec. 1, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 981, Sec. 1, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 993, Sec. 2, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 1101, Sec. 1E, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1161, Sec. 1A, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1317, Sec. II, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 1101, Sec. 1A, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. V, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 1407, Sec. V, 11-15-11  
9233 - RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C2) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Central Commercial District (C2), only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses listed as permitted in the C1 District, subject to the use and development criteria specified in Section 9232 (except uses listed as permitted below). 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Retail uses exemplified by the following: 
(a)  Clothing apparel receiving and distributing. 
(b)  Electronics stores. 
(c)  Furniture consignment sales. 
(d)  Nurseries. 
4.  Service uses, exemplified by the following list, including any retail sales incidental thereto: 
(a)  Bowling alleys. 
(b)  Coin operated machinery—Repairs, sales and services. 
(c)  Dental/medical Lab. 
(d)  Electronics research laboratories and prototype assembly. 
(e)  Mortuaries. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or any other uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be conditionally permitted in the Central Commercial District (C2) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All conditionally permitted uses in the C1 District, subject to the development and use criteria specified thereto (uses listed in Section 9233a are permitted). 
2.  Amusement resorts, arcades, and private recreational facilities which include video and vending machines or other such contrivances in excess of five which are identical to the principal business. 
3.  Automotive repair shops. 
4.  Automotive/vehicle sales lots (used/pre-owned). 
5.  Billiard parlors and pool halls. 
6.  Cleaning and dyeing establishments. 
7.  Equipment rentals of heavy machinery (trailers, tractors, skip loaders). 
8.  Garages (public). 
9.  Karaoke music studio. 
10.  Reserved. 
11.  Outdoor markets and outdoor sales establishments. 
12.  Party facilities including birthday party businesses. 
13.  Pet shops. 
14.  Secondhand sales with pawn/collections. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.14, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1497, Sec. 4(Att. C), 7-3-18) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.8; Ord. No. 293, Secs. 2(b) and 3; Ord. No. 175, Sec. 5; Ord. No. 311; Ord. No. 314; Ord. No. 340; Ord. No.352, Sec. 4; Ord. No. 372, Secs. 3, 4; Ord. No. 699, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 888, Secs. 1(a), 5, 6, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 896, Sec. 8, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 920, Sec. 2, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 958, Sec. 2, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 981, Sec. 4, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 993, Secs. 6, 7, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 1101, Sec. 1F, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1161, Sec. 1B, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 1170, Sec. 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 1241, Sec. 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 1242, Sec. 2, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 1251, Sec. 2, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 1317, Sec. II, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
9234 - HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C3) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Heavy Commercial District (C3) District, only the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses listed as permitted in the C2 Districts, subject to the use and development criteria specified thereto (except uses listed as permitted below). 
2.  Electronic plants. 
3.  Research plants. 
4.  Secondhand sales. 
5.  Wholesale stores and storage. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses. 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Heavy Commercial District (C3) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses listed as conditionally permitted in the C2 Districts subject to the use and development criteria specified thereto. 
2.  Light manufacturing of clothing, novelties, and toys. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.15, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.9; Ord. No. 311; Ord. No. 352, Sec. 5; Ord. No. 699, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 920, Sec. 3, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 981, Sec. 6, Ord. No. 1101, Sec. 1G, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1161, Sec. 1C, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 1170, Sec. 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08 Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
9235 - COMMERCIAL GENERAL DISTRICT (CG) 
a 
Purpose 
To provide for and encourage the orderly development of commercial areas throughout the City in accordance with the Land Use Element of the General Plan, which will serve the demand for a wide variety of goods and services. 
b 
Permitted Uses 
In the Commercial General District (CG), the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses listed as permitted in the C2 Districts subject to the use and development criteria specified thereto (except uses listed as permitted below). 
c 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Commercial General (CG) District subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses listed as conditionally permitted in the C1 and C2 Districts subject to the use and development criteria specified thereto (except uses listed in Section 9235b are permitted). 
2.  Any use permitted under Section 9235b in excess of five (5) acres in total parcel space. 
3.  Building supply. 
4.  Business school. 
5.  Manufacturing, fabrication, distribution facilities occupying less than 50 percent of floor area and less than 50 percent of operations. 
d 
Restricted Uses 
1.  No warehousing or storage other than accessory storage of commodities sold at retail on the premises shall be permitted except as otherwise provided by this Section. 
2.  No manufacturing, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly indicated to the retail business conducted on the premises shall be permitted. 
3.  Not more than five (5) persons shall be engaged on the premises in the incidental manufacturing, processing or treatment of products as permitted herein. 
4.  None of the above listed uses or any other use determined to be permitted shall maintain any outside storage or work areas. 
5.  No residential use shall be permitted in any structure used for commercial purposes, except for caretaker facilities incidental to the permitted use. 
e 
Development Standards 
1.  Maximum structural height. 
The maximum height of any building or structure shall not exceed three stories nor thirty-five (35) feet; provided, however, that penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the buildings, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, roof signs, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, wireless masts or similar structures may exceed such height limit; provided no space above such height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. 
2.  Structural setbacks. 
(a)  Front yard: 
A minimum of ten (10) feet front structural setback shall be required from the ultimate street right-of-way line. 
(b)  Side yard: 
A minimum of ten (10) feet side yard structural setback shall be required from the ultimate street right-of-way line or adjoining residential lot. Otherwise, no side yard setback shall be required. 
(c)  Rear yard: 
Where any commercially zoned property rears upon the rear or side yard of property classified for single-family residential purposes, there shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet. Where the commercial property rears upon an alley or private drive easement, there shall be a rear yard setback of not less than five (5) feet. Otherwise, no rear yard need be provided. 
3.  Lot coverage. 
Commercial sites may have 100 percent lot coverage less that required for landscaping and parking requirements. 
4.  Lot size (building site). 
A building site shall occupy not less than a 3,000-square foot parcel. 
5.  Refuse storage requirements. 
Refuse storage areas shall conform to the standards and criteria contained in the Guidelines for Planning, Zoning and Development, as adopted by the City Council. 
6.  Street dedication. 
Highway dedication and improvements shall be as required by Section 9271x. 
7.  Suffix (supplemental provisions). 
Properties designated "CG-PUD" on the Zoning Map shall require the submission and approval of design plans for a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to the requirements for Planned Unit Developments. 
f 
Limitations and Exceptions 
1.  Use of properties zoned other than "CG," for general commercial purposes: 
Where property classified for "CG" uses has a depth of two hundred (200) feet or less, as measured at right angles from the street frontage indicated as business frontage, additional adjoining property may be used for commercial purposes when such adjoining property fronts upon the side street, and the side of such adjoining property abuts upon the property classified for "CG" purposes. The additional property so used shall be a part of and an extension of the particular use occupying the corner property. The use of subject property shall require approval of a conditional use permit. 
2.  Exception to height limitations: 
Height limitations of this Section may be exceeded for those structures removed more than two hundred (200) feet from any single-family residential zone, subject to approval of a conditional use permit. 
3.  Exception to setback requirements: 
Exceptions to the general setback requirements of this section shall be made only in conformance with the development criteria of specific plans as approved by the City Council. 
g 
Use Criteria—Office Development 
1.  Office developments within the Commercial General District (CG) shall conform to retail commercial use parking standards for the first floor area unless otherwise specifically exempted pursuant to the approved conditional use permit. 
2.  Findings, including, but not limited to, the following, shall be made by the Planning Commission prior to approving a Conditional Use Permit for construction of a building where greater than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area, or any portion of the ground floor area is designated for office use. 
(a)  Development or construction of professional or general office buildings would be more compatible with the surrounding uses in the area than permitted retail commercial uses on the subject property. 
3.  Development or construction of buildings restricted to a mixture of uses in which the retail commercial floor area exceeds fifty (50) percent of the total building floor area are exempt from office development use criteria. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.16, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 654; Ord. No. 699, Sec. 4; Ord. No. 888, Sec. 2, 8-1-83; Ord. No. 896, Secs. 12, 13, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 920, Sec. 4, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 963, Sec. 2C, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 981, Sec. 8, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 1101, Sec. II, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1161, Sec. 1D, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 1170, Sec. 2, 6-3-96; Ord. No. 1206, Sec. 2, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
PART 4 - INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER DISTRICTS 
 
9240 - INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER ZONING DISTRICT SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Site Development Standards for Industrial and other uses by Zoning District. Site development standards for industrial and other uses shall comply with the standards listed in Table 1, unless otherwise noted. For site development standards for additional permitted or conditionally permitted uses refer to districts in Part 4 of this Chapter. 
Table 1: Industrial and Other Development Standards 
City of Tustin 
Zoning 	Minimum Lot Area 	Minimum Lot Width 	Lot 
Coverage 	Building Height 	Front Yard (1) 	Interior Side Yard (1) 	Corner Side Yard (1) 	Rear Yard (1) 
PM Planned Industrial District (Sec. 9241) 	20,000 sq. ft. 	100 feet 	100 
percent (2) 	50 feet 	25 feet 	3 feet 	3 feet 	10 feet 
M Industrial District (Sec. 9242) 	N/A 	N/A 	100 
percent (2) 	50 feet 	None 	None 	None 	None 
U Unclassified District (Sec. 9243) 	As established by Conditional Use Permit 
PC Planned Community District (Sec. 9244) 	As determined with adoption of PC District 
P&I Public and Institutional District (Sec. 9244) 	As established by Conditional Use Permit 
SP-1 MCAS Tustin Specific Plan (Sec. 9246) 	As set forth in MCAS Tustin Specific Plan 
 
(1) If it fronts onto secondary or primary highway then refer to Section 9271u. 
(2) Less parking and landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.17, 5-21-13)  
9241 - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (PM) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission are similar) will be allowed in the Planned Industrial District (PM) subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9240 and/or as specified in this Chapter: 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales (off-site) located within a building and permitted business with at least 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and where the alcoholic beverage sales area within the building occupies no more than 10 percent of the gross floor area. (Ord. No. 1493, Sec. 3, 9-4-18) 
2.  Book binding. 
3.  Bulk merchandise sales. 
4.  Ceramic and plastic fabrication. 
5.  Chemical laboratories. 
6.  Delicatessens. 
7.  Design and development. 
8.  Distributors of electronic, electrical, and electromechanical products. 
9.  Finished paper products. 
10.  Food (and kindred products) manufacturing or storage. 
11.  Laboratories for research and development. 
12.  Leather products. 
13.  Light industrial, research and development, and manufacturing uses which do not maintain greater than fifty (50) percent of their gross floor area for office purposes. 
14.  Office uses - including administrative and professional offices (as defined in Section 9297) that are accessory to permitted uses (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271ee). 
15.  Outside storage (in conjunction with permitted use) enclosed in minimum of six-foot high solid fence. 
16.  Parking lots. 
17.  Pharmaceutical products. 
18.  Photography and printing plants. 
19.  Precision machine shop. 
20.  Prototype weapons and fabrication of components. 
21.  Public utility uses (except the storage of flammable fuel products). 
22.  Scientific instrument manufacturing. 
23.  Textile and furniture manufacturing. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Planned Industrial District (PM) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9230 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales establishments subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271dd and the Planning Commission's Guidelines for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments. 
2.  Offices (greater than 50 percent of gross floor area). 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.18, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.11; Ord. No. 307, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 599; Ord. No. 963, Sec. 2D, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 1003, Sec. 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10  
9242 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (M) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
In the Industrial District (M), the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9240 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All uses permitted in the PM District. 
2.  Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in section 3911(a), and subject to the provisions set forth in Article 3 Chapter 9 of the Tustin City Code. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Industrial District (M) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9240 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  All conditionally permitted uses in the PM District, subject to the development and use criteria specified thereto. 
2.  All permitted uses that utilize greater than fifty (50) percent of their gross floor area for office use (including administrative and professional offices as defined in Section 9297 and subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271ee). 
3.  Building material yards. 
4.  Caretaker's residential unit when in conjunction with permitted use. 
5.  Convenience stores. 
6.  Hazardous waste facilities (subject to all standards and criteria contained in the Tustin City Code). 
7.  Indoor Kennels and Animal Boarding Facilities. 
8.  Manufacturing uses (subject to compliance with performance standards of the Air Pollution Control Board). 
9.  Places of worship, subject to adopted guidelines. 
10.  Restaurants. 
11.  Retail commercial uses. 
12.  Schools for professional, instructional, motivational, vocational and/or seminar uses. 
13.  Specialty stores. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.19, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Secs. 4.10, 4.11; Ord. No. 599; Ord. No. 896, Sec. 14, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 963, Secs. 2D, 2E, 1-20-86; Ord. No. 981, Sec. 9, 5-4-87; Ord. No. 1003, Sec. 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1097, Sec. 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 1100, Sec. 1, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 1101, Secs. 1D, 2, 11-12-92; Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 1313, Sec. II, 7-3-06; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10.  
9243 - UNCLASSIFIED DISTRICT (U) 
In the Unclassified District (U) all uses are permitted unless otherwise prohibited by law, provided that a Conditional Use Permit shall first be secured for any use to be established in any "U" District, with development criteria as specified in the Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.20, 5-21-13)  
9244 - PLANNED COMMUNITY DISTRICT (P-C) 
a 
Purpose 
To allow diversification of the relationships of various buildings, structures and open spaces in planned building groups while insuring substantial compliance with the district regulations and other provisions of this Chapter. The intent of this Chapter is to insure that adequate standards related to the public health, safety and general welfare shall be observed without unduly inhibiting the advantage of large scale planning for residential, commercial and industrial purposes. The amenities and compatibilities of P-C Districts are to be insured through the adoption of a Development Plan and/or the approval of Conditional Use Permits, maps, diagrams, and text setting forth land use relationships and development standards. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
b 
General Requirements 
The following provisions shall apply in the P-C District and subject to the other provisions of this Chapter. Except that where conflict in regulations occur, the regulations specified in this Section or in the Development Plan or plans approved pursuant to this section shall apply. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
c 
Application 
The entire parcel for which an application for rezoning or pre-zoning to P-C is filed must be in one ownership. Should there be multiple owners, the application must be made by or with the written authorization for such action on behalf of all property owners concerned, and the applicant, together with a statement signed by interested owners that they agree to be bound by the regulations and conditions which will be effective within the district. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
d 
In the Planned Community District (PC), the following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) will be allowed subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9240 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  The uses permitted in any PC District shall be those designated on the approved development plan. In the event that such approved usage does not conform to the General Plan of the City, the General Plan may be amended, pursuant to the General Plan Amendment process to conform to the development plan. Said amendment may be processed simultaneous with the amending of the zoning ordinance classifying the area PC. 
2.  The continued use of land within a PC District for agricultural. 
3.  Grading shall be permitted within a PC District outside of an area of immediate development subject to securing a grading permit. 
4.  Any area designated for residential use may be developed at a lower residential density than is indicated on the approved development plan without requiring an amendment of the development plan. 
5.  Large family day care homes (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271aa). 
6.  Reverse vending machines (Subject to standards contained in Section 9271bb). 
7.  Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Section 3911(a), and subject to the provisions set forth in Article 3 Chapter 9 of the Tustin City Code. (PCMU, PC-COM and PC-IND zones only). 
8.  Accessory dwelling units, on lots developed with one (1) single-family dwelling (subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271jj). (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 8, 4-4-17) 
(Ord. No. 911, Sec. 6, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 993, Sec. 5, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.21, 5-21-13) 
e 
Procedures 
1.  Any application for a zone change to permit the establishment of a P-C District shall be made pursuant to Section 9295 of this Chapter and shall be accompanied by a development plan for the entire parcel which is the subject of the application. Said development plan shall be subject to the processing of a Conditional Use Permit if, included within the plan are areas designated for professional or general office use (as defined in Section 9297). Prior to approving a Conditional Use Permit for construction of a building designated for such office usage, the Planning Commission shall make findings, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Development or construction of professional or general office use would be more compatible with surrounding uses in the area than retail commercial uses on the subject property (Ord. No. 896, Sec. 15, 11-21-83; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
2.  Areas on the development plan shall be subject to one of the following or any combination thereof: 
(a)  The requirements of any of the zoning districts established by this Chapter, as amended; 
(b)  Standards of development set forth on the approved development plan and supplementary text material; 
(c)  Approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission prior to development; or 
(d)  In the event that bulk vending machines and/or a large collection facility are part of an approved development plan, said uses shall be subject to all standards contained in Section 9271bb. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 8, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
3.  The development plan shall set forth the following: 
(a)  The proposed use of all lands within the subject property and the approximate dimensions of the exterior boundaries of each area; 
(b)  The type, character and heights of buildings or structures and the number of dwelling units per gross acre proposed for each residential area; 
(c)  The location of school sites, recreational facilities and other public and quasi-public facilities and the approximate area of each site; 
(d)  The general location of major thoroughfares coordinated with the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways; 
(e)  A topographic map of the property; 
(f)  A preliminary report describing proposed provisions for storm drainage, sewage disposal, water supply, and other utilities; 
(g)  A justification of all commercial and industrial facilities, if any, to be located within the subject property. 
4.  The development plan, after its approval and adoption as provided herein, shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder and all development within the district shall substantially comply therewith, except as said development plan may be amended by ordinance. 
5.  Commencement of construction 
Building construction shall not be commenced unless and until one of the following alternatives has been accomplished: 
(a)  There has been recorded a final subdivision map for any specific portion of the district designated on the development plan as subject to the regulations of a zoning district established by this Chapter or for which Standards of Development have been approved. Said subdivision shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 3 of Article 9 of this Code, as amended, and the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  Standards of development have been approved on the development plan for the specific area proposed for development. If ambiguity exists as to the specific dimensions or extent of any designated area on the development plan, the specific boundaries shall be set by the filing of a legal description and map of the parcel proposed for development in conjunction with the filing for construction permits. 
(c)  The Planning Commission has granted a Conditional Use Permit for any specific development. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.22, 5-21-13) 
6.  Application for a Conditional Use Permit for development as stipulated above shall include the following as applicable: 
(a)  Topographic map of the property showing the proposed method of adapting the development to the site; 
(b)  Legal description or boundary survey of the property; 
(c)  Location, grades, widths and types of improvements proposed for all utilities, streets, walkways, driveways and service areas; 
(d)  Location, height, number of stories and number of residential units, if any, for each proposed structure; 
(e)  Location and design of automobile parking areas; 
(f)  Preliminary landscaping plan; 
(g)  Location of public or quasi-public buildings or areas, including but not limited to, schools, recreation facilities, parking areas, and service areas, if any; 
(h)  Elevations of structures showing architectural type; 
(i)  Irrevocable offers to dedicate those areas shown on the plan as public property; 
(j)  Method by which the property could be divided for the sale or lease of individual parcels; 
(k)  Method by which open space areas are to be perpetually maintained. (Ord. No. 335, Sec. 2) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.23, 5-21-13) 
f 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Industrial District (PC) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit and subject to the development standards identified in Table 1 of Section 9240 and/or as specified in this Chapter. 
1.  Alcoholic beverage sales establishments subject to the provisions set forth in Section 9271dd and the Planning Commission's Guidelines for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.24, 5-21-13) 
(Ord. No. 1230, Sec. 2, 6-19-00)  
9245 - PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT (P & I) 
a 
Purpose 
The purpose of the Public and Institutional District shall be to identify by classification on the zoning map those properties within the City that are used or authorized for public, quasi-public and institutional use; in tax exempt status, open space reservation, public recreation, and miscellaneous uses distinct from the standard classifications of residential, commercial and industrial. 
b 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The following uses (or uses which, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission, are similar) may be permitted in the Public and Institutional District (P & I) subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  Places of Worship, subject to adopted guidelines (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.25, 5-21-13) 
2.  City Hall, civic center, community center 
3.  Federal, state, county, district office buildings 
4.  Hospitals 
5.  Libraries 
6.  Lodges, clubs, and social halls 
7.  Military installations 
8.  Open space reservations 
9.  Parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers (public) 
10.  Post office 
11.  Public parking 
12.  Schools (public) and school administration offices (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
c 
Development Standards 
The development standards and requirements for development and changes in use shall be those contained in the general section of this Chapter and as specified and approved by the Planning Commission as conditions of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.26, 5-21-13) 
d 
Reclassification 
Conversion of any public or quasi-public use established in the P & I District to private use shall require a rezoning and classification action. 
(Ord. No. 525)  
9246 - MCAS TUSTIN SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT (SP-1 SPECIFIC PLAN) 
a 
Conditionally Permitted Uses 
The purpose of the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan District (SP-1 Specific Plan) is to establish zoning regulations to guide the orderly development and improvement in accordance with the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan for that portion of the city which is designated as MCAS Tustin Specific Plan on the official zoning map of the city. The preparation and adoption of a specific plan is authorized by Chapter 3, Article 8 of the State of California Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Sections 6540 et seq.). The MCAS Tustin Specific Plan replaces the usual development standards otherwise applicable to most property within the City of Tustin. 
b 
Adoption of MCAS Tustin Specific Plan 
There is adopted the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan, the text of which is set forth in the document entitled "MCAS Tustin Specific Plan" attached to this ordinance as Exhibit B, as corrected by changes identified as "MCAS Tustin Specific Plan Corrections" and provided as Exhibit C, which are attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
c 
Applicability 
The SP-1 Specific Plan District is established by this chapter. The provisions of this section shall apply to all property shown on the official zoning map within the SP-1 Specific Plan District. The regulations set forth in the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan shall apply to the SP-1 Specific Plan District only in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Tustin General Plan. 
d 
Permitted uses and development standards 
All property within the SP-1 District shall be developed and maintained in accordance with all policies, requirements, regulations and provisions set forth [in] the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan. 
e 
Zoning adoption or change 
The SP-1 District zoning shall be adopted or changed by the same procedure prescribed within the Tustin City Code for zoning district amendments and consistent with State of California Planning and Zoning Law. An amendment to the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan may be processed as described within Section 4.2.7 of the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan. Amendments to the MCAS Tustin Specific Plan may be adopted by ordinance and may be amended as often as deemed necessary by the Tustin City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1257, Sec. 2, 2-3-2003)  
PART 5 - COMBINING AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS 
 
9251 - COMBINING PARKING DISTRICT (P) 
a 
Permitted Uses 
All uses in the districts with which the "P" is combined. 
b 
Development Standards 
1.  As specified in the district with which the "P" District is combined, unless superseded by the provisions of this district 
2.  Front yard requirement: Layout of landscaping 
3.  Repealed. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
(Ord. No. 157, Sec. 4.13)  
9252 - CULTURAL RESOURCE DISTRICT (CR) 
a 
Purpose 
Tustin has played a vital role in the history of Orange County and has retained a rich and unique cultural heritage. It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the recognition, preservation, protection and use of culturally significant structures, natural features, sites and neighborhoods within the City of Tustin is required in the interest of the health, safety, prosperity, social and cultural enrichment and general welfare of City residents. The purpose of Cultural Resource District is to: 
1.  Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving neighborhoods, structures, sites and features which reflect elements of the City's cultural, architectural, artistic, aesthetic, political, social, natural and engineering heritage. 
2.  Encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the City's past. 
3.  Strengthen civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity based on the recognition and use of cultural resources. 
4.  Promote the private and public enjoyment, use and preservation of culturally significant neighborhoods, structures and sites appropriate for the education and recreation of the citizens of Tustin and visitors to the City. 
5.  Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity of architectural styles and aesthetic appeal of the City. 
6.  Enhance property values and increase economic and financial benefits to the City and its inhabitants. 
7.  Assure that new construction and subdivision of lots in the Cultural Resource District are compatible with the character of the district. 
8.  Identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between preservation of historic and cultural resources and alternative land uses. 
b 
Applicability 
1.  The Cultural Resource District is an overlay district and shall apply to those properties as shown on the official Tustin Zoning Map and to those cultural resource structures and sites as may be designated by resolution of the City Council and listed by address and filed with the Department of Community Development. 
2.  The zoning district map shall be amended to indicate the application of the Cultural Resources District. The designation CR shall be added after the underlying zoning designation. 
3.  The requirements of this section shall be considered in conjunction with the requirements of the underlying district. If a conflict exists between the requirements of the underlying district and this section the requirements of this section shall apply. 
c 
Planning Commission 
The Planning Commission shall advise the City Council on all matters relating to historic and cultural resources, including without limitation, matters affecting the establishment of a Cultural Resource District, designation of Cultural Resources, and as a liaison between residents, property owners, and the City Council within a Cultural Resources District. In performing its historic and cultural resources duties, the Planning Commission shall not exercise any independent final decision-making authority or expend city funds. Actions of the Commission shall not be considered actions of the City and shall not be represented as such. 
d 
Cultural Resource Designation Criteria 
For the purposes of this section, an improvement or natural feature may be designated a cultural resource by the City Council, and any area within the City may be designated as a Cultural Resource District by the City Council if it meets the following criteria: 
1.  It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City's cultural, architectural, aesthetic, social, economic, political, artistic, engineering and or architectural heritage; or 
2.  It is identified with persons, a business use or events significant in local, state, or national history; or 
3.  It embodies distinctive characteristics of style, type, period, or method of construction, or is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftmanship; or 
4.  It is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer, or architect; or 
5.  Its unique location or singular physical characteristic represents an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the City; or 
6.  Its integrity as a natural environment or feature strongly contributes to the wellbeing of residents of the City or the wellbeing of a neighborhood within the City; or 
7.  It is a geographically definable area possessing a concentration or continuity of site, buildings, structures or objects as unified by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
e 
Cultural Resource Designation Procedures 
Cultural Resource Districts and Designated Cultural Resources shall be established by the City Council as follows: 
1.  Any person may request the designation of an improvement as a cultural resource or the designation of a Cultural Resource District by submitting an application for such designation to the Community Development Director. The Committee or City Council may also initiate such proceedings on their own motion. 
2.  The Community Development Director or City Council shall refer the proposed request to the Committee for their study, review and recommendation. 
3.  The Committee shall conduct a study of the proposed designation and make a preliminary determination based on such documentation as it may require as to its appropriateness for consideration. If the Committee determines that the application merits consideration, but only if it so determines, it shall schedule and notice a public hearing. 
4.  The Committee's decision to schedule or not to schedule a public hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Community Development Department. Notice of a decision not to schedule a public hearing shall be given by mail to the applicant. No permits for alteration, demolition or removal of any improvement, building or structure within the proposed Cultural Resources District or relative to a proposed cultural resource shall be issued while the public hearing or any appeal related thereto is pending. 
5.  In the case of a proposed Designated Cultural Resource, notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicant, property owner, and occupants of the improvement at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, using the name and address of such owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
6.  In the case of a proposed Cultural Resources District, notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicant, property owners and occupants of all properties within the proposed district at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing, using the name and address of such owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment rolls, and shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
7.  At the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than thirty (30) days from the date set for the initial public hearing for the designation of a proposed Cultural Resource or Cultural Resource District, the Committee shall recommend approval in whole or in part, or disapproval in whole or in part of the application in writing. In the case of a proposed Cultural Resource District, the Committee's recommendation shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission who shall follow all Zoning Amendment procedures contained in the Tustin Municipal Code considering establishment of the Cultural Resource District. In the case of designation of a Cultural Resource or site, the Committee's recommendation shall be transmitted directly to the City Council. 
8.  The City Council, after receipt of the recommendations from the Planning Commission for designation of a Cultural Resource District, shall by ordinance approve the application in whole or in part, or shall by motion disapprove it in its entirety. In the case of designation of a Cultural Resource recommended by the Committee the City Council shall by resolution approve the application in whole or in part of, or by motion disapprove the request. 
9.  Failure to send any notice by mail to any property owner where the address of such owner is not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in conjunction with the proposed designation. 
10.  As soon thereafter as reasonably possible the Community Development Department shall send by first class mail a copy of the Ordinance designating a Cultural Resource District or a certified copy of the resolution designating a Cultural Resource to the property owner or owners in the District or the property owner or owners of the Cultural Resource, as applicable. 
11.  Amendment, revision or deletion of a designation may be accomplished by following the above procedures. 
f 
Certificate of Appropriateness Required 
1.  A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required prior to: 
(a)  Alteration of the exterior features of a building or site within a designated Cultural Resource District, or alteration of a Designated Cultural Resource, or construction of improvements within a designated Cultural Resources District requiring a City building permit. 
(b)  Demolition or removal of any Designated Cultural Resource or of any improvements in a Cultural Resource District. 
(c)  A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for the following: (1) ordinary maintenance or repairs that do not involve a change in design, exterior material or original appearance of an improvement, nor (2) any construction, reconstruction, alteration or removal of any feature which has been determined by the Building Official to be necessary to protect the public health or safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition provided the Building Official certifies such action. 
g 
Procedure for Certificate of Appropriateness 
1.  Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be made on forms provided by the Community Development Department and shall contain whatever detailed information (plans, drawings, agreements, photographs, etc.) as is determined by the Community Development Department to be necessary for the Department to act on the request. Where the proposed project requires other discretionary approvals such as a tentative tract map, the background information shall also be concurrently submitted to the Department on each of these applications. 
2.  Applications for Certificate of Appropriateness shall comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
3.  The Community Development Director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny Certificates of Appropriateness for improvements requiring a City building permit. In reviewing applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Community Development Director may consult with and receive the advice and recommendation of the Planning Commission, in their capacity as the Historic Resource Committee, prior to rendering a decision. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.27, 5-21-13) 
4.  Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development or Planning Commission in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code (Appeals). 
5.  A Certificate of Appropriateness shall lapse and become void one (1) year following the date on which the certificate was approved unless the conditions of the approval specify a lesser or greater time or unless, prior to such expiration date, a building permit is issued by the Building Official and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the application. A Certificate may be renewed for an additional period of one (1) year or for a lesser or greater period provided that prior to the expiration of the time period granted, an application for renewal of the permit is filed with the Community Development Department. The Community Development Director may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for renewal of a Certificate of Appropriateness; such decision may be appealed as set forth in paragraph 4 above. 
6.  Any Certificate of Appropriateness granted in accordance with the terms of this section may be revoked by the City Council in the manner hereinafter set forth if any of the conditions or terms of such Certificate are violated or upon violation of any applicable provisions of this section. 
Before the Council considers revocation of any Certificate of Appropriateness, the Planning Commission shall hold a hearing thereon after giving written notice thereof to the permittee at least ten (10) days in advance of such hearing. Within five (5) days thereafter, the Commission shall transmit a report of its findings and its recommendations on the revocation to the City Council who will act on the matter. 
h 
Required Findings for Construction or Alteration 
The following findings are required for issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness for alteration of Designated Cultural Resources, or for construction of improvements within a Cultural Resource District. No Certificate shall be issued if the findings cannot be made. For work on a Designated Cultural Resource within a Cultural Resource District, the required findings for both the resource and district shall be made. 
1.  Alteration of a designated cultural resource: 
(a)  The proposed work will not detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect the resource and, in the case of a structure, is compatible with the architectural style of the existing structure. 
(b)  The proposed modification will retain the essential elements which make the structure, site or feature culturally significant. 
2.  Construction of improvements in a Cultural Resource District. 
(a)  The proposed work conforms to the Municipal Code and design standards which may be established from time to time by the Historic Resource Committee. 
(b)  The proposed work does not adversely affect the character of the district or Designated Cultural Resources within the district. 
(c)  The proposed work is harmonious with existing surroundings. The extent of harmony shall be evaluated in terms of appropriateness of materials, scale, size, height, placement and use of a new building or structure in relationship to existing buildings and structures and the surrounding setting. 
i 
Findings and Additional Permit Procedures for Demolition, Removal or Relocation of Designated Structures or Structures Constructed Prior to 1940: 
1.  A Certificate of Appropriateness for the demolition of a Designated Cultural Resource shall not be approved unless the Community Development Director or, on appeal, the City Council finds that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  The structure/site is a hazard to public health or safety and repairs or stabilization are not physically possible. 
(b)  The site is required for a public use which will be of more benefit to the public than the Cultural Resource, and there is no feasible alternative location for the public use. 
(c)  For a Designated Cultural Resource only: 
(1)  It is not feasible to preserve or restore the structure, taking into consideration the economic feasibility of alternatives to the proposal. 
(2)  The proposed replacement structure does not detract from the neighborhood. 
(d)  Reconstruction or restoration is not economically feasible or practical. 
2.  No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out any demolition, removal or relocation of a Designated Cultural Resource or structure within a Cultural Resource District built prior to 1940 without first receiving a demolition or relocation permit from the City. Such permit shall not be issued unless one of the following events has occurred and in the case of a demolition the applicant has complied with i.3 below: 
(a)  A Certification of Appropriateness has been approved by the Community Development Director or by the City Council on appeal; or 
(b)  A period of 180 days has expired from the date of the Community Development Director's denial of the Certificate of Appropriateness, and there has been no City Council appeal. 
(c)  A period of 180 days has expired from the date of City Council denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
3.  In addition to the above requirement, no demolition permit or relocation permit shall be issued for the demolition or relocation of a Designated Cultural Resource or structure within a Cultural Resource District built prior to 1940 until a Certificate of Appropriateness and City building permit has been issued for a replacement structure or as otherwise approved by the Director of Community Development. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.28, 5-21-13) 
j 
Design Criteria and Development Standards 
1.  The City Council may establish, promulgate and adopt by resolution, design criteria and standards for properties as are necessary to supplement the provisions of this section as a guide to evaluate applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, said criteria may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Acceptable materials for new construction such as stucco, masonry, metal, and glass curtain; 
(b)  Appropriate architectural character, scale, and detail for new construction; 
(c)  Acceptable appurtenances to new and existing structures such as gables, parapets, balconies and dormers; 
(d)  Acceptable textures and ornamentation such as paint colors and types, use of wood, stone, metal, plaster, plastics, and other manmade materials, use of shutters, wrought and cast iron, finishes of metal, colors of glass, such as silver, gold, bronze, smoke, and other details or architectural ornamentation; 
(e)  Acceptable accessories on new or existing structures such as light fixtures, gas lights, canopies, exterior carpentry, tile or wood, signs, banners, flags and projections. 
2.  Residential standards 
(a)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  All uses shall be permitted in the Cultural Resources Overlay District as are authorized in the underlying Residential District. 
(2)  The City Council may also permit other nonlisted uses which support the purposes of the district as a conditional use following a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
(3)  Accessory dwelling units not within existing single-family dwellings or existing accessory buildings, subject to a recorded deed restriction approved by the City: 
(a)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(b)  Minimum building site: None. 
(c)  Maximum overall lot coverage for all structures combined: 50 percent. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage for the accessory dwelling unit: None. 
(e)  Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet for detached unit; 20 feet for attached unit. 
(f)  Reserved. (Repealed Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 9, 4-4-17) 
(g)  Minimum side yard setback: Corner lot line: 10 feet; interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(h)  Minimum rear yard setback: 5 feet. 
(i)  Maximum floor area of accessory dwelling unit: 50 percent of primary single-family dwelling, not to exceed 600 square feet. 
(j)  The accessory dwelling unit shall be consistent with the architectural style, materials and color of the primary single-family dwelling and shall not detract from the single-family appearance of the primary single-family dwelling. 
(k)  The accessory dwelling unit shall not cause a substantial adverse change, as defined in California Public Resources Code Section 5020.1, in the significance of any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Places or the City of Tustin Historical Resources Survey. 
(l)  The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed concurrently with, or subsequently to, the primary single-family dwelling, which shall be conforming or brought into conformance with the Tustin City Code. 
(m)  All entrances to the accessory dwelling unit shall be to the rear of the primary single-family dwelling and shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
(n)  When the new residential unit is built between the existing single-family dwelling and the front property line, the rear unit must comply with the provisions of this section. 
(o)  An accessory dwelling unit shall not be allowed on a lot developed with an accessory building used as guest quarters or a guest house. 
(p)  A maximum of one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per building site. 
(Ord. No. 1454, Sec. 4, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 9, 4-4-17) 
(b)  Site development standards (applicable to creation of new lots only): 
(1)  Minimum single-family lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum multiple-family lot size: 15,000 square feet. 
Development of existing lots within the CR District may proceed consistent with the underlying residential zoning district. (Ord. No. 1207, Sec. 2, 11-16-98) 
(c)  Prohibited uses 
Accessory buildings used as guest quarters. (Ord. No. 1454, Sec. 5, 9-15-15) 
3.  Commercial standards 
(a)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  All uses shall be permitted in the Cultural Resource District as are authorized in the underlying commercial district. The City Council may also permit other nonlisted uses which support the purpose of the district as a conditional use following a public hearing and recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Limitations on permitted uses: 
(1)  No merchandise shall be displayed nor advertised for sale on or over public right-of-way. This section is not to be construed as restricting nor limiting the outside display and sale of merchandise on private property within the district. 
(c)  Authorized and encouraged uses: 
The following uses are authorized and encouraged with the interest of creating a commercial village atmosphere: 
Pipe and tobacco shops 	Lamp shops 
Wine tasting rooms/micro-winery and/or beer tasting rooms/micro-brewery (Section 9271dd) 	Yardage goods 
Leather goods 	Knit shops 
Candle shops 	Ice cream shops 
Boutique 	Jewelry shops 
Coffee shops 	Wrought iron ware 
Ethnic restaurants 	Art galleries 
(Spanish, Mexican, 
French, German) 	General offices 
(if located on any floor above and if less than 50 percent of total area are occupied by general offices, consistent with Section 9233a(1)(g) 
Hobby shops 	Delicatessens 
Photographer's studios 	Antique shops 
China and crystal 	Gift shops 
 
The above list of potential uses is not all encompassing but typifies the character of uses that illustrate the desired image. 
(Ord. No. 1251, Sec. 2, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.29, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1493, Sec. 4, 9-4-18) 
(d)  Site development standards and exception 
In order to provide maximum flexibility in design and development for various lot sizes, consistent with a concept of village environment, the following criteria and exceptions are applicable: 
(1)  Front building setbacks may be established at the property line except for corner properties requiring a five-foot line of sight clearance. 
(2)  Rear yard setbacks shall be established at fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line, or in the event the development extends to the next intervening street, the rear setback line shall be construed as the frontage on "C" or Prospect Streets. 
(3)  As an exception to the general sections of this Chapter and other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, when commercial and professional properties are developed or converted to permitted uses under the provisions of this section, on-site parking requirements may be modified under any one or a combination of the following provisions: 
a.  Property or properties that lie within a Vehicle Parking Assessment District or Business Improvement Area shall be exempt from the requirement for on-site parking accommodations, subject to the provisions of the Parking or Improvement District Ordinance. 
b.  On-site parking requirements may be waived upon the presentation to the City of a long-term lease, running with and as a condition of the business license, for private off-site parking accommodations within 300 feet of the business or activity to be served. 
c.  All or a portion of required number of parking spaces may be satisfied by depositing with the City an amount, to be used for public parking accommodations within the area, equal to four (4) times the assessed value as determined from the latest assessment roll of the County Assessor, of 200 square feet of land within the area, for each required parking space not otherwise provided. 
d.  Development proposed within both the Central Commercial District (C-2) and the Old Town Commercial General Plan land use designation (the commercial portion of Old Town Tustin), may satisfy all or a portion of the required number of on-site parking spaces through the payment of a fee, in an amount determined by Fee Resolution of the City Council, upon a determination of the Tustin Planning Commission that the proposed project meets the following findings: 
•  The proposed project is an infill project located within the commercial district of Old Town. 
•  That the proposed project is considered to be relatively small. 
•  That the proposed project has incorporated building or site design enhancements that make it an outstanding addition to Old Town Tustin. 
•  That the proposed project provides some on-site parking, but is aesthetically superior to one that provided all required parking on site. 
•  That the project applicant shall agree to pay an annual fee for each public space not provided on site. 
•  Other findings that may be adopted from time to time by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1416, Sec. 2, 4-3-12) 
(e)  Public improvements 
Public improvements contributing to the motif of the area and the intent of this section are to consist of the following: 
(1)  Street furniture for convenience of the pedestrian shopper to consist of benches and trash receptacles. 
(2)  Street lighting with the use of stanchions and fixtures that contribute to the development theme. 
(3)  Street portals to create an identity of approach to the area for vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  The use of wishing wells as theme and area identity. 
(5)  Street and traffic patterns that segregate vehicle from pedestrian traffic by providing rear access to parking accommodations, delivery services, and through traffic, with frontage accommodations for pedestrians and short term convenience parking. 
k 
Duty to Keep in Good Repair 
The owner, occupant, or other person in actual charge of a Designated Cultural Resource shall keep the exterior of any designated structure, site, or feature in good repair. 
l 
Enforcement and Penalties 
1.  Methods of enforcement. In addition to the regulations of this section which govern the approval or disapproval of Certificates of Appropriateness covered by this section, the Community Development Department shall have the authority to implement the enforcement thereof by any of the following means: 
(a)  Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this section upon the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of the improvement, building, structure or land; 
(b)  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this section, and the City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end; 
(c)  Calling upon the Chief of Police and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this section. 
In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the City Attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this section, or for an injunction in appropriate cases. 
2.  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six (6) months or be so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 2, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1301, §§ III—VI, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1332, Sec. 2, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 18, 11-17-09)  
PART 6 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
9260 - PURPOSE 
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to ensure that sufficient off-street parking facilities are provided for all uses and that parking facilities are properly designed and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9261 - APPLICABILITY 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, every use, including a change or expansion of a use or structure shall have appropriately maintained off-street parking and loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this Section. A use shall not be established and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this Section are satisfactorily completed. 
a  Section 9252: Cultural Resource District (CR) standards shall take precedence where applicable. 
b  Standards established in an adopted Specific Plan, Planned Community, Development Agreement, or similar governing document, shall take precedence where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9262 - GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS 
a  Minimum Parking Requirements: 
1.  There shall be provided at the time of establishment of use and/or occupancy of any building or structure a minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces as required in this Chapter for said use, building and/or structure with adequate provision for safe ingress and egress. 
2.  Parking and loading spaces provided shall be designed in conformance with this Section. 
3.  Parking and loading spaces may not be located within any front or side setback area, except as provided in this Code. 
4.  Parking of vehicles on an unpaved surface is prohibited, except when approved by a Temporary Use Permit. 
5.  Parked or stored vehicles, recreational vehicles (not within an established mobile home park), or other similar items shall not be used for temporary or permanent habitation or sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 2, 2-5-13) 
b  Availability: 
1.  Required off-street parking areas and access ways shall be made permanently accessible available, marked and maintained for the purposes of temporary vehicle parking and access only. Required parking shall not be: 
a.  Rented, let, or used for storage of property, or used to park an inoperative or non-motorized vehicle, or otherwise be blocked in any manner that would impede access to or the use of any required parking space for the temporary parking of vehicles. A vehicle parked on private residential property belonging to or occupied by the owner of such vehicle for the purpose of temporarily displaying them for sale shall be exempt from this prohibition, provided such temporary display does not exceed ninety (90) days in any calendar year. 
b.  Used for overnight parking except by residents or tenants with the authorization of the property owner. 
2.  Required residential parking spaces shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Residents shall not store or park any non-motorized vehicles in any parking space, driveway, or private street area except for the purpose of loading, unloading, making deliveries or emergency repairs. 
b.  Garages shall be available for the parking of vehicles. Storage of personal items may occur in a garage only to the extent that such storage does not impede vehicle parking nor reduce the number or required minimum size of the required garage space. 
3.  Required nonresidential parking spaces shall be permanently available for tenants, employees, customers and guests having lawful reason to be at the premises for which the parking is required. In the absence of prior approval from the Community Development Director, it is unlawful for any owner, lessee, tenant, or any persons having control of the operation of the premises to prevent, prohibit, or restrict authorized persons from using the required parking. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 3, 2-5-13) 
c  Maintenance. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the property owner to maintain and repair required parking areas and associated improvements in accordance with this Code and any other conditions imposed at the time of approval. 
2.  Parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, paving, light standards, walls, turnaround areas, landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in a good condition and be free of debris, graffiti, and litter. 
3.  A parking lot maintenance/restriping permit shall be required prior to commencing any maintenance activities in the parking lot involving reconfiguration of an existing parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 4, 2-5-13) 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9263 - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED 
Each land use shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by this Section, except where a greater number of spaces are required through a land use entitlement approval or where an exception has been granted in compliance with Section 9264 (Reduction of Off-Street Parking Requirements). 
a  Expansion of Any Structure or Change In Use. When a structure is enlarged or increased in density capacity or intensity or when a change in use requires more off-street parking, additional parking spaces shall be provided for the proposed change in compliance with this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 5, 2-5-13) 
b  Mixed-Use/Multi-Tenant Developments. Except as provided in Section 9264a, whenever two (2) or more uses identified in this Chapter exist within separate tenant spaces on the same site or within the same building: 
1.  The number of parking spaces required of each separate tenant space shall be determined separately at the rates established in this chapter for each tenant use. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 6, 2-5-13) 
2.  Except as provided in Section 9263b3., parking for ancillary activities or uses within all zoning classifications shall be provided at the parking ratio required of the primary use. 
3.  Within the PM and M zoning classifications, ancillary activities or uses within a single tenant space not exceeding ten (10) percent of the tenant's gross floor area shall be calculated at the parking ratio of the primary use. Parking required for activities or uses within a single tenant space that exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the tenant space shall be determined separately at the rates established in this Chapter for each use. 
c  Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in Section 9263g (Table 1) shall provide parking as required in a written determination by the Community Development Director on the basis of the requirements for similar uses. The Community Development Director shall use the requirements of Section 9263g as a general guide in determining the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided. 
d  Gross Floor Area. Gross floor area shall be used as a basis for calculating the number of parking spaces required in this Section. Gross floor area shall be measured as the area bounded by the outer face of exterior walls including auxiliary common areas such as a hallway, lobby, and restroom. 
e  Rounding of Quantities. When calculating the number of parking spaces required, any fractional space shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
f  Company-Owned Vehicles. The number of parking spaces required by this Section does not include spaces for company-owned vehicles. Parking spaces for company-owned vehicles shall be provided in addition to the number of parking spaces required for the primary use and may utilize tandem parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 7, 2-5-13) 
g  Parking Requirements By Land Use. The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided for each use shall comply with Table 1. 
TABLE 1: PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE 
Land Use Type 	Parking Spaces Required 
Manufacturing and Processing 
General manufacturing, industrial uses 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Research and development, laboratories 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Warehouses and storage facilities 	1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor for the first 20,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area and 1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the next 20,000 sq. ft.; and 1 space for each 4,000 sq. ft. thereafter 
Wholesale operations not used exclusively for storage 	1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, less that area devoted to office or sales, which shall be 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Recreation, Education, Public Assembly 
Adult day care centers 	1 space for each employee on maximum shift, plus 1 space for each 5 clients at maximum enrollment 
Child day care centers 	1 space for each employee and teacher on maximum shift, plus 1 space for each 5 children at maximum enrollment; or 
	1 space for each employee and teacher on maximum shift, plus 1 space for each 10 children at maximum enrollment if adequate drop-off facilities provided. Drop-off facilities must be designed to accommodate a continuous flow of passenger vehicles to safely load and unload children. The adequacy of drop-off facilities proposed shall be determined by the approval body for the proposed use. 
Cinemas, movie theaters 	1 space for each 3 fixed seats 
Commercial trade or business schools, instructional 	1 space for every 3 students at maximum capacity of each classroom, plus 1 space for each faculty member and employee 
Golf courses 	6 spaces for each hole; plus additional spaces for other related uses on the site 
 Driving ranges 	1 space for each tee 
 Miniature golf courses 	3 spaces for each hole 
Indoor recreation/fitness centers 	
 Arcades 	1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 Bowling alleys 	5 spaces for each lane, plus required spaces for ancillary uses 
 Health/fitness clubs 	1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area, including swimming pool area 
 Pool and billiard rooms 	2 spaces for each table, plus 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of indoor gross floor area excepting the pool and billiard area, plus as required for ancillary uses 
 Skating rinks 	1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of indoor gross floor area excepting the skating rink area, plus as required for ancillary uses 
Libraries, museums, art galleries 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Performance theaters, meeting halls and membership organizations 	1 space for each 3 fixed seats; or if no fixed seats are provided, 1 space for every 35 sq. ft. of gross assembly or viewing area 
Places of assembly not specified elsewhere 	1 space for each 3 fixed seats; or if no fixed seats are provided, 1 space for every 35 sq. ft. of gross assembly area, classrooms, meeting rooms, etc., based on the most intense simultaneous use 
Schools (Private) Elementary and Middle 	2 spaces per classroom, plus adequate drop-off/loading area as approved by the Community Development Director 
Schools (Private) High Schools 	1 space per 3 students, plus adequate drop-off/loading area as approved by the Community Development Director 
Colleges/Universities (excluding related residential uses) 	1 space per 3 students 
Studios for dance, art, martial arts, one-on-one personal fitness; Tutoring facilities 	1 space for each instructor plus 1 space for each 3 students present at any one time 
Tennis/racquetball/handball or other courts 	1.5 spaces for each court, plus 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of indoor gross floor area excepting the court area, plus as required for ancillary uses 
Residential Uses 
Dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and rooming/boarding houses 	1 space for each 2 beds 
Duplex housing units (not within a multifamily complex) 	2 garage spaces for each unit plus 1 space for open, unassigned guest parking per 4 dwelling units 
Large family day care homes 	1 space for each nonresident employee, in addition to the required residential spaces, plus adequate drop-off area as approved by the Community Development Director 
Mobile homes (in mobile home parks) 	2 covered spaces for each mobile home (tandem parking permitted in an attached carport), plus 1 guest parking space for each 10 units 
Multifamily housing 	2 covered spaces for each dwelling unit, plus 1 unassigned guest space for every 4 units 
Accessory dwelling units 	1 space per unit or bedroom, whichever is greater, in addition to that required for the primary single-family unit 
Required parking spaces for accessory dwelling units may be tandem spaces and within side yard and/or rear yard setback areas, but not blocking access to a required garage parking space and not within front yard setback areas, except on existing driveways. 
See Section 9271jj for exceptions to the parking requirements for accessory dwelling units. 
Senior citizen congregate care housing 	1 space for every 3 beds 
Senior citizen multifamily housing 	1 space for each unit with 50 percent of the spaces as covered spaces, plus 1 guest parking space for each 10 units 
Single-family housing 	2 spaces, within a fully enclosed garage, for each unit with 4 or fewer bedrooms, and 3 spaces, within a fully enclosed garage, for each unit with 5 or more bedrooms 
Retail Trade 
Automobile parts and supplies, including mobile home and vehicle machinery 	1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Banks and financial services 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Building materials, hardware stores, and plant nurseries 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of indoor display area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor display area 
Convenience stores 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Nightclubs and dance halls 	1 space for each 7 sq. ft. of dance floor area, plus 1 space for every 35 sq. ft. of additional gross floor area, plus as required for ancillary uses (restaurant, etc.) 
Restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, lounges, or similar establishments at which the consumption of food and beverages occurs primarily on the premises 	1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus a minimum 7-car stacking space for drive-through, except no additional parking spaces shall be required when a restaurant use replaces a retail, service, or office use on a property located within the Downtown Commercial Core Specific Plan 
	No additional parking shall be required for an outdoor restaurant seating area when the area either contains no more than 12 seats, or is no larger than 50 percent of the restaurant's interior seating area; 1 additional parking space shall be required for each additional 100 sq. ft. by which the outdoor restaurant seating area exceeds the 50-percent threshold 
Restaurants, take out; including delicatessens, donut shops, coffee shops, or similar establishments at which the consumption of food and beverages occurs primarily away from the premises 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus a minimum 7-car stacking space for drive-through, except no additional parking spaces shall be required when a restaurant use replaces a retail, service, or office use on a property located within the Downtown Commercial Core Specific Plan 
	No additional parking shall be required for an outdoor restaurant seating area when the area either contains no more than 12 seats, or is no larger than 50 percent of the restaurant's interior seating area; 1 additional parking space shall be required for each additional 250 sq. ft. by which the outdoor restaurant seating area exceeds the 50-percent threshold 
Retail Center (Small) 	The parking required will be the sum of parking requirements for the individual uses as specified in this Table 
Retail Center (Large) 	4.5 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Retail stores: General merchandise 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Retail stores: Appliance, furniture, and bulk good stores 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Service Uses 
Body art facility 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Hotels and motels 	1 space for each guest room, plus 1 space for each 2 employees on largest shift, plus requirements for other accessory uses 
Kennels and animal boarding 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Laundromats 	1 space for every 3 washing machines or one space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater 
Medical services 	
 Clinics, medical/dental offices 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 4,000 sq. ft. of medical space within a building or center and 6 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet; except for locations in the Combining Parking District (P) where 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area shall apply 
 Extended care (elderly, skilled nursing facilities, etc.) 	1 space for each 4 beds the facility is licensed to accommodate 
 Hospitals 	2 spaces for each patient bed the facility is licensed to accommodate, plus required spaces for ancillary uses as determined by the review authority 
 Medical/dental labs 	1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Offices, administrative, corporate 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft. and 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. thereafter; except for locations in the Combining Parking District (P) where 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area shall apply 
Pet grooming 	1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Personal services 
 Barber/beauty shops (and other personal services: tanning salon) 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Service stations 	1 space for each pump island, plus 4 spaces for each service bay, plus additional spaces for accessory uses 
Storage, personal self-storage facilities 	1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 2 spaces for a resident manager 
Vehicle repair and maintenance 	
 Auto Repair 	4 spaces for each service bay, plus adequate queuing lanes for each bay 
 Car washes-automated self-serve 	1 space per facility if not in conjunction with a service station; no additional space required when in conjunction with service station; number of stacking spaces subject to Conditional Use Permit 
 Car washes-self serve 	2.5 spaces for each washing stall, for queuing and drying 
 Car washes-full serve 	10 spaces, plus 10 spaces for each wash lane for drying area, plus queuing area for 5 vehicles ahead of each lane 
Veterinary clinics and hospitals 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area for the first 4,000 sq. ft. of medical space within a building or center; and 6 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet. 
Video rental 	1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
 
(Ord. No. 1454, Sec. 6, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 1462, Sec. VI, 11-3-15; Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 10, 4-4-17; Ord. No. 1497, Sec. 4(Att. C), 7-3-18) 
h  Disabled/Handicapped Parking Requirements. Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled in the following manner: 
1.  Number of spaces and design standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with the accessible parking requirements contained in the California Building Code. 
2.  Reservation of spaces required. Disabled accessible spaces required by this Section shall be reserved by the property owner/tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use. 
3.  Upgrading of markings required. Standards for the marking, striping, and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces within the City shall be in compliance with the State standards. Upgrading to the State standards shall be completed by affected property owners within sixty (60) days of their being notified in writing by the City of new State standards, or within a time period and in a manner prescribed by State law, whichever is earlier. 
4.  Fulfilling of requirements. Disabled accessible parking spaces required by this Section shall count toward fulfilling off-street parking requirements. 
i  Stacking Space. Number and location of stacking spaces for drive-through lanes shall be determined during project review. A stacking space shall have the same length as a standard parking space. 
j  Uses not Listed in Section 9263 Table 1. The required number of parking spaces for uses not listed in Section 9263 Table 1 shall be the same as for a use specified which has similar traffic generating characteristics. The Community Development Director and City Engineer or their designee, shall determine what constitutes similar traffic generating characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1373, Sec. II, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 8, 2-5-13; Ord. No. 1425, Sec. 2, 2-5-13)  
9264 - REDUCTION OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
a  Joint Use of Parking Areas. With the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, parking facilities may be used jointly for nonresidential uses with different peak hours of operation. Requests for a minor Conditional Use Permit for shared parking shall meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  A parking study prepared by a California licensed traffic engineer or civil engineer experienced in the preparation of such study shall be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that no substantial conflict will exist in the peak hours of parking demand for the uses for which joint use is proposed. The methodology to be used in preparing the study shall be that promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE); 
2.  The number of parking spaces which may be credited against the requirements for the structures or uses involved shall not exceed the number of spaces reasonably anticipated to be available during different hours of operation; 
3.  Parking spaces designated for joint use shall be located so that they will adequately serve the uses for which they are intended; 
4.  A written and recorded agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the City Attorney and Community Development Director and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of the number of parking spaces designated for joint use and availability of reciprocal access easements. 
5.  Zoning Administrator approval of a minor Conditional Use Permit is required for parking areas serving structures totaling less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Planning Commission approval of a Conditional Use Permit is required for all other parking areas with joint-use parking. 
b  Historic Resource Residential Parking. When associated with a recognized historic resource, as identified in this Section, the number of required off-street parking spaces may be decreased by one (1) garage or parking space upon Zoning Administrator approval of a minor adjustment per Section 9299 (Zoning Administrator). Approval of a minor adjustment can be made when all the following circumstances are found to apply: 
1.  The adjusted decrease is for parking that serves a residence that is currently listed or is qualified to be listed in the City's Historical Resources Survey. 
2.  A minimum one-car garage is provided on-site. 
3.  Providing a new garage space or access to a new garage could result in the significant alteration or demolition of any historic structure or resource listed or eligible to be listed in the City's Historical Resources Survey including historic garages that contribute to the listing of the structure or resource. 
4.  New increases in square footage would not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the square footage of the structure that legally existed as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance; and, the total gross floor area of the residence does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet, including any detached habitable space (e.g. guest house, etc.). 
5.  The required number of parking spaces can be accommodated off-street outside of a fully enclosed garage within an existing legal driveway, tandem space, carport, etc. 
6.  The adjusted decrease is granted as a means to preserve the integrity of the historic structure. 
7.  That the design of the modification to the historic resource will be a positive contribution to the community. 
8.  The adjusted decrease is not associated with the addition of an accessory dwelling unit as authorized in this Code. (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 11, 4-4-17) 
c  Reduction in parking due to American Disabilities Act (ADA) upgrade. When required solely as a need to upgrade existing parking facilities to comply with Title 24, Title III and California Code of Regulations (CCR), or other California Access Codes or requirements, the total number of required parking spaces may be reduced at the discretion of the Community Development Director. The property owner shall demonstrate that by bringing the site into conformity with State and Federal ADA, required nonaccessible parking spaces will be unavoidably lost and shall submit a parking lot site plan that clearly identifies the entire onsite parking area showing that the loss of required nonaccessible parking spaces is unavoidable by parking space redesign. The Community Development Director may require appropriate parking lot redesign options that maintains any portion of the number of required nonaccessible parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9265 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM) 
Where applicable, trip reduction/TDM program plans shall be prepared for review and approval in compliance with the City's TDM Ordinance (Article 9, Chapter 9 of the Tustin City Code) or by the Air Quality Management District. Compliance and enforcement provisions of the City's TDM Ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9266 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING 
Off-street parking areas shall be provided in compliance with the following standards: 
a  Access. Access to off-street parking areas shall be provided in the following manner: 
1.  Parking areas shall provide adequate maneuvering room so that vehicles enter an abutting street or alley in a forward direction. Single-family residential and duplex residential uses shall be excluded from this requirement except when driveways take access from a designated major arterial highway; 
2.  All parking spaces shall have a minimum seven-foot vertical clearance. The front three (3) feet of a parking space in an enclosed garage or carport in a residential zone, however, may have a vertical clearance of four (4) feet to allow for enclosed storage to be provided above a vehicle's hood (See Figure 1). 
b  Location, Nonresidential. Off-street parking areas shall be located in the following manner: 
1.  Parking spaces shall be permanently accessible. 
2.  Required parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel or center as the activities or uses served, except that required parking spaces may be located within five hundred (500) feet of the parcel served if subject to a recorded covenant running with the land, subject to City Attorney approval, that shall be recorded against the affected parcel by the owner of the parking lot guaranteeing to the City that the required parking spaces will be maintained for the use or activity served. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 9, 2-5-13) 
c  Location, Residential. Parking in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  Vehicles shall not be parked between the street property line and the front or side of the residential unit except on a legal driveway, parking space, garage or carport approved by the City. 
2.  Storage of a recreational vehicle is prohibited except when located outside of any required front, side, or rear yard setbacks, on a paved surface, and when fully screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjoining properties by a wall or fence to a minimum height of six (6) feet and landscaping in a manner approved by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 10, 2-5-13) 
3.  Recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on driveways in front of residences for not more than forty-eight (48) hours within any seven (7) consecutive day period of time for the purpose of loading and unloading only. 
4.  In multifamily residential developments, parking shall only be permitted in designated parking spaces approved by the City. 
5.  Fabric, plastic or other temporary shade structures designed or utilized for sheltering vehicles or parking purposes are prohibited. 
6.  No commercial or commercially licensed vehicle shall be stored on any residentially zoned or used property. No commercial or commercially licensed vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of over twelve thousand (12,000) pounds is allowed to be parked on any residentially zoned or used property or on any private residential street. 
7.  A vehicle shall not be parked across or otherwise block any private or public sidewalk. 
d  Parking Space Design And Dimensions: 
1.  Minimum parking dimensions shall be as indicated in Table 2 and as illustrated by Figures 4, 5 and 6. 
TABLE 2 MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND LOT DIMENSIONS 
Parking Stall Standard 
Type of Stall 	Length/Width 	Door Opening 
Residential Garage/Carport 	20 feet/10 feet, inside dimensions 	8 feet min. (single car opening) 
16 feet min. (two-car opening) 
Standard 	19 feet/9 feet 	(Not applicable) 
Compact 	17 feet/8 feet 	(Not applicable) 
 
One-Way Traffic and Single Loaded Aisles in Parking Lot 
Parking angle (degrees) 	Stall depth, including bumper overhang 	Aisle width (travel lane) 	Total bay depth 
30 	17 feet 4 inches 	11 feet 	28 feet 4 inches 
45 	19 feet 10 inches 	13 feet 	32 feet 10 inches 
60 	21 feet 	18 feet 	39 feet 
75 	20 feet 7 inches 	21 feet 11 inches 	42 feet 6 inches 
90 	19 feet 	25 feet 	44 feet 
 
One-Way Traffic and Double Loaded Aisles in Parking Lot 
Parking angle (degrees) 	Stall depth, including bumper overhang 	Aisle width (travel lane) 	Total bay depth 
30 	17 feet 4 inches 	11 feet 	45 feet 7 inches 
45 	19 feet 10 inches 	13 feet 	52 feet 7 inches 
60 	21 feet 	18 inches 	60 feet 
75 	20 feet 7 inches 	21 feet 11 inches 	63 feet 1 inch 
90 	19 feet 	24 feet 	62 feet 
 
Two-Way Traffic and Double Loaded Aisles in Parking Lot 
Parking angle (degrees) 	Stall depth, including bumper overhang 	Aisle width (travel lane) 	Total bay depth 
30 	17 feet 4 inches 	24 feet 	58 feet 8 inches 
45 	19 feet 10 inches 	24 feet 	63 feet 8 inches 
60 	21 feet 	24 feet 	66 feet 
75 	20 feet 7 inches 	24 feet 	65 feet 2 inches 
90 	19 feet 	24 feet 	62 feet 
 
2.  General design requirements. 
a.  Aisle width for internal circulation. The minimum aisle width for two-way traffic with no parking spaces is twenty (20) feet and a minimum of twelve (12) feet for one-way traffic with no parking spaces. 
b.  Parallel parking spaces. Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum length of twenty-two (22) feet as shown in Figure 8. 
c.  Drainage. Off-street parking/loading areas shall be designed and constructed to ensure that surface water will not drain over sidewalks or adjacent parcels. Surface water shall be directed to landscape areas or bio-filtration planters and shall not be directed onto adjacent paved areas. Parking area design must comply with the City of Tustin Water Quality Ordinance and all Federal, State, and Regional Water Quality Control Board rules and regulations. 
d.  Compact parking spaces. Compact car spaces may be provided as follows: 
1.  Compact car parking spaces may be provided in addition to and not in lieu of required parking. 
2.  Each compact space shall be clearly marked as a compact space in letters not less than twelve (12) inches high and seven (7) inches wide, reading 'Compact' or as otherwise allowed by code. 
3.  Compact parking spaces shall be located along the perimeter of parking areas, away from any entrance to buildings and uses. 
e.  Wheel stops/curbing. Wheel stops or concrete curbing at least six (6) inches high and six (6) inches wide shall be provided for parking spaces located adjacent to walkways, fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas and structures. 
f.  Overhang. Parking stalls and wheel stops may be designed to allow a vehicle to overhang into landscaped areas a maximum of two (2) feet. A vehicle overhang shall not encroach into any walk way drive aisle or other path of travel. 
g.  Queuing distance. Parking lot entries accessed from a public or private street shall access driveways that are not intersected by a parking aisle, parking space, or another access driveway for a minimum twenty (20) feet from the property line, to provide a queuing area for vehicles entering and exiting the parking area. See Figure 7 (Access to Parking Spaces). 
h.  Physical barrier. Parking spaces located adjacent to a physical barrier (i.e., wall, fence) shall be eleven (11) feet wide to allow for opening of vehicle doors. 
i.  Dead-end drive aisle. Drives aisle with a dead-end configuration shall have a three-foot additional back-up space. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 11, 2-5-13) 
e  Landscaping. 
1.  A minimum of five (5) percent of the interior parking lot area shall be permanently landscaped. The area of the parking lot shall be computed by adding areas used for access drives, aisles, stalls, and maneuvering. Required setback or buffer areas between the parking lot and property lines shall not be counted towards satisfying the parking lot landscape requirement. 
2.  Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall be minimum five (5) feet wide. The minimum perimeter parking lot landscaping along street frontages shall be minimum ten (10) feet wide for parking lots abutting any major arterial highway. Additional landscape criteria are specified within individual zoning designation standards, where applicable. 
3.  Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall be designed and maintained to screen cars from view from the street to a height of thirty (30) inches to forty-two (42) inches. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, solid masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices which meet the intent of this requirement. Trees shall be provided in these locations at a rate of one (1) for every twenty (20) lineal feet of landscaped area. Plant materials, signs, or structures within a traffic safety sight area of a driveway shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in height. 
4.  Areas within the parking lot that are not used for parking or other approved uses shall be landscaped. 
5.  At least one (1) 24-inch box tree for every six (6) parking spaces shall be included in the development of the landscape program for the site. Trees must be dispersed throughout the parking lot and shall be planted in locations that do not conflict with vehicle or pedestrian movement and access. 
6.  A permanent and automatic irrigation system shall be installed and maintained in all landscaped areas to ensure proper maintenance of plant materials. 
7.  A six-foot eight-inch high decorative masonry wall shall be provided along the property line where a parking area, driveway, or vehicle turning area on a non-residentially zoned parcel abuts a residentially zoned parcel. Within a required front yard, the wall shall not exceed three (3) feet in height subject to visual clearance requirements at driveways. The Community Development Director may waive or modify this requirement to protect the visual clearance of adjacent residences or where screening is not necessary due to existing grade differentials or other reasons deemed acceptable by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Secs. 12, 13, 2-5-13) 
f  Lighting. Parking facilities shall provide lighting in compliance with the requirements of the Tustin City Code and other applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 14, 2-5-13) 
g  Design For Carports And Garages. 
1.  Carports/covered parking shall have a solid roof structure that completely covers a carport parking stall. Lockable storage space of at least ninety (90) cubic feet shall be provided in carports and shall be designed and maintained so as not to obstruct vehicle access to the required parking space (see Figure 1). Carports shall be screened from public view by a solid wall. 
2.  Garages shall be completely enclosed on all sides, have a solid roof and a lockable door. 
h  Residential Guest Parking. Off-street guest parking in residential zoning districts shall be designated and restricted, with appropriate signs/pavement markings, for the exclusive use of the guests. 
i  Shopping Cart Storage. Shopping cart storage areas shall not be located within required parking spaces. 
j  Striping and Identification. 
1.  Parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles. If double stripes are used, parking space widths shall be measured from the center of the double stripes. The Community Development Director may require the installation of traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility. 
2.  Parking spaces for the disabled and compact spaces shall be striped and signed in compliance with applicable State standards and as contained in this Chapter. 
3.  Parking spaces provided for motorcycle use only shall have bollards installed and be appropriately spaced to prevent automobile usage of the motorcycle area. Motorcycle spaces shall be marked so that they can be clearly identified for motorcycle use only. 
k  Tandem Parking. Except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter, tandem parking shall be prohibited. 
l  Valet Parking. Valet parking may be allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit and that adequate drop-off area is provided. Tandem parking in conjunction with valet parking may be allowed subject to plan approval through a Conditional Use Permit. 
m  Interpretations. The parking lot design standards may be interpreted by the Community Development Director for conditions not already specified in this Section. 
n  Parking lots built prior to the adoption of this ordinance may be maintained and repaired; however any reconfiguration of parking area shall comply to the extent possible, with the provisions contained in this Part. Any deviations from the standards shall be approved by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 15, 2-5-13) 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9267 - DRIVEWAYS AND SITE ACCESS 
a  Driveways For Residential Uses. 
1.  The driveway width within the front yard setback shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet; if the garage or carport is designed for three (3) or more vehicles, the driveway width within the front yard setback shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet. For lots at the ends of cul-de-sacs with lot frontages of less than forty (40) feet, the parking and driveway areas within the front yard setback shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total front yard setback. The total width may be divided for properties with two (2) driveways. 
2.  Circular driveways shall have a minimum outside radius of twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Parking and driveway areas within the front yard setback which abut the parking or driveway area of an adjacent lot shall not be designed or installed in such a manner so as to create an unattractive, excessively paved area. Adjacent parking and driveway areas determined by the Director of Community Development to be unattractive or excessive shall be separated with a buffer consisting of landscaping, raised hardscaping, or combination of such materials installed in the area between the parking or driveway area and the adjacent side or rear property line. 
4.  A driveway leading to a parking area for duplexes, condominiums, and dwelling units located on a flag lot may be located, in part, along the driveway of a contiguous lot and may, in part, be a common driveway which provides access to more than one (1) dwelling unit. 
5.  Paved areas (e.g., parking of vehicles or providing pedestrian access to the residence) may be provided within the front yard setback of residential districts if the total paved area does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total front yard setback area, the parking of vehicles does not obstruct ingress and egress to required parking, and all of the requirements of this Zoning Code can be met. For narrow lots, or lots at the ends of cul-de-sacs with lot frontages of less than forty (40) feet, or other similar irregular conditions, the percentage of parking and driveway areas within the front yard setback may be reduced through Design Review approval of the Director of Community Development. 
6.  Where garages face each other and are separated by a shared driveway, the minimum driveway width shall be twenty-five (25) feet. See Figure 10 (Minimum Driveway Width for Garages with Shared Driveway). 
7.  Any deviation from the above standards may be considered on a case-by-case basis, subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director. 
b  Driveways for Commercial and Industrial Districts. One-way driveways within the front yard area shall have a minimum width of fourteen (14) feet and a maximum width of twenty (20) feet. Two-way driveways within the front yard area shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a maximum width of thirty-five (35) feet. 
c  Paved Areas. Paved areas may be improved with impervious materials including, but not limited to, concrete, bricks, slate or stone tiles, decorative stamped concrete, or any other permanent hardscape. No decomposed granite, gravel, or other loose materials shall be allowed. 
1.  During the pendency of any Water Conservation Stage declared pursuant to Chapter 10 of Article 4 of the City Code, unimproved and/or unpaved portions of the front yard setback area in residential districts or front yards in commercial or industrial districts shall be improved and maintained with appropriate landscaping that is free of weeds and overgrown plant material and/or synthetic turf maintained in accordance with the Synthetic Turf Standards and subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. 
2.  At all times other than during the pendency of any Water Conservation Stage, unimproved and/or unpaved portions of the front yard setback area in residential districts or front yards in commercial or industrial districts shall be improved and maintained with appropriate landscaping in a healthy and vigorous condition and/or synthetic turf maintained in accordance with the Synthetic Turf Standards and subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 1457, Sec. 6, 6-2-15; Ord. No. 1477, Sec. 5, 3-21-17) 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1398, Secs. 3—5, 8-6-11)  
9268 - OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 
a  Number of Loading Spaces Required. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as identified in Table 4, below: 
TABLE 4 REQUIRED LOADING SPACES 
Type of Land Use 	Total Gross Floor Area 	Loading Spaces Required 
Industrial, manufacturing, research and development, and institutional uses 	5,000 to 19,999 sq. ft. 	1 
	20,000 to 39,999 sq. ft. 	2 
	40,000 to 79,000 sq. ft. 	3 
	80,000 sq. ft. and over 	4 plus 1 space for each additional 50,000 sq. ft. 
Office, hotels, hospitals and other non-goods handling uses 	5,000 to 49,999 sq. ft 	1 
	50,000 to 99,999 sq. ft. 	2 
	100,000 sq. ft. and over 	3 
Retail stores, restaurants and other goods handling uses 	5,000 to 14,999 sq. ft. 	1 
	15,000 to 44,999 sq. ft 	2 
	45,000 sq. ft. and over 	3 
All nonresidential uses 	Less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	0 
 
1.  The number of loading spaces required is based on the total gross floor area of the entire center. Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the Community Development Director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use. 
2.  Dual use of loading spaces for purposes of vehicle parking shall be allowed during hours approved by the property owner or their designee. Loading spaces may count towards the number of required parking spaces for the associated use. Dedicated loading spaces may not be used as dual use parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 16, 2-5-13) 
b  Standards For Off-Street Loading Areas. Off-street loading areas shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Dimensions. The acceptable dimensions of the required loading spaces shall be determined and approved through the Design Review process. 
2.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting in compliance with city requirements. 
3.  Loading Doors and Gates. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall be painted to be compatible with the color of the exterior structure wall(s) and be located on the rear of the structure away from public view. Loading bays and doors may be located on the side of a structure, away from a street frontage, where the Community Development Director determines that the bays, doors, and related tracks can be adequately screened from view from adjacent streets. 
4.  Loading Ramps. Plans for loading ramps and/or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions, well, and overhead clearances when required by the Community Development Director. 
5.  Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed to: 
a.  Ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets as much as possible; 
b.  Ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other traffic areas on-site; 
c.  Ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site; and 
d.  Avoid adverse noise impacts upon neighboring residential properties. 
6.  Screening. Loading areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall be screened when required by the Community Development Director. 
7.  Striping. Loading areas shall be striped and/or have signage indicating the loading spaces. Dual use loading spaces shall have appropriate striping and/or signage indicating hours approved for vehicle parking. The striping and/or signage shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 17, 2-5-13) 
c  Figures. 
1  The figures and notes in this Section delineate and illustrate the requirements in this Chapter: 
  
Figure 1. Vertical Clearance: Parking space in enclosed garage or covered parking. 
1  Minimum vertical clearance height: Seven (7) feet 
2  Minimum vertical clearance height at front of space: Four (4) feet 
3  Maximum horizontal distance allowed for Note 2 above: Three (3) feet 
  
Figure 2. Minimum Garage Dimensions 
A  Two-car Garage 
1.  Interior width: Twenty (20) feet 
2.  Interior length: Twenty (20) feet 
3.  Door opening: Sixteen (16) feet 
B.  One-car garage or garage with separate openings and interior posts 
4.  Interior width for one car space: Ten (10) feet 
5.  Interior length for one car space: Twenty (20) feet 
6.  Door opening: Eight (8) feet 
  
Figure 3. Parking Overhang Standards 
1.  Parking length: Seventeen (17) feet minimum 
2.  Overhang length: Two (2) feet maximum 
  
Figure 4. 90-degree—Single Drive Aisle 
1.  Stall dimensions: Nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet 
2.  Drive aisles: Twenty-four (24) feet 
3.  Parking Bay (inside curbs): Sixty-two (62) feet minimum 
4.  Driveway in front yard area: Twenty-four (24) feet to thirty-five (35) feet 
5.  Drive aisle back-up space: Three (3) feet 
6.  Concrete curb: Six (6) inches high by six (6) inches wide 
7.  Perimeter Wall: Six (6) feet eight (8) inches when adjacent to residential property or use 
8.  Tree wells: One (1) tree per every six (6) stalls 
  
Figure 5. 90-Degree—Double Drive Aisle 
1.  Stall Dimensions: Nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet 
2.  Drive aisles: Twenty-four (24) feet 
3.  Tree wells: One (1) tree per every six (6) stalls 
4.  Parking bay: Sixty-two (62) feet 
5.  Interior circulation: Twenty (20) feet 
6.  Driveway in front yard area: Twenty-four (24) feet to thirty-five (35) feet 
7.  Stalls adjacent to physical obstruction: Eleven (11) feet by nineteen (19) feet 
  
Figure 6. 60-Degree 
1.  Stall Dimensions: Nine (9) feet by twenty-one (21) feet 
2.  Drive aisle width: 
One-way - Eighteen (18) feet 
Two-way - Twenty-four (24) feet 
3.  Tree wells: Every sixth (6th) stall, twenty (20) feet; two-way - twenty-four (24) feet 
4.  Parking bay depth: 
One-way - Sixty (60) feet 
Two-way - Sixty-six (66) feet 
5.  Interior Circulation: 
One-way - Twelve (12) feet 
Two-way - Twenty (20) feet 
6.  Driveway in front yard area: One-way - Fourteen (14) feet to thirty-five (35) feet 
  
(Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 18, 2-5-13) 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08)  
9269 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the respective meanings as set forth except when the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
"Carport." An attached or detached unenclosed structure with a solid roof designed to shelter motor vehicles. 
"Carwash - Automated Self Serve." A car wash facility that is fully automated in which patrons remain in their vehicles during the service then drive away after the service and does not involve carwash personnel. 
"Carwash - Full Serve." A car wash facility that provides full car wash services in which patrons wait for their vehicles in a waiting area while car wash personnel vacuum, wash, dry and detail the vehicles. 
"Carwash - Self Serve." A car wash facility in which wash bays are provided and patrons wash the vehicles themselves. 
"Company-Owned Vehicles." Passenger delivery and/or other special purpose vehicles owned and operated by business establishments located at a site. 
"Covered Space." A parking space located within any approved parking structure constructed with a solid roof that is designed and used primarily for the sheltering of vehicles. 
"Driveway." A paved area of a lot located between the public right-of-way and the garage, carport, or required parking space designed and intended as an access way between a private or public road and the garage, carport, or required parking space. 
"Floor Area, Gross." The sum of the horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings, but not including underground parking, uncovered steps or exterior balconies. 
"Garage." A detached, accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling, used primarily for the housing of vehicles of the occupant of the dwelling, having a roof, and enclosed on at least three (3) sides, with the fourth side being a lockable door. 
"Parking Space." Accessible and usable paved area on a building site located off-street and designed for the parking of vehicles. 
"Recreational Vehicle." A motorized or nonmotorized vehicle that is intended for human habitation, recreational use, camping and travel use including, but not limited to, a motor home, travel trailer truck camper trailer (with or without motive power), all-terrain vehicles, and boats. 
"Retail Center (Small)." A commercial property with less than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
"Retail Center (Large)." A commercial property with 30,000 square feet or more of gross floor area. 
"Seat." Furniture or furnishings designed and used for sitting; eighteen (18) inches of continuous bench or bleacher seating shall equal one (1) seat. 
"Stacking Space." A space that a vehicle can occupy for the purpose of queuing in order to access a drive-through service. 
"Tandem Parking." Any off-street parking space designed in such a manner that a vehicle properly parked in such space may by design, have its ingress to or egress from such space blocked by a vehicle properly parked in a contiguous parking space. 
(Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1418, Sec. 19, 2-5-13)  
PART 7 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
9270 - REGULATIONS 
All regulations in this Chapter pertaining to the districts established in Sections 9213a and b hereof are subject to the general provisions, conditions and exceptions contained in this Part. 
a 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
All of the uses listed in this Part, and all matters directly related thereto are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their inclusion in any class of use set forth in the various districts herein defined, and therefore the authority for and location of the operation of any of the uses designated herein shall be subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 9291. In addition to the criteria for determining whether or not a Conditional Use Permit should be issued as set forth in Section 9293b hereof, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission shall consider the following additional factors to determine that the characteristics of the listed uses will not be unreasonably incompatible with uses permitted in surrounding areas. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.3) 
(1)  Damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration; 
(2)  Hazard from explosion, contamination or fire; 
(3)  Hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character or traffic or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. 
The uses referred to herein are as follows: 
(a)  Airports and landing fields. 
(b)  Establishments or enterprise involving large assemblages of people or automobiles as follows: 
(1)  Amusement parks and race tracks; 
(2)  Recreational facilities, privately operated. (Ord. No. 382, Sec. 1) 
(c)  The mining of natural mineral resources, together with the necessary buildings and appurtenances incident thereto. 
(d)  Removal or deposit of earth other than in connection with excavations or deposits in connection with construction of buildings, roadways, or public or home improvements. 
(e)  Presentation of live entertainment, pursuant to the live entertainment permit per Article 3 of the Tustin City Code. (Ord. No. 406) 
(f)  Dish antennae located in residential zones exceeding three (3) feet in diameter and located other than in rear yard areas obscured from public right-of-way view. (Ord. No. 926, Sec. 2, 2-4-85) 
(g)  Dish antennae located in all zones other than residential, exceeding three feet in diameter and not fully screened or otherwise obscured from public right-of-way view. (Ord. No. 926, Sec. 2, 2-4-85) 
b 
Approval of Temporary Uses 
Temporary uses are typically associated with special events or community events which are in place for a short period of time. Temporary Use Permits may be issued no more than four (4) times per calendar year for each business, except if approval is given by the Community Development Director for additional Temporary Use Permits. Permits are required prior to a temporary outdoor use occurring in any zone (excluding residential uses) as follows: 
1.  Requests for a temporary use of up to thirty (30) days require approval of a Temporary Use Permit from the Community Development Department. 
2.  Requests for more than thirty (30) days and up to one (1) year require Community Development Director approval. 
3.  Requests for more than one (1) year require approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) by the Planning Commission. 
Any temporary outdoor use involving five hundred (500) or more persons gathering together at any given time may be subject to a Large Outdoor Gathering Permit pursuant to Tustin City Code Sections 3241 through 3244. (Ord. No. 362, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 501; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
c 
Prohibited Uses 
Any use that is not expressly permitted in a district as a permitted use or as a conditionally permitted use, including a use in a district determined to be similar in character to a particular use allowed in such district as provided in this Code, shall be deemed a prohibited use and such use shall not be allowed in such district. (Ord. No. 1322, Sec. 1, 12-4-06) 
Marijuana dispensaries as defined in this Code are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts. (Ord. No. 1466, Sec. 3, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 1478, Sec. 3, 4-4-17) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.30, 5-21-13)  
9271 - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS 
a 
Repealed. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.31, 5-21-13) 
b 
Public Utilities 
1.  General Utilities. 
(a)  Public utilities for distribution of gas, water, electricity and telephone communications shall be allowed in all districts without limitation as to height or without obtaining a Conditional Use Permit thereof and the provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to limit or interfere with the installation, maintenance and operation of public utility pipelines and electric transmission or telephone communication lines when located in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California and within rights-of-way, easements, franchise, or ownership of such public utilities. 
2.  Utilities to be Placed Underground. 
(a)  Whenever any property in any one zone is developed with new or relocated buildings or structures, or whenever enclosed floor area in excess of 200 square feet is added to an existing building site in any zone, except zones permitted for single-family residential use, or whenever a residential building or use is converted to any purpose or use other than that which existed at the time of conversion, all electrical, telephone, community antenna, television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed, shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. 
(b)  For the purpose of this Section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, may be placed above ground. 
(c)  The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section, and shall provide all necessary facilities on their premises so as to receive such services from the supplying utility or utilities subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on the respective utility or utilities on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(d)  Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter result from its literal interpretation or enforcement, the Planning Commission may waive, modify, or delay the application of any undergrounding requirement upon written request by a building site owner. Such request shall be filed with the Community Development Department and shall contain any and all facts which are offered in support. 
(e)  If the Planning Commission's action is to delay the installation of required undergrounding utilities, it may require the building site owner to file with the City a cash deposit, and/or record a covenant sufficient to provide for the future installation of the underground features which are to be delayed. The amount of the cash deposit shall be determined by the Building Official. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.32, 5-21-13) 
c 
Temporary Real Estate Offices 
The following temporary uses shall be permitted in any district: 
(1)  Model homes and their garages used as offices solely for the first sale of homes within a subdivision on the following conditions: 
(a)  A temporary certificate of use and occupancy shall first be obtained from the Department of Building and Safety for the use of model homes and their garages for offices solely for such first sales; 
(b)  The use shall be discontinued at the end of one (1) year from the date of the certificate of use and occupancy; 
(c)  Provided, however, the Building Official may for good cause, after receipt of a certified report from the developer on the number of dwellings sold, extend the time limit not to exceed two (2) successive periods of six (6) months each. 
(2)  Temporary offices not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet solely for the first sale of lots within a subdivision on the following conditions: 
(a)  A temporary Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall first be obtained from the Department of Building and Safety for the use of the structures for offices solely for such first sales; 
(b)  The use shall be discontinued and such offices removed from the premises at the end of one (1) year from the date of issuances of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy. 
(c)  Provided, however, the Building Official may for good cause, after receipt of a certified report from the subdivider on the number of lots sold, extend the time limit not to exceed two (2) successive periods of six (6) months each. (Ord. No. 234, Sec. 1) 
d 
Height Limits of Towers 
Where chimneys, silos, cupolas, flag poles, monuments, gas storage holders, radio and other towers, water tanks, steeples and similar structures and mechanical appurtenances are permitted in a district, height limits may be exceeded upon the securing of a Conditional Use Permit in each case. (Ord. No. 156, Sec. 5.7; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.33, 5-21-13) 
e 
Public and Semi-Public Building Height Limit 
In any district with a height limit of less than seventy-five (75) feet, public and semi-public buildings, schools, Places of Worship, hospitals and other institutions permitted in such district may be erected to a height exceeding that herein specified for such district, provided that the cubical contents of the building shall not exceed an area equal to the area of the site upon which it is constructed multiplied by the factor three (3), and provided that the front, rear and side yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each one (1) foot by which such building exceeds the height limit hereinbefore established for such district. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.8; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.34, 5-21-13) 
f 
Height Limit in "C" or "M" Zone 
Upon securing a Conditional Use Permit any building in any "C" or "M" District may be erected to a height exceeding that herein specified for such district, provided that the cubical contents of the building shall not exceed an area equal to the area of the site upon which it is to be constructed multiplied by the factor five (5). (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.9; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.35, 5-21-13) 
g 
Repealed. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.10; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
h 
Animal Hospital or Clinic 
One (1) caretaker apartment shall be permitted incidental to an animal hospital. Said apartment shall be used solely by persons employed in the hospital for caretaker duties. (Ord. No. 340, Sec. 2) 
Small animal hospitals or clinics shall be subject to additional provisions hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  All animals shall be kept within an enclosed, air conditioned, soundproof structure. 
(2)  Said hospitals or clinics shall be so designed that no odors will be discernible beyond the property lines of the parcel on which it is located. (Ord. No. 352, Sec. 6) 
i 
Fences, Solid Hedges and Walls 
(1)  Fences, solid hedges and walls may be erected in any district, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Fences, solid hedges and walls shall not exceed six feet eight inches (6'8") in height on or within all rear and side property lines on interior lot lines, and on or to the rear of all front yard setback lines. 
(b)  No fence, solid hedge or wall over three (3) feet in height shall be erected in the required front yard setback. 
(c)  Any fences, solid hedges or walls located in any required rear or side yard abutting the intersection of a street, alley or driveway shall be subject to the Intersection Site Distance requirements as determined by the Public Works Department site distance standards. 
unless approved, in writing, by the Community Development Department. 
(d)  Fences, solid hedges, walls or structures exceeding, up to twenty (20) percent, six feet eight inches (6'8") in height to enclose areas on the rear half of a lot may be erected subject to a minor adjustment (refer to Section 9299b(1)). 
(e)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a fence or wall required by any law or regulation of the State of California or any agency thereof or by any other ordinance of the City of Tustin, for reasons of public safety. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 1) 
(2)  Walls shall be constructed and maintained on zone boundary lines as follows: 
(a)  Where any "C", "M", or "Pr" zone abuts upon any residential zone, there shall be constructed a solid masonry wall, six feet eight inches (6'8") in height on the zone boundary line. 
(b)  Where any "R-3", "R-4", or "PD" zone abuts upon any R-1 zone, there shall be constructed a solid masonry wall six feet eight inches (6'8") in height on the zone boundary line. 
(c)  Where any "M" zone abuts upon any "C" or "Pr" zone, there shall be constructed a solid masonry wall six feet eight inches (6'8") in height on the zone boundary line. 
(d)  The aforesaid walls shall be six feet eight inches (6'8") in height except that portion of equal depth of the front yard on the abutting "R" classified property which shall be three (3) feet in height unless a greater height is approved in writing by the Planning Department. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 1) 
(e)  Provided, however, the Community Development Director may waive or modify any wall requirements as specified in this Section where there is a solid masonry wall existing immediately adjacent on the contiguous property, upon finding and requiring that: 
i)  An existing wall meets or can be modified to conform to the intent of this Section; and 
ii)  Suitable landscaping can be installed adjacent to the existing wall to supplement and enhance the environmental buffering; and 
iii)  Protection can be afforded the existing wall to prevent vehicle damage, if necessary; and 
iv)  Concurrence of the adjacent property owner can be obtained, when necessary, to modify an existing wall to meet the requirements of this Section. (Ord. No. 534) 
(3)  However, upon application and proceedings pursuant to Section 9291, Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirements set forth herein. 
(4)  The fences, solid hedges and walls provided herein shall be measured and constructed pursuant to development standards of the Building Department. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 1) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.36, 5-21-13) 
j 
Architectural Feature Limitations 
Architectural features on the main buildings, such as cornices, eaves and canopies may not extend closer than three (3) feet to any side lot line. Eaves and canopies may extend a maximum of three (3) feet into the required front yard and no closer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line. Fireplaces, not exceeding six (6) feet in breadth, may extend not closer than three (3) feet to any side lot line. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.12) 
k 
Repealed. (Ord. No. 338; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
l 
Limitations of Porches and Staircases 
Open, uncovered, raised porches, landing places or outside stairways may project not closer than four (4) feet to any side lot line, and not exceeding six (6) feet in breadth, may extend not closer than three (3) feet to any side lot line. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.13) 
m 
Official Plan Line for Streets 
Whenever an Official Plan Line has been established for any street, required yards shall be measured from such line and in no case shall the provisions of this Chapter be construed as permitting any encroachment upon any Official Plan Line. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.14) 
n 
Accessory Structures 
1.  Accessory structures attached to a main building shall be made structurally a part thereof, have a common roof with said main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this Chapter applicable to the main building. 
2.  Detached accessory structures, such as garages, carports, laundry and recreation buildings, may be constructed on the front one-half (½) of the lot, provided, however, that in any R-3 or R-4 District no garage, carport, or laundry building openings shall face an abutting street. 
3.  The architectural style of all sides of accessory buildings shall be compatible with the architectural style of the main buildings. 
4.  Detached accessory structures may have a zero-foot side and rear yard property line setback if abutting an adjoining structure on a separate lot with a zero-foot setback or if the abutting lot is unimproved. If an adjoining structure on a separate lot is constructed other than with a zero-foot property line setback, a minimum of three (3) feet shall be maintained between the structures. 
5.  All accessory structures shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from street rights-of-way; provided, however, that accessory structures abutting a State Highway, where no access is permitted, may have a zero-foot setback. 
6.  Detached accessory structures constructed within five (5) feet of any side or rear property line in an "R" District shall be enclosed by a solid wall on such side or sides; provided, however, that garages or carports facing an alley or an access easement, the right of use of which is dedicated to the subject property, need not be enclosed on such side or sides constructed within five (5) feet of a side or rear property line if the minimum backing space is twenty-five (25) feet from the carports or garages to the far side of the alley or access easement. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.37, 5-21-13) 
o 
Swimming Pools 
Swimming pools in residential districts shall not be located closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line, nor within those areas described by Section 9271i(1)(b) or 9271i(1)(c). (Ord. No. 476; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
Heater and filter units for swimming pools shall be located in the rear or side yard areas, and shall be screened from view. (Ord. No. 547) 
Any lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from any adjoining premises. (Ord. No. 770, Sec. 8) 
p 
Setback Requirements for Lots Developed Prior to Zoning Ordinance 
In the Single Family Residential (R-1), Duplex Residential (R-2), and Multiple Family Residential (R-3) zoning districts, the minimum required side or rear yard setback for side or rear yard additions to existing structures (not including accessory structures except garages identified in the City's Historic Resources Survey) that are listed on the City's Historic Resources Survey shall be the same as the adjacent elevation of the existing side or rear yard setback of the original structure if the setback is less than the minimum setback required in the applicable residential district provided the requirements of the Uniform Building Code can be met and emergency access can be maintained. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.17; Ord. No. 1238, Sec. 2, 6-4-01) 
q 
Development of Substandard Parcels 
Single family dwellings only may be erected on any parcel of land the area of which is less than the building site area required for the particular district in which said parcel is located, but if, any only if, said parcel was in single ownership at the time of the adoption of this Chapter and said single ownership was recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Orange County. No structure shall be erected on any substandard parcel if said parcel was acquired from the owner or owners of contiguous property or said contiguous owner's or owners' transferee, after the effective date of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.18) 
r 
Sideyard Width of Substandard Lots 
The width of side yards on single family dwellings constructed pursuant to subsection q above may be reduced to ten (10) percent of the width of such parcel, but in no case to less than four (4) feet. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 519) 
s 
Repealed (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.38, 5-21-13) 
t 
Repealed (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.38, 5-21-13) 
u 
Building Lines 
Building lines are as stated in this Section unless otherwise shown on Zone Map. No building shall be closer to a property line or to the center line of any street or highway than the building line applicable thereto. 
Front side or rear yard abutting or street, measured from center line: 
	Building Line for SECONDARY 

Highway (80' R/W) 	Building Line for PRIMARY 

Highway (100' R/W) 
DISTRICT 	Front 	Side 	Rear 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
R-A 	60' 	50' 	65' 	70' 	60' 	75' 
E-4 	60' 	50' 	65' 	70' 	60' 	75' 
R-1 	60' 	50' 	65' 	70' 	60' 	75' 
R-2 	60' 	50' 	65' 	70' 	60' 	75' 
R-3 	60' 	50' 	65' 	70' 	60' 	75' 
C-1 	55' 	55' 	55' 	65' 	65' 	65' 
C-2 	55' 	55' 	55' 	65' 	65' 	65' 
C-3 	55' 	55' 	55' 	65' 	65' 	65' 
CG 	55' 	55' 	55' 	65' 	65' 	65' 
M 	55' 	55' 	55' 	65' 	65' 	65' 
PM 	65' 	65' 	65' 	75' 	75' 	75' 
 
(Ord. No. 157, Sec. 5.22) 
Irvine Blvd. setback—Ten (10) feet from right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.39, 5-21-13) 
v 
Prefix and Suffix to Districts 
A numerical prefix and/or suffix may be added to any district. The prefix shall establish the minimum width for a building site measured in feet at the building setback line; in non-residential districts, the numerical suffix shall establish the minimum number of square feet for a building site in said zone. However, the numerical suffix and building site shall in no case be less than the minimum lot size established in this Chapter. This section shall not apply to a P-D District. In residential districts, the suffix corresponds to the minimum lot area required per family unit. (Ord. No. 248, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
w 
Repealed (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.40, 5-21-13) 
x 
Highway Dedication and Improvement 
No building and no land shall be used for any of the commercial uses permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3 or M Zones, nor shall any certificate of use and occupancy therefor be issued by the Building and Safety Department, where the land upon which such building or land to be used for said uses abuts upon, and the ingress or egress to the said building or land is by way of or into or upon any existing highway or highways shown on the Master Plan of Streets and Highways, adopted by the City of Tustin on December 5, 1960, as amended, until and unless the right-of-way for such highway or highways to the width shown on "Standard Streets and Highways Plans" has been dedicated to or vested in the City of Tustin, and such right-of-way has been improved by installation of curbs, gutters, and street drainage, in full compliance with the City of Tustin Street Improvement Standards, as amended, or the owner has dedicated or irrevocably offered to dedicate such right-of-way and prepared plans for the improvement and has entered into an agreement with the City to make such improvements. In the event an agreement for the improvement is entered into, the City Council may require that the agreement be secured by a good and sufficient bond, or it may accept in lieu thereof a cash deposit, which bond or cash deposit shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvement. 
Commercial use, as used in this section means any retail, wholesale, or manufacturing business, the carrying on of any profession, the operation of mobile home parks, hotels, or any business, but does not include farming, including all types of agriculture and horticulture, or the conducting of temporary stands for the sale of agricultural or farming products grown or produced in the premises as accessory use to the land, or the conducting of any home occupation. 
Provided, however, that sidewalks shall not be required in the M Zone. (Ord. No. 293, Sec. 4) 
y 
Criteria for Dish Antenna Installation 
(1)  Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "dish antenna" is a disc-shaped antenna either solid or mesh type construction exceeding three (3) feet in diameter, intended but not limited to the purpose of receiving communications from an orbiting satellite transmitter. 
(2)  Location: 
(a)  Residential zones: A dish antenna installed at ground level in the rear yard and obscured from public right-of-way view is exempt from the requirement of a Conditional Use Permit. If a useable signal cannot be obtained from a rear yard location, the dish antenna may be located in the side yard of the property or on a building roof subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(b)  Nonresidential zones: A dish antenna located at ground level or on a building roof completely obscured from public right-of-way view is exempt from the requirement of a Conditional Use Permit. Those antennas which cannot be obscured as determined by City staff are subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.41, 5-21-13) 
(3)  Antenna color compatibility: All dish antennae shall be compatible in color with their surroundings and not include signage whether manufacturer's name and other advertising. Antennas shall be painted to match surrounding background if only partially obscured or to match dominant building color if roof-mounted. 
(4)  Height limitations: 
(a)  Residential zones: Dish antennas shall not exceed the maximum building height limit permitted in the zone if roof-mounted nor exceed ten (10) feet in height if ground-level mounted. 
(b)  Nonresidential zones: Dish antennas shall not exceed the maximum building height limit permitted in the zone if roof-mounted nor exceed fifteen (15) feet in height if ground-level-mounted. 
(5)  Building permits: A building permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of any dish antenna exceeding three (3) feet in diameter. (Ord. No. 926, Sec. 2, 2-4-85) 
z 
Outdoor Vending Activities, Pushcarts, Portable Vending Devices 
Consistent with other sections of the Tustin City Code, outdoor vending activities are also hereby prohibited except as provided herein: 
(1)  Pushcarts or portable vending devices may operate within the City of Tustin in the following locations only: 
(a)  Within any commercial multi-use or multi-tenant shopping center with more than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of leasable floor area or located on a site greater than one (1) acre in land area, with written consent of the center owner or agent, upon Planning Commission review and approval of a proposal subject to the findings required for approval of a design review application by the director of community development; 
(b)  At any special event or activity, with limits to the number of pushcarts conditioned upon the issuance of a temporary use permit, by the Director of Community Development; and 
(c)  At other appropriate sites, upon issuance of a conditional use permit and design review approval by the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Pushcarts or portable vending devices may be operated or used for any outdoor vending purpose only during the business or operating hours of the shopping center or special event where located. In centers where one (1) or more businesses operate on a twenty-four-hour basis, the maximum hours of operation of pushcarts or portable vending devices shall be 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(3)  Pushcart or portable vending device operators and pushcart or portable vending device owners shall have a valid City of Tustin business license, and any necessary State, County or other City permit required by law, and shall operate in accordance with regulations pertaining to those licenses and permits. 
(4)  Design standards 
The following design criteria and standards shall be considered in the evaluation of a Design Review application for pushcarts or other portable vending devices: 
(a)  Location, number and size, including height; 
(b)  Design of the pushcart(s) or other portable vending device(s), including color and signage, which shall be compatible with the design of the shopping center where the pushcart(s) is located; 
(c)  Ancillary equipment, such as cash register stands and trash receptacles; 
(d)  Security. The design and location of pushcarts or portable vending devices shall minimize theft and vandalism. 
(5)  One (1) small compact stool or chair may be utilized by the pushcart or portable vending device operator. The chair or stool shall be placed within four (4) feet of the pushcart and shall not block the safe passage of pedestrians or vehicles. No advertising shall be placed on the stool or chair. No additional seating shall be allowed. 
(6)  A refuse bin of at least one (1) cubic foot, shall be provided in, on or within three (3) feet of the pushcart(s) or other portable vending device(s). 
(7)  Restrictions: 
(a)  No noise-making devices shall be used in conjunction with pushcarts or portable vending devices. 
(b)  Pushcarts or portable vending devices shall not be stationed for purposes of outdoor vending in any location which creates an unreasonable obstruction to the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or within ten (10) feet of any intersection, driveway, or building entrance; or in any space designed for vehicular parking. 
(c)  No signs or other advertising devices are permitted beyond those painted on or affixed to the pushcart, portable vending device or its canopy. Such signs shall be considered "vehicle signs", and shall be allowed in accordance with Tustin City Codes. Electrified or internally illuminated signs shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Pushcart canopies, awnings or roofs constructed of fabric or other light-transmitting material shall not be backlit. 
(e)  All merchandise shall be maintained on the pushcart or portable vending device. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 1, 6-6-94) 
aa 
 Child Care Facilities 
1.  Family Day Care Home 
Family day care homes, including large family day care and small family day care homes, shall operate in accordance with the California Code: Health and Safety Code. All day care homes are subject to the regulations adopted and enforced by the State Fire Marshal and Orange County Fire Authority and must comply with the provisions of the State Uniform Building Code and City of Tustin Building requirements. 
Large family day care homes are also subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Prior to commencement of operation of any large family day care home, the applicant for a permit shall complete and submit an application to the Community Development Department. Information provided on the permit shall include: Name of operator; address of the home; and a list of property owners within a 100-foot radius of the exterior property boundary of the proposed day care home. 
(b)  Large family day care homes shall be operated in a manner not exceeding the noise level in the Tustin Noise Ordinance, nor shall such day care homes be allowed to operate in a manner that would constitute a nuisance to neighboring properties. A day care home shall, by design, location and layout, avoid any potential noise which may constitute a nuisance to neighboring properties. 
(c)  A permit shall not be granted for a large family day care home that would be established within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior property boundaries of any existing licensed large family day care home. 
(d)  All property owners within a 100-foot radius of the exterior property boundary of a proposed large family day care home, as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll, shall be notified of the intent to establish such a home. 
(e)  No hearing on the application for a permit shall be held by the Planning Commission unless a hearing is requested by the applicant or a property owner within a 100-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the proposed home. If no hearing is requested, the permit shall be granted if the large family day care home complies with the provisions of this Code. 
(f)  The play yard of the home must be enclosed by a minimum six-foot high fence setback from the required front yard. 
(g)  A permit for a large family day care home shall not be granted for any location that has on the property a swimming pool as defined by the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, as adopted. 
(h)  The applicant shall be licensed, or deemed to be exempt from licensure by the State of California, to operate a large family day care home. 
(i)  The provisions contained in this Chapter shall not preclude the City from revoking any permit granted for a large family day care home. Proceedings may be conducted by the Planning Commission to determine if said use is being operated in a manner that may be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the community or surrounding properties. 
2.  Day Care Center - pursuant to California Health and Safety Code 
Development Standards: 
(a)  Maximum height: 30 feet 
(b)  Minimum building site area: 10,000 square feet 
(c)  Minimum lot width at property line: 100 feet 
(d)  Minimum front, side, and rear yard setback: Same as required for primary uses in the district 
(e)  Building requirements and indoor and outdoor space required per child are established by the Building Code and pursuant to California Health and Safety Code 
(f)  Outdoor play areas shall be screened from surrounding properties by a six-foot eight-inch high solid wall or fence (except where play areas abut public park or playfield) (Ord. No. 1206, Sec. 2, 9-21-98; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
bb 
 Recycling Centers 
An operation/use which is certified by the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery which accepts from consumers, and pays or provides the refund value pursuant to Section 14572 of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act, for empty beverage containers intended to be recycled. 
Recycling Location - A place, mobile unit, reverse vending machine, or other device where a certified recycling center accepts one of more types of empty beverage containers from consumers, and pays or provides the refund value for one or more types of empty beverage containers. 
As used in the Tustin City Code recycling locations shall include: 
(a)  Reverse Vending Machines - A mechanical device of 50 square feet or less which accepts one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's refund value as determined by California state law. The refund value payments shall be aggregated and then paid, if more than one container is redeemed in a single transaction. A Reverse Vending Machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. (In order to accept and temporarily store all three (3) container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of Reverse Vending Machines may be necessary.) 
(b)  Bulk Reverse Vending Machines - An attendant operated reverse vending machine occupying greater than 50 square feet, but less than 500 square feet. Machines shall be designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of container. 
(c)  Large Recycling Locations- Recycling locations occupying a permanent building or store front. 
Recycling locations defined in this section shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Reverse vending machines: 
(a)  Established in conjunction with a supermarket or convenience zone (as defined in Section 9297) in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City of Tustin. 
(b)  Located within 30 feet of the entrance to the supermarket and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
(c)  Does not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use. 
(d)  Occupies no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure. 
(e)  Maximum height: 8 feet. 
(f)  Constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material. 
(g)  Clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperable. 
(h)  Sign area shall be limited to a maximum of 4 square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions. 
(i)  Maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis. 
(j)  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the supermarket (host use), but may be 24 hours. 
(k)  Illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
(l)  Outdoor storage of any kind is prohibited. 
(2)  Bulk Reverse Vending Machines: 
(a)  Established in conjunction with a supermarket or convenience zones (as defined in Section 9297) which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the City of Tustin. 
(b)  No larger than 500 square feet and not occupying any parking spaces required by the primary use. 
(c)  Maximum height: 10 feet. 
(d)  Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, and shall be located within 100 feet of the host use. 
(e)  Minimum setbacks: 10 feet from any property line. 
(f)  Accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the Orange County Fire Authority and Health Department. 
(g)  No power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines shall be used. 
(h)  Containers are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule. 
(i)  All recyclable material shall be stored internally. 
(j)  Maintained free of litter, pests, vermin and any other undesirable materials at all times. 
(k)  Not exceed exterior noise levels of 60 dBA. 
(l)  Containers for donation of materials shall be at least 75 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use and shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(m)  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. 
(n)  Bulk vending machines may have informational signs required by State law pursuant to Section 9272; other signs including directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the Community Development Director pursuant to Design Review Section 9272 if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(o)  Placement of the facility shall not require removal of existing landscaping. 
(3)  Large Recycling Locations: 
(a)  The facility shall not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use if in a freestanding building. 
(b)  The facility shall operate in an enclosed building with outside storage prohibited. 
(c)  Setbacks, height, lot coverage, and landscape requirements shall be those provided for in the C-1 Zoning District unless it occupies an existing store front or building. 
(d)  Site shall be maintained free of litter, pests, vermin and any other undesirable materials at all times and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
(e)  Exterior noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA. 
(f)  If the facility is located in a free standing building which lies within 500 feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(g)  The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
(h)  The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs shall meet the standards of the C-1 Zoning District; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the Community Development Director pursuant to design review, Section 9272, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(i)  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Twenty-four-hour operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.42, 5-21-13) 
cc 
 Repealed (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.43, 5-21-13) 
dd 
 Alcoholic beverage sales establishments 
Subject to the Planning Commission's Guidelines for Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishments and the following standards: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, no establishment may sell alcoholic beverages for either on- or off-site consumption unless a Conditional Use Permit has been approved by the Zoning Administrator for such establishment. 
(2)  All establishments selling alcoholic beverages shall comply with the Alcoholic Beverages Sales Establishments Guidelines adopted by Planning Commission Resolution. The Zoning Administrator may waive, modify, or impose additional conditions of approval deemed necessary and appropriate provided that the waiver, modification and/or additional conditions achieve the purpose, intent, and findings provided in the Guidelines. 
(3)  The establishment hours of operation may extend until 2:00 a.m. daily unless otherwise restricted by the City of Tustin and/or California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(4)  On-site Sales Establishments shall offer food service at all times. Food service options shall include foods that are prepared on-site, prepackaged foods, and/or provided pursuant to an agreement with food vendors. 
(5)  Off-site - located in a building and permitted business with less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, and permitted businesses with more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area where the off-site alcoholic beverage sales area within the building occupies more than 10 percent of the gross floor area, subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  A minimum distance separation of 1,000 feet from any public or private school. 
(b)  Minimum distances between off-site sales establishments and public or private schools shall be computed by measuring the distance from the closest entry/exit provided for public/customer access of the off-site sales establishment to the property line of the public or private school (whether inside or outside the City boundaries). 
(c)  The gross annual sales of alcohol shall not exceed 50 percent of all sales within the establishment. 
(d)  Specialty stores as defined in Section 9297 of the Tustin City Code shall be exempt from minimum distance regulations. 
(6)  Any Conditional Use Permit granted in accordance with this Section may be revoked by the Planning Commission in the manner herein set forth if the establishment creates undue burden on the surrounding area, the Tustin Police Department, Code Enforcement and if any of the conditions of approval are violated. 
(7)  An establishment shall be considered to have created an undue burden to the surrounding area and/or City resources if any of the following occur: 
a.  Issuance of three (3) Notices of Violation or Citations within a twelve (12) month period either from the Community Development Department, Police Department, and/or Fire Marshall; 
b.  The imposition of disciplinary action or finding of violation by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; 
c.  Six (6) documented instances within a twelve (12) month period of activities detrimental to the public health, safety, and/or welfare of persons residing, visiting, or working in the neighborhood or injurious to the property or improvement in the area; and/or 
d.  Any critical incident occurring on or in the premises or in connection with the operation on the premises, as determined by the Community Development Director in consultation with the Police Department. 
(8)  Upon the determination that the establishment has caused an undue burden, upon violation of any provision of this Section, or upon failure to comply with the conditions of approval, or in the event that the Conditional Use Permit is abandoned for a twelve (12) month period, the Community Development Director shall issue a Notice of Intent to revoke such permit. The Notice of Intent to revoke such permit shall be provided to the property owner and business owner at least ten (10) days prior to a Revocation public hearing. The Notice of Intent shall state why the approved Conditional Use Permit should be revoked and provide the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the Conditional Use Permit for the approved establishment. 
(9)  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to revocation of the Conditional Use Permit. The Planning Commission may revoke the Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions of this Section for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Where the Planning Commission has found and determined that the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare demand revocation or suspension of the permit; 
b.  Where the establishment has violated any provisions of the Tustin City Code, or Statutes of the State of California, or of the United States of America; 
c.  Where Conditional Use Permit granted in accordance with this Section, is transferred to a new applicant and the new applicant fails to sign and return an "Agreement to Conditions Imposed" form provided by the Community Development Department which states that the property owner, applicant, operator, and/or tenant agrees to comply with all conditions imposed by the City of Tustin. 
d.  Where a Conditional Use Permit has been issued in reliance on false statements in the application; 
e.  Where the establishment has violated any of the terms and conditions of approval of the Conditional Use Permit; 
f.  Where the establishment has caused undue burden on the surrounding area, the Police Department, Code Enforcement, and any other City resources; and/or 
g.  Where the use or activity for which the Conditional Use Permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for one (1) year or more. 
(10)  A decision of the Planning Commission at the conclusion of the Revocation hearing shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.44, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1493, Sec. 5, 9-4-18) 
ee 
 Office Uses 
(1)  Office developments within the Retail Commercial District (C-1), Central Commercial District (C-2), and Commercial General District (CG) shall be constructed to conform to the following criteria: 
(a)  Parking standards for retail commercial uses on the first floor area of the building shall be subject to Part 6 Off-Street Parking requirements of the Zoning Code unless otherwise specifically exempted pursuant to an approved Conditional Use Permit. 
(b)  Findings, including, but not limited to, the following, shall be made by the Planning Commission prior to approving a Conditional Use Permit for construction of a building where greater than fifty (50) percent of the total floor area or any portion of the ground floor area is designated for use by professional or general offices: 
i.  Development or construction of professional or general office buildings would be more compatible with surrounding uses in the area than permitted retail commercial uses on the subject property. 
(c)  Development or construction of buildings restricted to a mixture of uses in which the retail commercial floor area exceeds fifty (50) percent of the total floor area is exempt from office development use criteria. 
(2)  Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.45, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 1497, Sec. 4(Att. C), 7-3-18) 
ff 
Operation of Uses 
All uses (including storage) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except those that are specifically permitted or effectively screened from view, except for off-street parking, loading, approved temporary uses, or any outdoor dining space specifically permitted in conjunction with eating establishment and approved design review and/or Conditional Use Permit, variance or as otherwise exempted within this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.46, 5-21-13) 
gg 
 Home Occupation 
All home occupations operating within the City of Tustin are subject to the following provisions: 
i.  No persons employed who are not residents on the premises. 
ii.  No exterior display. 
iii.  No stock-in-trade or commodity sold upon the premises. 
iv.  No mechanical or electrical equipment used except such as is customary for housekeeping purposes. 
v.  No outside operations or storage. 
vi.  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises. 
vii.  No alterations which negatively impact the health safety or welfare of the general public, or which emits smoke, dust, fumes, odors, vibrations, glare or electrical disturbances onto any other premises. 
viii.  No activity which generates excessive pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic or parking excess or that otherwise normally found in the zone. 
ix.  No parking or use made of any vehicle over three-fourths ton carrying capacity. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.47, 5-21-13) 
hh 
 Light and Glare 
All exterior lighting shall be subject to the following standards, unless otherwise exempted by the City of Tustin: 
(a)  Outdoor lighting shall be designed so as to minimize impacts from light pollution including light trespass and glare to minimize conflict caused by unnecessary illumination. 
(b)  Outdoor lighting fixtures that are used to illuminate a premises, architectural feature or landscape feature on private property shall be directed, shielded, or located in such a manner that the light source is not directed off-site. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.48, 5-21-13) 
ii 
Equipment Screening 
Roof-top equipment screening (subject to review and approval by the Community Development Department). 
(a)  Roof-mounted equipment screening shall be a minimum of six (6) inches above the tallest piece of equipment and constructed in a way as to effectively screen equipment from view at right-of-way. 
(b)  Screening element must appear visually integrated with the architecture of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.49, 5-21-13) 
jj 
Accessory dwelling units (see Section 9252j2 for standards applicable to accessory dwelling units in the Cultural Resource District that are not within existing single-family dwellings or existing accessory buildings). A maximum of one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per building site. 
(a)  Accessory dwelling units not within existing single-family dwellings or existing accessory buildings, subject to a recorded deed restriction approved by the City. 
(1)  Maximum height: 25 feet. 
(2)  Minimum building site: 10,000 square feet. 
(3)  Maximum overall lot coverage for all structures combined: 50 percent. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage for all the accessory dwelling unit: 30 percent of rear yard and 30 percent of side yard. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet for detached units; 20 feet for attached unit. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback: 
Corner lot line: 10 feet. 
Interior lot line: 5 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback: 5 feet. 
(8)  Maximum floor area of accessory dwelling unit: 50 percent of primary single-family dwelling, not to exceed 10 percent of total building site area. 
(9)  Any accessory dwelling unit shall be consistent with the architectural style, materials and colors of the primary single-family dwelling and shall not detract from the single-family appearance of the primary single-family dwelling. 
(10)  Any accessory dwelling unit shall not cause a substantial adverse change, as defined in California Public Resources Code Section 5020.1, in the significance of any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Places or the City of Tustin Historical Resources Survey. 
(11)  Any accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed concurrently with, or subsequent to, the primary single-family dwelling, which shall be conforming or brought into compliance with the Tustin City Code. 
(12)  All entrances to any accessory dwelling unit shall be located toward the rear of the primary single-family dwelling and shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
(13)  When the primary single-family dwelling would conform to the development standards normally applicable to accessory dwelling units, and the accessory dwelling unit is built between the primary single-family dwelling and the front property line, the accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the development standards normally applicable to the primary single-family dwelling. 
(14)  An accessory dwelling unit shall not be allowed on a lot developed with an accessory building used as guest quarters or a guest house. 
(b)  Accessory dwelling units within existing single-family dwellings or existing accessory buildings, subject to a recorded deed restriction approved by the City. 
(1)  Independent exterior access shall be provided. 
(2)  Side and rear setbacks shall be sufficient for fire safety. 
(c)  No parking shall be required for the accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The accessory dwelling unit is within the Cultural Resource District. 
(2)  The accessory dwelling unit is within one-half (½) mile of public transit. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit is within one (1) block of a car share area. 
(4)  The accessory dwelling unit is within an existing single-family dwelling or existing accessory building. 
(d)  All building code provisions shall apply unless otherwise exempted by State law. 
(Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 12, 4-4-17)  
9272 - DESIGN REVIEW 
a 
Review Required 
(1)  The City Council finds that poor quality in the exterior design, development and maintenance of structures, landscaping and general appearance affects the desirability of the neighborhood and the community as a whole, and impairs the benefits of both potential and existing uses to the detriment of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.50, 5-21-13) 
(2)  The City Council further finds that quality evaluations are necessary to fully accomplish the purpose of regulations designed to control such matters, since such regulations cannot both allow reasonable latitude for diversity and originality of design and still be specific enough to control all the aspects of the different uses that can adversely affect the community. 
(3)  The Community Development Department is hereby established to accomplish the above objectives and shall have the following responsibilities: 
(a)  To provide for the review of building design, site planning and site development in order to protect the increasing value, standards and importance of land and development in the City due to the urbanization of Orange County. 
(b)  To retain and strengthen the unity and order of the visual community. 
(c)  To ensure that new uses and structures enhance their sites and are harmonious with the highest standards of improvements in the surrounding area and total community. 
(4)  In carrying out the functions of design review, consultant services may be utilized as budgeted by the City Council. (Ord. No. 587, Sec. 2) 
b 
Scope of Jurisdiction 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, including new structures or major exterior alteration or enlargement of existing structures, building to be relocated, and signs to be constructed or modified, the Community Development Director shall approve the site plan, elevations and landscaping for such development. (Ord. No. 587, Sec. 2) 
c 
Conditions of Approval 
The Community Development Director shall approve the submitted plans if he finds that the location, size, architectural features and general appearance of the proposed development will not impair the orderly and harmonious development of the area, the present or future development therein, the occupancy thereof, or the community as a whole. In making such findings, the Community Development Director shall consider the following items: 
(1)  Height, bulk and area of buildings. 
(2)  Setbacks and site planning. 
(3)  Exterior materials and colors. 
(4)  Type and pitch of roofs. 
(5)  Size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings. 
(6)  Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television antennas. 
(7)  Landscaping, parking area design and traffic circulation. 
(8)  Location, height and standards of exterior illumination. 
(9)  Location and appearance of equipment located outside of an enclosed structure. 
(10)  Location and method of refuse storage. 
(11)  Physical relationship of proposed structures to existing structures in the neighborhood. 
(12)  Appearance and design relationship of proposed structures to existing structures and possible future structures in the neighborhood and public thoroughfares. 
(13)  Proposed signing. 
(14)  Development guidelines and criteria as adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.51, 5-21-13) 
d 
Procedures and Time Limits 
(1)  The Community Development Department shall review all applications for a Conditional Use Permit, variance and other proceedings subject to public hearing before the Planning Commission, and shall render to the Planning Commission a report of its review, observations and recommendation prior to the date of such public hearing. 
(2)  Pertinent information shall be furnished to the Community Development Department to enable review and evaluation of proposed developments. 
(3)  The decision of the Community Development Director in matters of original jurisdiction and those referred to him by the Planning Commission or City Council shall be final, unless appealed in writing as herein provided. 
(4)  Development shall commence within one (1) year of approval, otherwise, a new evaluation and review shall be required prior to any development, unless otherwise authorized by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.52, 5-21-13) 
e 
Guiding Principles 
Implementation of the development preview process relative to external design shall be guided by the following principles: 
(1)  Individual initiative shall be encouraged. Control shall be reduced to the minimum extent possible, while insuring that the goals stated in this Chapter are achieved to the fullest possible extent. 
(2)  Good architectural character is based upon the suitability of a structure for its purposes, upon the appropriate use of sound materials and upon the principles of harmony and proportion in the elements of the structure. 
(3)  Good architectural character is not, in itself, more costly than poor architectural character and is not dependent upon the particular style of architecture selected. 
(4)  When considering signs, particular attention shall be given to incorporating the design, including colors, of the sign into the overall design of the entire development, so as to achieve homogeneous development. 
(5)  Building to be relocated must be previewed as to their compatibility with neighboring structures and with existing or proposed structures on the same site. (Ord. No. 587, Sec. 2) 
f 
Appeals 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. (Ord. No. 656, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 19, 11-17-09) 
g 
Repealed (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.53, 5-21-13)  
9273 - LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a lawfully established structure or use may be continued although the particular structure or use does not conform to current applicable regulations for the district in which the particular structure is located or use is made; provided, however, no legal nonconforming structure or use of land may be extended to occupy a greater area of land or structure than is legally authorized at the time the structure or use first becomes legal nonconforming. If any legal nonconforming structure or use is discontinued or abandoned, any subsequent use of such land or structure shall conform to the regulations specified for the district in which such land or structure is located. If no structural alterations are made therein, a legal nonconforming use may be changed to another use of the same or more restrictive classification upon the securing of a Conditional Use Permit. If the legal nonconforming use is replaced by a more restrictive legal nonconforming use, the occupancy thereafter may not revert to a less restrictive use. If any legal nonconforming use is wholly discontinued for any reason, except pursuant to a valid order of a court of law, for a period of one (1) year, it shall be conclusively presumed that such use has been abandoned within the meaning of this Chapter, and all future uses shall comply with the regulations of the particular district in which the land or structure is located. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 6.1; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.54, 5-21-13) 
(b)  (1)  Any lawfully established structure which is legal nonconforming either in use, design, or arrangement, shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, unless such enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration is in compliance with the regulations set forth in this Chapter for the district in which such structure is located; provided, however, that any such legal nonconforming structure may be maintained, repaired or portions thereof replaced, so long as such maintenance, repairs or replacements do not exceed fifty (50) percent of the structure's assessed valuation, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the City of Tustin. 
(2)  The Community Development Department of the City of Tustin may send, by first class and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the current owner or any nonconforming structure, or of any property upon which any prior nonconforming use exists, a demand that said owner shall furnish to the City of Tustin a statement, under oath, on a form submitted for said purpose, setting forth the information required under subsection (b)(3). (Ord. No. 310, Sec. 1) 
(3)  The statement required under subsection (b)(2) shall contain all available evidence pertaining to the following: 
(i)  as to structures on the premises, all structures on the premises, all available evidence that: (1) the structures were established consistent with all codes, regulations and requirements applicable to the premises at the time of construction, including copies of all permits issued by governmental agencies; and (2) any enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration made to each structure was made in compliance with the provisions of the Tustin City Code that were applicable to the premises at the time of such enlargement, extension, reconstruction or alteration, or such alteration made the use or structure more conforming with the rules and regulations of the Tustin City Code; and (3) each structure has been continuously used and maintained since establishment; and (4) that any maintenance, repair or replacement of the structure or portions thereof were consistent with subsection (b)(1), above. 
(ii)  as to uses at the premises, all available evidence that: (1) at the time the use was first established, the use was consistent with all codes, regulations and requirements applicable to the premises; and (2) the use has been continuously maintained since established; and (3) that the use has not been enlarged or extended since the use first became nonconforming. 
(4)  The statement shall be filed with the Community Development Department of the City of Tustin within thirty (30) days from the date of such demand. In the event of any failure to duly file such a statement as herein provided, said structure and use shall conform to all regulations of the zone in which it is located within thirty (30) days after such failure. 
(5)  The Director of Community Development shall review the evidence available, including, but not limited to, the evidence contained in the statement provided by the owner, and shall, within sixty (60) calendar days of submittal of the owner's statement, send to the owner a written preliminary determination of conforming or nonconforming status. The preliminary determination shall include a finding that the available evidence indicates the use and/or the structure is or is not legal nonconforming. The burden of proof to establish the lawful and continuing existence of the structure and/or use at the time the use or structure first became legal nonconforming and for all periods of time as required under this Section rests with the current owner. 
(6)  The owner or any other individual may, within twenty (20) calendar days of the mailing of the preliminary determination, request a hearing on the preliminary determination before the Zoning Administrator by submitting a written request identifying the preliminary determination, and submitting therewith a hearing fee in such amount as the City Council may establish by resolution. The hearing shall be set within thirty (30) calendar days and occur within ninety (90) calendar days of the receipt of the request for hearing, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing to the owner and to any other individual(s) requesting the hearing. The owner and each individual requesting the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses regarding the nonconforming status. The hearing may be continued from time to time by the Community Development Director. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Community Development Director shall send to the owner and any individual requesting the hearing a written final determination of conforming or nonconforming status that shall include a finding that the available evidence indicates the use and/or the structure is or is not legal nonconforming. If no hearing is timely requested, the preliminary determination shall be deemed final. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.55, 5-21-13) 
(7)  A final determination by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in accordance with Section 9294. 
(c)  Notwithstanding Sections 9273(a) and 9273(b), legally established structures and uses listed in the City's Historical Resources Survey may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered in accordance with the provisions of Sections 9264b and 9271p of this Chapter. 
(d)  A legal nonconforming structure, destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value at the time of its destruction by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God, may be restored or used only in compliance with the regulations existing in the district wherein it is located, except Multiple family dwellings (see Section 9273(h)). (Ord. No. 310, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.56, 5-21-13) 
(e)  The provisions set forth in (b) and (d), above, shall apply to structures, land and uses which are, or become, legal nonconforming due to any reclassification of districts under this Chapter; provided, however, that public uses, public utility buildings and public utility uses existing at the time of the adoption of this Chapter, or existing at the time of reclassification of districts, shall not be considered legal nonconforming. (Ord. No. 319, Sec. 3) 
(f)  Any use of land or structure which is made "nonconforming" either in design or arrangement due to acquisition of public right-of-way by the City shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and any other provision of the Tustin City Code, regulating legal nonconforming uses or structures, unless it is established by the Community Development Department that such use or structure creates a nuisance or is a threat to the health, safety, welfare or well-being of the occupants of the public. (Ord. No. 1013, Sec. 2, 1-3-89) 
(g)  Except as provided in Section 9273(d), following a final nonconformity determination pursuant to this Section 9273, all nonconforming structures and/or uses determined not to be legal nonconforming shall be illegal, and such structures and/or uses are a public nuisance that shall either be altered to conform with all applicable standards and regulations, or shall be discontinued and removed. 
(h)  Multiple family dwellings: Reconstruction/replacement. 
Multiple family dwellings damaged or destroyed due to catastrophic events may be reconstructed or replaced by new identical construction pursuant to the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed dwelling units. However, repair or replacement construction shall comply with all current building and fire code regulations. (CAL. GOV. CODE § 65852.25) (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.57, 5-21-13) 
(Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 6, 11-15-11)  
9274 - MULTIPLE DWELLING CONVERSIONS STANDARDS 
a 
Conversion Subject to Other Code Provisions 
Conversion of multiple dwelling units to condominiums as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, Community Apartment Projects as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code or Stock Cooperatives as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code; shall be required to conform and be consistent with the regulations and provisions of the following: 
(1)  Part 9, Administration of this Chapter concerning application for and action on a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.58, 5-21-13) 
(2)  Chapter 3, Subdivisions of the Tustin City Code. 
(3)  Section 9224, Planned Development District (P-D) of Part 2, Residential Districts, of this Chapter. 
(4)  The Tustin Area General Plan. 
b 
Minimum Standards, Fire 
(1)  Access roadways shall be extended to within two hundred fifty (250) feet of all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any building. Where the access roadway cannot be provided, approved fire protection system or systems shall be provided as required and approved by the Orange County Fire Marshal. A turn-around radius of a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided when access road extends over one hundred fifty (150) feet from street with any one point of egress. 
(2)  An approved water supply capable of supplying required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to all premises. When any portion of the building protected is in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet from a water supply on a public street, there shall be provided, when required by the Orange County Fire Marshal, on-site fire hydrants and mains capable of supplying the required fire flow. 
(3)  Illuminated directional address signs to be installed at locations determined by the Orange County Fire Marshal. 
c 
Minimum Standards, Public Works 
Any missing or damaged street improvements, including, but not limited to the following will be required: Curb and gutter, sidewalk, drive aprons, street lights and street trees. All public improvements to be constructed in conjunction with the development shall be revised on existing improvement plan by a civil engineer and all public improvements shall be completed prior to final inspection and release by the Building Department. 
d 
Minimum Standards, Building 
The condominium conversion shall comply with the requirements and intent of the development regulations and code requirements as adopted by the City of Tustin, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sound attenuation be provided in a manner specified by an acoustical engineer as approved by the Building Official to satisfy the intent of Chapter 35 of the Uniform Building Code, 1976 Edition, and of California Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 4, Section 1092. Exterior freeway noise shall be attenuated to forty-five (45) dBA inside the units. 
(2)  Compliance with the security ordinance to provide deadbolt locks, window locks, security lighting and those other items required by staff to meet the intent of the ordinance. 
(3)  One-hour rated fire walls shall be provided between units. Fire detection devices shall be provided for all units. 
(4)  Plans of the existing structures shall be reviewed for code conformance with the applicable Uniform Building Code under State law. The Building Official shall require improvements, corrections, replacement of detrimental components as determined necessary. A report shall be submitted by the applicant on general structural conditions, addressing foundation, framing, interior and exterior wall coverings, roof, plumbing, electrical wiring, utility connections, built-in household appliances, heating and cooling systems and sewer evaluation prepared by an independent state licensed structural engineer, architect or general contractor. Said report shall address condition and expected remaining useful life of each respective item. 
(5)  A pest information report addressing the present condition of the structure as it may be affected by termites, dry rot, roaches, or other insects, and recommending work required, if any, to render the structure free of infestation. 
e 
Minimum Standards, Planning 
(1)  Plans and reports shall be submitted on all interior and exterior cosmetic improvements, new interior amenities and appliances and renovation of common areas to current landscaping requirements. 
(2)  That covered patios, entry ways and roof top recreation patios shall not be considered open space to satisfy provisions of the Planned Development (PD) District. 
(3)  Covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall be submitted for review and approval by the Community Development Department and City Attorney which shall contain at a minimum: 
(a)  The formation of a "Community Association" to provide for the maintenance of the common area. 
(b)  Disclosure of management agreements, maintenance provisions, access for emergency repairs, easements, etc. 
(c)  Allocation of off-street parking spaces for residents and guests. 
(d)  Provisions for establishment of a maintenance and operating budget. 
(4)  Tenant relocation/purchase provisions: The applicant shall give written notice to all tenants ten (10) days prior to the date of all public hearings relating to the condominium conversion application. All persons who are tenants at the time of City approval of the conversion shall be given a notice of intent to convert of one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the date of conversion and the right to purchase exercisable within sixty (60) days in accordance with State law. The applicant shall submit a tenant relocation/purchase plan containing at least the following: 
(a)  Relocation assistance benefits shall be paid to tenants of the development as of the time of City approval of the conversion and who remain as tenants for one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter or until the sooner issuance of building permits, and to persons who become tenants after City approval and who have not been given written notice by the developer of the intended conversion prior to becoming a tenant. The relocation assistance benefit shall be payable only to such tenants who desire to relocate. The relocation assistance benefit shall be determined on a per unit basis, to be shared among the tenants of the unit. The amount of such relocation assistance benefit shall be equal to twice the last month's rent paid or a minimum amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), whichever is greater, per dwelling unit. Rent reduction or waiver may be included for consideration. The minimum amount may be increased from time to time by resolution of the City. 
(b)  In no event may rents be increased following approval of a tentative map or Conditional Use Permit without prior City Council approval by resolution or minute order. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.59, 5-21-13) 
(c)  A percentage or dollar discount shall be offered tenants desiring to purchase their unit together with special financing mechanisms or purchase plans. 
(d)  Provisions for special protection of longer term occupancies or greater cash assistance shall be available to households of the elderly (sixty (60) years of age or older), the disabled, as defined in United States Code, Title 42, Section 423, or handicapped persons, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 50072. 
(e)  Provisions shall be made for refund of cleaning and security deposits; additional cash payments for moving or inconvenience expenses (time off from work, transportation, etc.); availability of a relocation coordinator; director of available units or other relocation assistance; and other provisions to assist tenants in relocation or purchase. 
(f)  Agreement shall be made that no tenants shall be unreasonably disturbed during building, remodeling or sales activity, and except in an emergency situation, shall be granted two (2) days' notice prior to requiring access for repair, improvements, inspection or showing to prospective purchaser or mortgagee. Provided further that no tenant shall refuse reasonable access for such purposes. (Ord. No. 822, Sec. 1, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 872, Sec. 1, 8-2-82)  
9275 - REGULATION OF AREAS FOR COLLECTING AND LOADING RECYCLABLE MATERIALS 
Shall conform to standards and site development standards set forth in Section 4316 of the Tustin City Code et al. 
(Ord. No. 1111, Sec. 2, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.60, 5-21-13)  
9276 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES 
a 
Purpose 
The purpose of these regulations and guidelines is to regulate the establishment and modification of all wireless communication facilities outside the public right-of-way and City of Tustin property, and to protect the public health, safety, aesthetics, and quality of life of Tustin citizens. The Tustin City Council has found and determined that these regulations and guidelines for wireless communication facilities are necessary to attain these objectives. 
b 
Definitions 
Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions pertain to this Section. 
"Antenna" means a device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals. 
"Antenna, dish" means a disk-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data; also called microwave antenna, microwave dish antenna, or satellite dish. 
"Antenna, microwave" means a dish antenna. 
"Antenna, panel" means an antenna or array of antennas that are flat and rectangular and designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as directional antennas. 
"Antenna, whip" means an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty (360) degrees. They are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six (6) inches in diameter and measure up to eighteen (18) feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas. 
"Building-mounted" means affixed to a building or to such as a water tank, billboard, steeple, freestanding sign, etc. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.61, 5-21-13) 
"California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)" means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the State of California. 
"Certificate of public convenience and necessity" means a certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
"Co-location" means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single building-mounted, roof-mounted or ground-mounted wireless communication facility. 
"Electromagnetic field" means the local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor. 
"Ground mounted" means mounted to a pole, monopole, lattice tower or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting such antenna. 
"Lattice tower" means a structure with three (3) or four (4) steel support legs that supports a variety of antennas. These towers generally range in height from sixty (60) to two hundred (200) feet and are constructed in areas where great height is needed, microwave antennas are required, or where the weather demands a more structurally sound design. 
"Major wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that: 
(1)  Is ground-mounted on property not within the public right-of-way; or 
(2)  Is building-or roof-mounted and exceeds ten (10) feet in height and does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located; or 
(3)  Is building-or roof-mounted and exceeds the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located by a maximum of ten (10) feet. 
"Minicell" means a wireless communication facility that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Contains a maximum of six (6) whip or panel antennas. Each whip antenna does not exceed six (6) inches in diameter and four (4) feet in length. Each panel antenna does not exceed two (2) square feet in surface area. 
(2)  Contains a maximum of one microwave antenna no larger than ten (10) square feet in surface area. 
(3)  Has an array of antennas less than ten (10) feet in height. 
(4)  Is building-or roof-mounted. 
(5)  Has a total height that does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the applicable zoning district in which the facility is located. 
"Minor wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that: 
(1)  Consists of a minicell; or 
(2)  Consists of one or more stealth antennas mounted on an existing structure in a manner that does not extend beyond the height or width of such existing structure. 
(3)  Consists of building or roof mounted antenna that extends less than ten (10) feet in height beyond the top of the existing structure and does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
"Monopole" means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennae and related equipment. 
"Mounted" means attached or supported. 
"Private wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that has not been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity or a corporate identification number by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
"Public right-of-way" means and includes all public streets, sidewalks, and utility easements, now or hereafter owned in fee or easement by the City of Tustin. 
"Public wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity and/or a corporate identification number by the CPUC. 
"Radiofrequency radiation" means electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three (3) kilohertz to three hundred (300) gigahertz. 
"Roof-mounted" means mounted above the eave line of a building. 
"Stealth antennas" means antennas and associated hardware that are concealed within or placed on the surface of an existing structure in a manner that such antennas replicate the features of the existing building or are integrated into the overall design features of the existing building so that they are not readily visible. 
"Unipole" means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas and related equipment that are incorporated into a single vertical element. Also called unicell. 
"Wireless communication facility" means any public or private structure that supports antennas (dish, panel, whip, etc.), microwave dishes and other related equipment that sends and/or receives radiofrequency signals. This includes facilities for personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunication Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7). 
c 
Applicability of this Section 
(1)  All wireless communication facilities for which applications were approved and/or building permits issued by the Community Development Department on or prior to the adoption date of Ordinance No. 1192 shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines contained herein, unless Section 9276c(2) or Section 9276c(5) applies. 
(2)  All wireless communication facilities for which building permits have expired, and have not been renewed on or prior to the adoption date of Ordinance No. 1192, shall be required to comply with the regulations and guidelines contained herein. 
(3)  All wireless communication facilities to be located within City of Tustin public right-of-way or on property owned by the City of Tustin shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines contained herein. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
(4)  All satellite dishes of one (1) meter or less in diameter in residential districts and of two (2) meters or less in commercial or industrial districts shall be exempt from the regulations and guidelines contained herein. Dish antennas exceeding three (3) feet in diameter shall be regulated by Section 9271y and not by the provisions of this section. As used herein, "dish antenna" includes satellite dishes, multichannel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS") antennas and television antennas. 
(5)  All modifications to lawfully established wireless communication facilities for which applications for the modifications were submitted on or after the adoption date of Ordinance No. 1192, shall be required to comply with the regulations and guidelines contained herein. Modifications to legal nonconforming wireless communication facilities that are legal nonconforming with respect to any provision of Ordinance No. 1192, must first receive Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit, as established by Tustin City Code Section 9291. Modifications to legal nonconforming wireless communication facilities shall not increase the nonconformities. (Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 7, 11-15-11) 
d 
Requirement for Conditional Use Permit 
The following must first receive Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit as established by Tustin City Code Section 9291: 
(1)  Any major wireless communication facility established or modified in the City of Tustin. 
(2)  Any minor wireless communication facility established or modified within any City of Tustin residential zoning district on property that contains any legally established nonresidential use and no legally established residential use. 
(3)  Any wireless communication facility established or modified in the City of Tustin that exceeds the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
e 
Requirement for Design Review 
Design review approval shall be required prior to the establishment or modification of any wireless communication facility in accordance with Tustin City Code Section 9272. If a conditional use permit and/or a variance is required, the design review authority shall be deferred to the Planning Commission. 
f 
Development Criteria and guidelines for all Wireless Communication Facilities 
(1)  Screening criteria and guidelines 
(a)  Wireless communication facilities shall have subdued colors and nonreflective materials which blend with surrounding materials and colors. 
(b)  Wireless communication facilities shall be located in areas that will minimize their aesthetic intrusion on the surrounding community. Ground-mounted facilities should only be located in close proximity to existing aboveground utilities, such as electrical tower or utility (which are not scheduled for eventual removal or undergrounding), light poles, or trees of comparable heights. For building-mounted facilities, all screening shall be compatible with the existing architecture, color, texture and/or materials of the building. 
(2)  Site selection order of preference 
1.  On existing structures such as buildings, communication towers, steeples, freestanding signs, and/or co-located on existing facilities. 
2.  In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
3.  On vacant ground without significant visual mitigation only in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.62, 5-21-13) 
(b)  As part of the application process, applicants for wireless communication facilities shall be required to provide written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort in locating facilities in accordance with the site selection order of preference. 
(3)  Other criteria and guidelines 
(a)  Wireless communications facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other required seals or signage, unless signage is approved by the City in accordance with the city of Tustin Sign Code. 
(b)  All accessory equipment associated with the operation of the wireless communication facility shall be located within a building, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located, unless other less obtrusive alternatives are identified and approved by the City. 
(c)  Within ninety (90) days of commencement of operations, applicants for wireless communication activities that are located within three hundred (300) feet of residential areas or located on properties that are zoned residential and developed with a nonresidential use, may be required to provide a preliminary report and field report prepared by a qualified engineer that shows the operation of the facility is in conformance with the standard established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) for safe human exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMF) and radiofrequency radiation (RFR). 
g 
Locational Criteria for All Wireless Communication Facilities 
(1)  Except as permitted by section 9276, c(4), no wireless communication facility shall be established: 
(a)  On vacant property within any City of Tustin residential zoning district; or 
(b)  On property that contains any legally established residential use. 
(2)  No major wireless communication facility shall be established. 
(a)  Within any City of Tustin residential zoning district; or 
(b)  On property that contains any legally established residential use. 
(3)  A minor wireless communication facility may be established or modified within any City of Tustin residential zoning district on property that contains any legally established nonresidential use and no legally established residential use, with the approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission. Should the property subsequently be developed with a residential use, the conditional use permit shall become null and void, and the facility shall be removed. 
h 
Additional Locational Guidelines for Major Wireless Communication Facilities 
(1)  Providers requesting permission to establish major wireless communication facilities in the City of Tustin shall find sites that are separated from residential areas to the greatest extent feasible. No major wireless communication facility should be established within three hundred (300) feet of: 
(a)  Any City of Tustin residential zone or land use district; 
(b)  Any legally established residential use. 
(2)  No major wireless communication facility should be established within one hundred (100) feet of any existing, legally established major wireless communication facility except when co-located on the same building or structure. 
(3)  For the purposes of this ordinance [section], all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the proposed major wireless communication facility to the nearest property line of any land use, land use district, or zone described in subsection (a) above, or to the nearest point of another major wireless communication facility described in subsection (b). 
(4)  Major wireless communication facilities should be encouraged to locate and/or co-locate on properties which are located within Industrial (M) and Planned Community Industrial (PC-IND) zoning districts. 
i 
Height Standards for Major Wireless Communication Facilities 
No major wireless communication facility shall exceed by more than ten (10) feet the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
j 
Monitoring Program 
Each wireless communication facility approved subsequent to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1192 shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director at the end of five (5) years and/or at annual intervals thereafter from the date of design review and/or conditional use permit approval. The Community Development Director may defer this review to the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis. The Director or Planning Commission, as applicable, may recommend a condition of approval to the Planning Commission or the City Council, respectively, to modify existing conditions or impose new conditions as part of this review to protect the public health, safety, community aesthetics and general welfare, which condition shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.63, 5-21-13) 
k 
Conditional Use Permit Expiration 
Each major wireless communication facility approved subsequent to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1192 shall be approved for a period not to exceed the term of the lease with the property owner, including any extension thereof, for the major wireless communication facility. A recorded memorandum of lease setting forth the term of the lease shall be submitted to the Community Development Director prior to the issuance of a building permit for the major wireless communication facility. If the lease is extended or terminated, the operator of the wireless communication facility shall provide notice and evidence thereof in writing to the Community Development Director no later than five (5) days prior to the extension or termination of the lease. Upon termination or expiration of the lease, the Conditional Use Permit for the facility shall become null and void and the facility removed. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.64, 5-21-13) 
l 
Abandonment 
A wireless communication facility is considered abandoned if it no longer provides wireless communication service. If the use of a facility is discontinued for any reason, the operator of the wireless communication facility shall notify the City of Tustin in writing no later than five (5) days after the discontinuation of use. 
Lawfully erected wireless communication facilities that are no longer being used shall be removed promptly from the premises, and no later than ninety (90) days after the discontinuation of use. Such removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements. 
A written notice of the determination of abandonment shall be sent or delivered to operator of the wireless communication facility. The operator shall have thirty (30) days to remove the facility or provide the Community Development Department with evidence that the use has not been discontinued. The Planning Commission shall review all evidence and shall determine whether or not the facility is abandoned. All facility not removed within the required thirty (30) day period shall be in violation of the Code and operators of the facility and the owners of the property shall be subject to penalties for violations under the enforcement and penalties provisions of this section. 
m 
Violations/Penalties 
Violations of this ordinance shall constitute a public nuisance and shall also constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. Each day the violation continues is punishable as a separate offense pursuant to Tustin City Code Section 1121. 
(Ord. No. 1192, Sec. 3, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 1260, Secs. 1—3, 10-21-02)  
9277 - OUTDOOR RESTAURANT SEATING AREAS 
a 
Purpose 
The regulations and requirements of this division are intended to provide for the proper location and minimum standards for outdoor restaurant seating areas at restaurants in the commercial areas of the City of Tustin. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish an outdoor restaurant seating area at any site unless approval has been obtained, consistent with this section. 
b 
Applicability 
No person or entity shall operate a restaurant or take-out restaurant which provides an outdoor restaurant seating area for the purpose of serving food or beverages to customers, without the prior written approval of the Director of Community Development. Said approval shall be in addition to any other license or permit required by California Law or the Tustin City Code. 
Any person or entity lawfully operating a restaurant with an outdoor restaurant seating area prior to the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 1373] shall not be bound by the terms of this section, unless use of the previously established outdoor restaurant seating area is discontinued for any reason except pursuant to a valid order of a court of law for a period of twelve (12) months or more, at which time any subsequent establishment or reestablishment of an outdoor restaurant seating area at the location shall conform to the provisions of this Section. 
c 
Eligibility 
Approval for an outdoor restaurant seating area shall be granted only to the operator of a restaurant which is in conformance with the Zoning Code and which holds a valid City Business License. Written concurrence of the property owner shall also be required. When a restaurant is proposed to replace a restaurant where outdoor seating had previously been approved pursuant to this Section, the new restaurant owner or operator may continue to utilize the existing outdoor seating area without obtaining separate written approval, so long as such owner or operator submits an agreement to the City to comply with the requirements of this Section and all conditions of the prior written approval, on a form provided by the Director of Community Development, executed by the new restaurant owner and the property owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any portion of the existing outdoor restaurant seating area is located within a City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way, the new restaurant owner shall enter into a new License Agreement with the City and comply with the provisions of subsection f. All other proposals to establish a new outdoor seating area or to substantially modify an existing outdoor seating area shall be accompanied by a complete application for Design Review approval, pursuant to Section 9272 of this Code, on a form provided by the Director of Community Development and shall include each of the following: 
(1)  A detailed drawing to scale of the proposed site indicating the following: the existing facade, the points of ingress and egress, the proposed location of the tables, chairs, serving equipment, planters, borders, awnings, umbrellas, border enclosures, or other facilities to be included in the outdoor restaurant seating area. If the outdoor restaurant seating area is proposed to be located on City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way, the drawings must also include the location of existing public improvements, including fire hydrants, street signs, street lights, traffic signals, bus shelters, mail boxes, trees and tree grates, parking meters, planting boxes or planting areas, fire escapes or other overhead obstructions, and any other public obstruction. Photographs and/or brochures depicting the chairs, tables, umbrellas and other private features including lighting shall be included with the site plan. 
(2)  A narrative description of the proposal, including the proposed hours of operation, and any additional information as may be deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development. 
(3)  The fee as may be established by Resolution of the Tustin City Council. 
d 
Location 
(1)  An outdoor restaurant seating area, accessory to a permitted or lawfully established restaurant or take-out restaurant, shall be permitted with the prior written approval of the Director of Community Development. In addition, all such outdoor restaurant seating area shall meet the following design criteria: 
(a)  The outdoor restaurant seating area may only be established abutting the primary restaurant business with which the outdoor restaurant seating area is associated. 
(b)  An outdoor restaurant seating area shall not be located on City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way unless a valid License to do so has been obtained from the Tustin Public Works Department and subject to the regulations established in this Code. 
(c)  The outdoor restaurant seating area shall not occupy or interfere with the use of required parking spaces and drive aisles. 
(d)  The outdoor restaurant seating area shall not be located in a required setback abutting a residential district. 
(2)  Any outdoor restaurant seating area located within a park, golf course, recreation center, senior center or other public or quasi-public use, as may be determined by the Director of Community Development, shall not be deemed to be an "outdoor restaurant seating area" subject to subsection d(1) above. 
e 
Requirements 
City approval and continued enjoyment of the outdoor restaurant seating area shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The establishment or expansion of outdoor restaurant seating areas shall be subject to the City's Design Review process in accordance with Section 9272 to ensure compatibility in color and style with the exterior of the building. The use of compatible awnings, umbrellas, plants, and other human scale elements is encouraged to enhance the pedestrian experience. 
(2)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws and regulations, and operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
(3)  No outdoor keeping or storage of food or beverages to be served shall be permitted. No open keeping or storage of used dishes, utensils or food scraps shall be permitted. Self-closing outside trash containers shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department. All outdoor restaurant seating areas shall be cleaned on a continual daily basis. 
(4)  Operation of an outdoor restaurant seating area shall be permitted only at such times as the main place of business is open, and in no event before 6:00 a.m. and after 11:00 p.m., except when the restaurant outdoor seating area abuts in whole or in part a residentially used or zoned property, in which case the hours of operation shall be limited to no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  An outdoor restaurant seating area may have a menu board that does not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
(6)  Doors from the main restaurant to the outdoor restaurant seating area shall be self-closing. 
(7)  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor restaurant seating area shall be restricted by and subject to any required State Alcoholic Beverage Control or other applicable license or permit governing the restaurant. Any outdoor restaurant seating area where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed shall be enclosed by a border and shall be supervised at all times by an employee of the restaurant. No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the outdoor restaurant seating area, except to the interior of the restaurant. 
(8)  The outdoor restaurant seating area shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws and regulations concerning accessibility and nondiscrimination in the provision of services. 
(9)  The outdoor restaurant seating area shall not obstruct any fire exit, fire escape, or other required ingress or egress to any structure or property. 
(10)  All outdoor restaurant seating areas shall comply with the City's Noise Ordinance. 
(11)  Live entertainment or amplified music within the outdoor restaurant seating area shall be accomplished in such a fashion so as to comply with the Tustin City Code and City's Noise Ordinance and restrict noise from disturbing other businesses or residents. 
(12)  Lighting shall be provided to illuminate the outdoor restaurant seating area. 
(13)  Violation of any of the requirements set forth in this Section, or any other conditions placed on approval of an outdoor seating area by the City of Tustin, shall constitute a violation of the Tustin City Code, subject to enforcement in any manner authorized by the Code. In addition, the Director of Community Development is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any prior approval of an outdoor restaurant seating area upon continuous or repetitive violation of such requirements or conditions. 
f 
Additional Requirements for Outdoor Restaurant Seating Areas Located Within City Property, a Public Sidewalk, or the Public Right-of-Way 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, all or a portion of an outdoor restaurant seating area that satisfies the requirements set forth in subsection e, above, may be located within City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way where the Director of Public Works determines, in his or her discretion, that the use is compatible with the intended use of the City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A revocable License Agreement shall be obtained from the City of Tustin for any portion of an outdoor restaurant seating area located on City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way. The License Agreement shall be subject to termination by the City at any time upon a ten-day prior written notice upon determination of the Director of Community Development that one (1) or more of the conditions or provisions of this Section have been violated, or that one (1) or more factors listed in this Section have changed, or the permitted use is no longer compatible with the intended use of the City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way. No prior written notice shall be required to terminate the License Agreement where the Director of Community Development determines, in his or her discretion, that the continued use of the City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way for the outdoor seating area poses an imminent threat to health or safety. 
(2)  The use of public sidewalks or right-of-way for an outdoor restaurant seating area shall be permitted only when associated with the operation of a licensed restaurant or take-out restaurant operating on property located adjacent to said right-of-way. 
(3)  The restaurant operator or property owner shall provide to the City of Tustin, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, the following: 
(a)  An agreement to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City of Tustin and the Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency, as applicable, for any and all claims for liability or damages arising from the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area; and, 
(b)  Insurance certificates and endorsements evidencing general liability insurance, workers compensation insurance, and such other insurance, in such amounts and forms as may be required by the City of Tustin Risk Manager. 
(4)  In no event shall the placement of furnishings for the outdoor restaurant seating area or the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area interfere with the passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or reduce access to the public sidewalk to less than four (4) feet clear of all obstructions, measured from the edge of the sidewalk closest to the curb (or lampposts, utility boxes, etc., where such exist). 
(5)  In no event shall the placement of furnishings for the outdoor restaurant seating area or the operation of the outdoor restaurant seating area obstruct access to any bus stop, crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut, parking space or any other public property, or obstruct access to any fire hydrant, fire escape or fire door, or obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign. 
(6)  The restaurant owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way used for the outdoor restaurant seating area and the replacement of damaged public property, including brick pavers. 
(7)  Except for border enclosures required by State Alcoholic Beverage Control regulations, furniture and furnishings may not be attached by any means to the City property, a City sidewalk or other public right-of-way. When notified by the City of Tustin to do so, the restaurant shall remove all furnishings and obstructions from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to accommodate special events or to accommodate the repair or maintenance of City property, sidewalk, or public right-of-way. 
(8)  Granting of a License by the City pursuant to this subsection f shall be subject to payment of such fees or compliance with such additional conditions as may be required by the City Council. 
g  Appeals 
Appeal of any action or decision of the Director of Community Development to grant, deny, revoke, or suspend approval for an outdoor restaurant seating area pursuant to this Section may be made by any interested party in the same manner and subject the same procedures as appeal of action of the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Section 9299. 
(Ord. No. 1373, Sec. III, 1-19-2010)  
9278 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
a  Purpose 
It is the policy of the City of Tustin to comply with the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence. 
b  Applicability; Definition of Individual with a Disability 
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use, zoning, and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or waiver of other requirements, when reasonable and necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. 
An individual with a disability is defined as any of the following: 
1.  A person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities; or 
2.  A person who is regarded as having such impairment; or 
3.  A person(s) with a record of such impairment; or 
4.  A person with a "disability" as otherwise defined in the federal Americans with Disabilities Act or the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. 
c  Who May Request a Reasonable Accommodation 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, a parent or legal guardian of a minor with a disability, his or her other legally authorized representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure, or other requirement acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
d  Requests for Reasonable Accommodation 
1.  Application Process. To make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in Section 9278c may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedure by filing a completed development application form with the Community Development Department. Along with a completed development application form, the applicant shall provide the following: 
(a)  Description of the requested accommodation and the reference of the specific code(s), regulation(s), policy, practice, or procedure or requirement for which accommodation is being requested; and 
(b)  The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered an individual with a disability under Section 9278b, the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, or the California Fair Employment and Housing Act; and 
(c)  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling; and 
(d)  Confirmation that the property is the primary residence of the applicant (individual with a disability) for which the reasonable accommodation is being requested; and 
(e)  Plans and detailed information of any physical improvements to the property being proposed including photos and supporting information necessary to evaluate the requested accommodation; and 
(f)  Additional information as deemed necessary by the Community Development Department to properly evaluate the proposed request and render a decision. 
2.  Fees. At the time of application submittal, the applicant shall submit a filing fee in the amount required for a Minor Amendment application pursuant to the City's current fee schedule as adopted by the City Council. 
3.  Noticing. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be considered without a public hearing. 
4.  Conformance with Existing Codes. The property for which the reasonable accommodation is being requested shall be in compliance with the codes and regulations existing at the time of application submittal. The approval body may waive this requirement if the noncompliance is unrelated to the requested reasonable accommodation. The granting of any waiver shall not preclude the City from requiring correction of the existing violations to conform to all applicable codes and regulations. 
e  Reviewing Authority 
1.  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be considered by the Community Development Director. 
2.  The Community Development Department shall accept and review each application for reasonable accommodation and within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt thereof determine whether the application is complete. If the application is determined to be complete, the Community Development Director shall issue a written decision on a request within fifteen (15) days of the completeness determination date and may either grant, grant with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in Section 9278f. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Community Development Department shall promptly issue a written notice of the additional information necessary to complete the application. 
3.  In the event that the applicant also seeks approval of any additional entitlement(s) along with the request for reasonable accommodation, the approval body for the entire application, including the request for reasonable accommodation, shall be the same body that is required to approve the additional entitlement. 
f  Required Findings and Other Requirements 
1.  The decision to grant, grant with conditions, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following findings: 
(a)  The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be occupied as the primary residence by an individual with a disability; 
(b)  The requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
(c)  The requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and 
(d)  The requested accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's land use and zoning codes and policies. 
2.  Other Requirements 
An approved reasonable accommodation is a personal accommodation for the disabled individual requesting such accommodation and does not run with the land. At such time that the reasonable accommodation is no longer necessary or the individual with a disability no longer resides at the property, the property shall be restored to its previous condition. However, the Community Development Director may determine that it would be impractical or financially unfeasible to return the property to its previous condition. 
Upon any transfer of ownership of the property, the permittee or current owner shall notify all interested parties of the existence of the reasonable accommodation and the requirement of restoration of the property to its prior condition. Any request to maintain an existing reasonable accommodation for use by a different individual with a disability shall require approval of a new application for reasonable accommodation. A reasonable accommodation approved at the request of a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities does not need to be renewed upon transfer of ownership provided the property will continue to be used and occupied by persons with the disability or disabilities giving rise to the need for the reasonable accommodation. The reasonable accommodation may be inspected annually or more often if necessary by the Community Development Department. A deed restriction shall be recorded against the property to ensure compliance with conditions of approval, potential removal of the accommodation, and use restrictions. 
g  Appeals 
A decision of the Community Development Director shall be final unless appealed in accordance with Section 9294. 
h  Time Limits 
Any reasonable accommodation granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be null and void if not used within one (1) year from the date of approval. 
(Ord. No. 1381, Sec. II, 7-5-11)  
PART 8 - (NOT USED AT THIS TIME)  
PART 9 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
9290 - ZONING PERMITS 
Zoning Permit shall be issued in conjunction with and as a part of building permits, only after the Community Development Director has given written approval that any proposed use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or conversion is in conformance with the regulations for the district in which it is to be located. 
No building permit shall be issued until the zoning permit portion thereof has been completed by the Community Development Director. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.1) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.65, 5-21-13)  
9291 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
a 
General 
Conditional Use Permits may be issued as provided in this Section for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this Chapter upon conditions designated by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission. The Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this Chapter and may require tangible guarantees or evidence that such conditions are being or will be complied with. Applications for Conditional Use Permits may be considered after holding public hearings thereon, as required by law. Notice of such hearings shall be given to the persons designated and in the manner prescribed in Section 9296b. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.2) 
b 
Application 
Application for Conditional Use Permits shall be made in writing by the owners of the property, lessee, purchaser in escrow, or optionee, with the consent of the owners, or plaintiff in an action for eminent domain for acquisition of said property, on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by City Council Resolution and plans showing the details of the proposed use to be made of the land or building. (Ord. No. 451, Sec. 10) 
c 
Decision of the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission 
Upon receipt of the application for Conditional Use Permit, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use applied for will, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use, or whether it will be injurious or detrimental to property and improvements in the neighborhood or the general welfare of the City. If the Commission finds that the aforementioned conditions will not result from the particular use applied for, it shall grant the Conditional Use Permit. The granting of a Conditional Use Permit applied for by the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the property shall be conditioned upon ultimate vesting of title of the property to the plaintiff. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.22) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.66, 5-21-13)  
9292 - VARIANCES 
a 
Basis for Granting 
Applications for variances from the strict application of the terms of this Chapter may be made and variances granted when the following circumstances are found to apply: 
(1)  That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is situated. 
(2)  That because of special circumstances applicable to subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance is found to deprive subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.3) 
b 
Use Variances Not Allowed 
The use of lands or buildings not in conformity with the regulations or prohibited in the specified district in which such lands or buildings are located may not be allowed by the granting of a variance from the strict application of the terms of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.31; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.67, 5-21-13) 
c 
Application 
Application for variance shall be made in writing by a property owner, lessee, purchaser in escrow, or optionee with the consent of the owners, or plaintiff in an action for eminent domain for acquisition of said property, on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission. They shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00), a plan of the details of the variance requested, and evidence showing (1) that the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the intent of this Chapter or to the public safety, health and welfare, and (2) that due to special conditions or exceptional characteristics of the property, or its location, the strict application of this Chapter would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship. (Ord. No. 451, Sec. 10) 
d 
Hearing 
Upon receipt of an application for variance, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing on said application; said hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the application. Notice of such hearing shall be given as set forth in Section 9196b. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.33) 
e 
Decision of the Planning Commission 
After the conclusion of the public hearing or continuations thereof the Planning Commission shall grant or deny a permit to modify the application of the restrictions established by this chapter. The Commission, if the applicant for the variance consents thereto, may change or modify the extent of the variance requested but only if such change or modification constitutes a more restrictive variance than that requested by the applicant. The granting of a variance applied for by the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the property shall be conditioned upon ultimate vesting of title of the property to the plaintiff. 
(Ord. No. 157, Sec. 7.34)  
9293 - PERMITS 
a 
Effective Date of a Permit 
No Conditional Use Permit or permit granting a variance shall have any force or effect until the applicant thereof actually receives such permit designating the conditions of its issue thereon and signed by the Secretary of the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator or the City Council. No permit shall be issued by the City until the time for filing an appeal from decisions of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator as provided in Section 9294 hereof has expired, or, in the event of such appeal, after the final determination thereof by the City Council. 
b 
Length of Permits 
Any Conditional Use Permit or variance granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall be null and void if not used within one (1) year from the date of the approval thereof or within any longer period of time if so designated by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or the City Council. 
c 
Revocation of Permits 
Any Conditional Use Permit or variance granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter may be revoked by the City Council in the manner hereinafter set forth if any of the conditions or terms of such permits are violated or if the following findings are made: 
(1)  In connection with Conditional Use Permits: The continuance of the use would be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such use, or would be injurious or detrimental to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the City. 
(2)  In connection with variances: Continued relief from the strict application of the terms of this chapter would be contrary to the public interest, safety, health and welfare. 
d 
Hearing for Revocation of Permits 
Before the City Council considers revocation of any permit, the Planning Commission shall hold a hearing thereon after giving written notice thereof to the permittee at least ten (10) days in advance of such hearing. Within five (5) days thereafter, the Commission shall transmit a report of its findings and its recommendations on the revocation to the City Council. 
e 
Subsequent Applications 
For a period of one (1) year following the approval, denial or revocation of a discretionary land use permit, no application for the same or substantially similar discretionary permit for the same site shall be filed. 
f 
Modification of Conditions of Approval 
No request for modifications of any condition of approval relating to any fee, exaction or dedication of real property imposed on any land use permit or approval shall be accepted after the final decision on the land use permit or approval unless accompanied by a significant change in the size or intensity of the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.68, 5-21-13) 
Prior History—Ord. No. 157, Secs. 7.5, 7.6; Ord. No. 446, Sec. 2, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 1146, Sec. 2, 3-6-95  
9294 - APPEALS 
a 
Appeal of Decisions of the Director of Community Development or Zoning Administrator 
Any decision of the Director of Community Development or the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Planning Commission by any person. All appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk during normal business hours within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision and be accompanied by a deposit or fee as required by City Council resolution or ordinance. All appeals shall be made in writing and shall specify the decision appealed from, the specific action or relief sought by the appellant in the appeal, and reasons why the action taken by the Director of Community Development or the Zoning Administrator should be modified or reversed. Timely filing of a written appeal shall automatically stay all actions and put in abeyance all approvals or permits which may have been granted; and neither the applicant nor any enforcing agency may rely upon the decision, approval, or denial or other action appealed from, until the appeal has been resolved. A public hearing date shall be set within sixty (60) calendar days of filing of the appeal for Planning Commission consideration of the matter. The hearing shall be de novo and the Planning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the matter in accordance with this Code or remand the matter to the Director of Community Development or the Zoning Administrator for further proceedings in accordance with directions of the Planning Commission. 
b 
Appeal of Planning Commission 
Any decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by any person. All appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk during normal business hours within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision and accompanied by a deposit or fee as required by City Council resolution or ordinance. All appeals shall be made in writing and shall specify the decision appealed from, the specific action or relief sought by the appellant in the appeal, and the reasons why the action taken by the Planning Commission should be modified or reversed. Timely filing of a written appeal shall automatically stay all actions and put in abeyance all approvals or permits which may have been granted; and neither the applicant nor any enforcing agency may rely upon the decision, approval, or denial or other action appealed from, until the appeal has been resolved. A public hearing date shall be set within sixty (60) calendar days of filing of the appeal for City Council consideration of the matter. The hearing shall be de novo and the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the matter in accordance with this Code or remand the matter to the Planning Commission for further proceedings in accordance with directions of the City Council. A decision of the City Council on such appeal shall be final. 
c 
Request for Hearing by a Member of the City Council 
In lieu of the provisions of subsection b of this Section, any decision of the Planning Commission may be set for public hearing at the request of a member of the City Council. A Request for Hearing shall be filed with the City Clerk during normal business hours within the (10) calendar days of the date of the decision. The Request for Hearing shall be made in writing and shall specify the affected decision and the reason for the Request for a Hearing. Timely filing of a Request for Hearing shall automatically stay all actions and put in abeyance all approvals or permits which may have been granted; and neither the applicant nor any enforcing agency may rely upon the decision, approval, or denial or other action appealed from, until the hearing has been conducted and the City Council takes action on the matter. The City Clerk shall set a public hearing date within sixty (60) calendar days of filing the Request for Hearing. The hearing shall be de novo and the City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the matter in accordance with this Code or remand the matter to the Planning Commission for further proceedings in accordance with directions of the City Council. A decision of the City Council at the conclusion of hearing pursuant to this subsection shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 157, Secs. 8.1, 8.3; Ord. No. 201; Ord. No. 451, Sec. 10; Ord. No. 874, Sec. 2, 11-1-82; Ord. No.1366, Sec. 20, 11-17-09)  
9295 - AMENDMENTS 
a 
Definition 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any amendment to this chapter may be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are amended or adopted. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 9.1) 
b 
Types 
Any amendment to this chapter which changes any property from one district to another district, or imposed any regulation upon property not theretofore imposed, or removes or modified any such regulation, shall be initiated and adopted as hereinafter set forth in this Section. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 9.2) 
c 
Filing Procedure 
Any amendment of the nature specified in Section 9295b hereof may be initiated by (1) the filing with the Planning Commission of a resolution of intention of the City Council; (2) passage of a resolution of intention by the Planning Commission, or (3) filing with the Planning Commission of a petition of one or more record owners of property which is the subject of the proposed amendment or their authorized agents. A petition for amendment shall be on a form designated therefor by the Planning Commission and shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. No. 451, Sec. 10) 
d 
Public Hearing 
Upon receipt of a petition or resolution of intention of amendment, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing thereon, but not later than forty-five (45) days after the receipt of said petition or resolution. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 9.4) 
e 
Notices 
If the proposed amendment consists of a change in the boundaries of any district, the Planning Commission shall give notice of the time and place of such hearing, and the purpose thereof, in the manner designated in Section 9296b of this Chapter. If the proposed amendment is a matter of general or city-wide scope, notice thereof shall be given as provided in Section 9296c. (Ord. No. 156, Sec. 9.5) 
f 
Action of Planning Commission 
After the close of the public hearing or continuations thereof, the Planning Commission shall make a report of its findings and its recommendation with respect to the proposed amendment. The Commission report shall include a list of persons who testified at the hearing, a summary of the facts adduced at the hearing, the findings of the Commission, and copies of any maps or other data and/or documentary evidence submitted in connection with the proposed amendment. Copy of such report and recommendation shall be transmitted to the City Council within ninety (90) days after the first notice of hearing thereon; provided however, that such time may be extended with the consent of the City Council or the petitioner for such amendment. In the event the Planning Commission fails to report to the City Council within the aforesaid ninety (90) days or within the agreed extension of time, the amendment shall be deemed approved by the Planning Commission. The recommendations of the Planning Commission on proposed amendments shall be adopted by a majority of the voting members of said Planning Commission. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 9.6) 
g 
Action of City Council 
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission or expiration of the aforesaid ninety (90) days or agreed upon extended period, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, giving notice thereof as provided in Section 9296. After the conclusion of such hearing the City Council may within one (1) year adopt the proposed amendment or any part thereof set forth in the petition or resolution of intention in such form as the Council deems desirable. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 9.7)  
9296 - NOTICES OF HEARING 
a 
Public Hearing 
Whenever this Chapter prescribes that a public hearing shall be held on the discretionary application such as, but not limited to, variance or amendments to this Chapter, notice thereof shall be given as provided in this Section. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 10.1) 
b 
Notice of Hearing 
Notices of the public hearings on applications for Conditional Use Permit, variance, appeals and amendments to this Chapter changing the boundaries of any district shall be given by the body conducting such hearings in the manner prescribed by Sections 65090 or 65091 and 65854 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 10.3) 
c 
Notice of Hearing: Special Hearings 
Notices of public hearings on matters other than as specified in Subsection "b" hereof shall be given by the body conducting such hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Tustin, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 10.3) 
d 
Notice of Hearing: Failure to Post Notices 
Failure to mail or post notices as specified in Subsection "b" hereof shall not invalidate any proceedings. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 10.4) 
e 
Notice of Hearing: Filing of Affidavit 
Upon completion of the posting or mailing of the notices provided for in Subsection "b" and publication of notices as provided in Subsections "b" and "c" hereof, the City Clerk, if the hearing is held by the Planning Commission, or if the hearing is held by the City Council shall cause an affidavit of such mailing or publication to be filed in the permanent records of the particular proceedings to which such notices pertain. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 10.5) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.69, 5-21-13)  
9297 - DEFINITIONS 
"Accessory Dwelling Unit" means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on a lot developed with a legal conforming or legal nonconforming single-family dwelling, and if rented, must have a minimum rental term of thirty (30) days. (Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 13, 4-4-17) 
"Administrative Office" means an office for the rendering of service or general administration, but excluding retail sales. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.1) 
"Adult Bookstore" shall mean an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or related to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section thereof devoted to the sale or display of such material. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Adult Business" shall mean any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults, and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat, either by law or by the operators of such business. "Adult Business" shall also mean and include adult bookstores, adult theaters, topless dancing, stripping, figure modeling studios, adult motels or hotels, but shall not include those uses or activities the regulation of which are preempted by state law. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 1462, Sec. VII, 11-3-15) 
"Adult Hotel/Motel" shall mean a hotel or motel which provides, through closed circuit television, or other media, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Adult Park" means any mobile home or travel trailer park the spaces of which are rented or leased only to persons having no children under the age of fifteen (15). (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Adult Theater" shall mean a theater which presents live entertainment or motion pictures or videotaped presentations or slide photographs, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or related to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Alcoholic Beverage Sales Establishment" means any establishment where an alcoholic beverage is sold, including, but not limited to, liquor stores, bars, lounges, restaurants, markets, mini-marts, gas stations, drive-in dairies, bakeries and florists. (Ord. No. 920, Sec. 6, 11-19-84) 
"Alley" means a public or private way less than thirty (30) feet in width which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.2) 
"Alteration means any exterior change or modification requiring a building permit of any Designated Cultural Resource or of any property located within a Cultural Resource District. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Apartment" means any building or portion thereof which is designed and built for occupancy of three (3) or more families. (Ord. No. 157. Sec. 11.3) 
"Beverage" means beer and other malt beverages, carbonated mineral and soda waters, and similar carbonated soft drinks in liquid form which are intended for human consumption. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Beverage container" means the individual, separate bottle, can, jar, carton, or other receptacle, however denominated, in which a beverage is sold, and which is constructed of metal, glass, or plastic, or other material, or any combination of these materials. "Beverage container" does not include cups or other similar open or loosely sealed receptacles. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-9-87) 
"Block" means all property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a railroad right-of-way, waterway, dead end street or city boundary. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the block on the side of a street which it intercepts. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.5) 
"Boarding House" means a dwelling other than a hotel or motel, where lodging and/or meals for three (3) or more persons is provided for compensation. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.6; Ord. No. 1225, Sec. IV, 1-17-00) 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and designed for the shelter or housing of any person, animal or chattel. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.7) 
"Building, Accessory" means a subordinate building including shelters or pools, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot and/or building site. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.8) 
"Building, Main" means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot and/or building site on which it is situated. (Ord. No. 156, Sec. 11.9) 
"Building Setback Line" means a line established to denote the minimum distance a building may be constructed from a property line or right-of-way line. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 4) 
"Building Site" means a lot or parcel of land, in single or joint ownership, and occupied or to be occupied by a main building and accessory buildings, or by a dwelling group and its accessory building, together with such open spaces as are required by the terms of this Chapter and having its principal frontage on a street, road, highway or waterway. (Ord. No. 157. Sec. 11.10) 
"Business, Retail" means any establishment where the retail sale of any article, substance, or commodity, but not including the sale of lumber or other building materials, or the sale of used or secondhand goods or materials of any kind. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.11) 
"Business, Wholesale" means the wholesale handling of any article, substance or commodity, but not including the handling of lumber or other building materials or the open storage or sale of any material or commodity, and not including the processing or manufacture of any product or substance. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.12) 
"Carport" means a permanent, roofed structure, used for automobile shelter and automobile storage, in addition to the lockable storage hereinafter specified. Lockable, usable and accessible storage space of at least ninety (90) cubic feet shall be provided in all carports. (Ord. No. 304, Sec. 2) 
"Certificate of Appropriateness" means an approved certificate issued for the construction, demolition, alteration, removal, or relocation of any publicly or privately owned Designated Cultural Resource, or any structure, natural feature, or site within a Cultural Resource District. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Combining District" means any district in which the general district regulations are combined with those special districts defined in Section 9213 for the purpose of adding additional special regulations. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.13) 
"Committee" means the Historic Resource Committee. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1301, Sec. VII, 9-19-05) 
"Community Development Director" means the Director of the Community Development Department or designee. (Ord. No. 1301, Sec. VIII, 9-19-05) 
"Consumer" means every person who, for his or her use or consumption, purchases a beverage in a beverage container from a dealer. "Consumer" includes, but is not limited to, a lodging, eating, or drinking establishment, and soft drink vending machines. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Convenience Store" means any establishment under fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size where food, beverage, magazine and auto related items, or any combination thereof, are sold for off-site use and/or consumption. (Ord. No. 981, Sec. 11, 5-4-87) 
"Convenience Zone" means the area within a ½ mile radius of a "Supermarket", defined as meeting the following definitions based on CAL. PRC. CODE§ 14526.5: 
- Identified in the Progressive Grocer Marketing Guidebook. 
- Gross annual sales of $2 million or more. 
- A "full-line" store that sells a line of dry groceries, canned goods, or non-food items and perishable items. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Cultural Resource District" means any area containing improvements which have a special character, historical interest or aesthetic value or which represent one (1) or more architectural periods or styles typical to the history of the City, and which improvements constitute a distinct section of the City that has been designated a Cultural Resource District pursuant to Section 9252 of the Zoning Code. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Day Care Center" - pursuant to California Health and Safety Code defined as any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
"Delicatessen" means a small market or deli selling ready-to-eat foods, including, but not limited to, cold cooked meats, sandwiches, and salads. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Demolition" means to tear down or demolish. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Designated Cultural Resource" means improvements, buildings, structure, signs, features, sites, places, areas or other objects of scientific, aesthetic, educational, cultural, architectural, or historical significance to the residents of the City that has been designated a Cultural Resource by the City Council. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Designated Site (Cultural Resource Site)" means a parcel or part thereof on which a cultural resource is situated, and which has been designated a cultural resource site by the City Council. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"District" means a portion of the City within which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted or prohibited and within which certain yards and other open spaces are required and certain height limits are established for buildings, all as set forth and specified in this Chapter. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.14) 
"Driveway" means a paved area of a lot located between the public right-of-way and the garage, carport, or required parking space designed and intended as an access way between a private or public road and the garage, carport, or required parking space. (Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01) 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for residential use. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.15; Ord. No. 1225, Sec. IV, 1-17-00; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Dwelling, Single-Family" means a building designed for, or used to house not more than one (1) family, including all necessary employees of such family. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11. 16) 
"Dwelling, Two-Family" or "Duplex" means a building containing not more than two (2) kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than two (2) families, living independently of each other, including all necessary employees of each such family. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.17) 
"Dwelling, Multiple" means a building, or portion thereof, used and designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels and flats, but not including motels, boardinghouses, and hotels. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.18) 
"Dwelling Groups" means a group of two (2) or more detached one-family, two-family, or multiple dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one (1) ownership and having any yard or court in common, but not including automobile courts. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 9) 
"Exterior Architectural Feature" means the architectural elements embodying style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of an improvement, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building materials and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Family" means an individual or two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11. 20; Ord. No. 1225, Sec. IV, 1-17-00) 
"Family Park" means any mobile home or travel trailer park, the spaces of which are rented or leased without restriction upon the ages of the children or occupants. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Fence" means any structural device forming a physical barrier by means of hedge, wood, mesh, metal, chain, brick, stake, plastic or other similar materials. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.21) 
"Figure Modeling Studio" shall mean any establishment in which models pose while exposing specified anatomical areas. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Frontage" or "Fronting" means the portion of a parcel which abuts a street right-of-way. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Garage, Private" means a detached, accessory building, or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling, used primarily for the housing of vehicles of the occupant of the dwelling, having a roof, and enclosed on at least three (3) sides, with the fourth side being a lockable door, with not less than ten feet by twenty feet (10' × 20') clear and unobstructed inside dimensions, and which shall be permanently maintained as a parking accommodation. (Ord. No. 733, Sec. 7) 
"General Office" means an office for the conduct of any of the following uses or uses determined by the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission to be similar: accountants, advertising agency, contractors and building consultants, drafting, economic consultant, escrow, insurance, public utility office (not including corporate yards), real estate offices. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
"Guesthouse" means detached living quarters of a permanent type of construction and without kitchens or cooking facilities and where no compensation in any form is received or paid. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.23) 
"Guest Quarters" means an attached or detached building or room that provides living quarters for guests and (a) contains no kitchen or cooking facilities; (b) is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principle residence on the same building site; and (c) is not rented or leased, whether compensation is direct or indirect. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Height of Building" means the vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the topmost point of the roof. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.25) 
"Home Occupation" means an occupation carried on wholly within a dwelling by an occupant of the dwelling, as a secondary use. (Ord. No. 330, Sec. 2B; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Hotel"—See Motel. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.26) 
"Improvement" means any building, structure, parking facility, fence, gate, wall, landscaping requiring a building permit constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. (Ord. No. 1001, Sec. 3, 6-20-88) 
"Junk Yard" means more than one hundred (100) square feet of the area of any lot used for the storage of junk, including scrap metals, salvage or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling or "wrecking" of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, whether for sale or storage. (Ord. No.157, Sec. 11.27) 
"Kennel" means any lot or premises on which more than three (3) dogs, cats or similar small animals, more than three (3) months of age are kept, boarded, or trained, whether in special buildings or not. (Ord. No. 352, Sec. 1) 
"Large Family Day Care Home" pursuant to California Health and Safety Code definition and the development standards in TCC Section 9271aa. (Ord. No. 911, Sec. 7, 5-21-84; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
"Legal Nonconforming" shall mean a use or structure, whenever established, that was lawfully established and continuously used or occupied under previous regulations, standards, and/or requirements but that does not meet existing zoning codes, regulations, and/or standards. (Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 8, 11-15-11) 
"Lot"—See Building Site. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.28) 
"Lot Coverage" or "Building Site Coverage" the percentage of the building site area that is covered by the area within the perimeter of all structures located on the building site area. Covered area shall include all areas under roof, but not include roof overhangs, open trellis and covered porches, Swimming pools and spas are not considered in calculating structural site coverage. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Lot Front" means the narrowest dimension of a lot fronting on a street. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.29) 
"Lot Line" means a line separating the frontage from a street; the side from a street or adjoining property; the rear from an alley or street, or adjoining property. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.31) 
"Lot, Through" means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.32) 
"Lot Side" means any lot boundary not a front or rear lot line. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.30) 
"Lot Types" means types of lots that include the following (See Figure 5-3), Lot Types: 
1.  Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot. 
2.  Double-frontage lot. A "through" lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
3.  Flag lot. A lot having access to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that must be owned in fee. 
4.  Interior lot. A lot abutting only one street. 
5.  Reverse corner lot. A corner lot in which the corner lot line is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear. 
  
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Material" relative to adult businesses shall mean and include, but not be limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, videotapes, and pamphlets, or any combination thereof. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Massage Establishment" shall be defined as set forth in Section 3662 of the Tustin City Code. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10; Ord. No. 1380, Sec. VI, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 1462, Sec. VIII, 11-3-15) 
"Marijuana Dispensary" [shall be defined as] any person, association, business, facility, use, establishment, location, delivery service, cooperative, collective, or provider, whether fixed or mobile, that possesses, cultivates, processes, distributes, makes available or otherwise facilitates the distribution of marijuana (in any form or incorporated into any other product), whether for recreational or medicinal use, to any person, including, but not limited to, a qualified patient, a person with an identification card, or a primary caregiver as those terms are defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
"Marijuana dispensary" shall not include an individual aged twenty-one (21) years or older who: 
(1)  Possess, processes, transports, purchases, obtains or gives away to adults aged twenty-one (21) or older without compensation whatsoever, recreational marijuana; or 
(2)  Possesses, plants, cultivates, harvests, dries, or purchases six (6) or fewer living marijuana plants or who possesses the marijuana produced by those plants, provided that such activity is conducted within the person's "private residence", as that phrase is defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5), or upon the grounds of that private residence, provided that such activities are conducted within a fully enclosed, locked space, and are not visible by normal unaided vision from a public place. (Ord. No. 1466, Sec. 2, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 1478, Sec. 4, 4-4-17) 
"Micro-winery" means an establishment that, includes beverage production of wine and may include a tasting facility and sale of wine produced by the owner of the establishment. The establishment shall not include the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption with the exception of sampling the product within the tasting facility. Wineries shall provide ancillary food service in combination with its primary use. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Mobile Home" means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed for human habitation, for carrying persons and property on its own structure, for being drawn by a motor vehicle. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Mobile Home Park" means any area or tract of land where one (1) or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobile home shall be deemed to include rental for the lot it occupies. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Mobile Recycling Unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A Mobile Recycling Center also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Motel" or "Hotel" means a single building or group of detached buildings, containing guest rooms or apartments, with automobile storage space provided on the site for such rooms or apartments provided in connection therewith, which group is designed and used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.4) 
"Nonconforming Use" means a use that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is situated. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.33) 
"Official Plan Line" means a line established to denote the ultimate right-of-way of a street. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 5) 
"Parking Space" means accessible and usable space on a building site, at least nine feet by twenty feet (9' × 20') for open parking and ten feet by twenty feet (10' × 20') clear and unobstructed inside dimensions for covered parking, located off the street and for the parking of automobiles. Not less than two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided and permanently maintained as parking accommodation, one of which must be covered. Parking not otherwise required to be in a garage or carport must be located on a paved area on the same lot or parcel of land or contiguous thereto. (Ord. No. 733, Sec. 8) 
"Paved Area" means an area of any required yard which is constructed with impervious materials which either results in an increase in the amount of storm water run-off into public storm drainage facilities or hinders natural percolation of storm water on the subject property. (Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01) 
"Person" includes any individual, city, county, or city and county; partnerships, corporations, cooperatives, association, trust or any other legal entities, including the Federal Government. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.35) 
"Places of Worship" means a structure or portion of a structure that is used for the gathering of people for the purpose of performing acts of religious study, honor or devotion. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Portable Vending Device" means any stand, enclosure, booth, kiosk, instrument or mechanism intended to be temporarily used to display, distribute or sell food, beverage, product to the public. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Processor" means any person, including a scrap dealer, certified by the State Department of Conservation who purchases empty aluminum beverage containers, nonaluminum metal beverage containers, glass beverage containers, plastic beverage containers, or any other beverage containers, including any one (1) or more of those beverage containers, which have a redemption value established pursuant to this division, from recycling center in this state for recycling or, if the container is not recyclable, not for recycling, and who cancels, or who certifies to the department in a form prescribed by the Department of Conservation of, the redemption value and redemption bonus of these empty beverage containers by processing empty beverage containers, in any manner which the department may prescribe. However, the department shall not take any action regulating scrap dealers or recycling centers who are processors or recycling centers unless authorized by and pursuant to the goals of this division. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Professional Office" means an office for the conduct of any of the following uses or uses determined by the Community Development Director and/or the Planning Commission to be similar: architect, attorney, chiropractor, dentist, designer, doctor, draftsman, engineer, land planner, ophthalmologist or optometrist, podiatrist, surveyor, physician, surgeon, or any others licensed by the State of California to practice the healing arts, including clinics for out-patients only. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.36; Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
"Public Transit" means bus stops with headways of thirty (30) minutes or less during peak hours and train stations. (Ord. No. 1478, Sec. 13, 4-4-17) 
"Pushcart" means any wagon, cart, or similar wheeled container, which is not a "vehicle", as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, from which food, beverage, or product is displayed, distributed or offered for sale to the public. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Pushcart or Portable Vending Device Operator" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, stockholder, including, but not limited to, owners, operators, lessors and lessees, who operate a pushcart or portable vending device for the purpose of vending food, beverage, or product therefrom. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Pushcart or Portable Vending Device Owner" means any person as defined herein owning or controlling one (1) or more pushcarts and who: 
(1)  Conducts or permits or causes the operation of such pushcart(s) or portable vending device(s) for vending food, beverage or product; 
(2)  Owns, operates, controls, manages, or leases such pushcart(s) or portable vending device(s); or 
(3)  Contracts with persons to vend food, beverage or product from such pushcart(s) or portable vending device(s). (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Recyclable Material" is reusable material, including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Sections 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code and Orange County Fire and Health Departments. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Recycle," "Recycled," "Recycling" or "Recyclable" means the reuse or refilling of empty beverage containers or the process of sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting empty postfilled beverage containers for the purpose of using the altered form. "Recycle," "recycled," "recycling" "recyclable," does not include merely sorting, shredding, stripping, compressing, storing, landfilling with, or disposing of an empty beverage container. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Recycling Center" is a center for the collection of recyclable materials. (See Section 9271bb for recycling center regulations and classifications). (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Recycling Facility" is a center for the collection of recyclable materials. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities include the following: 
A "Certified Recycling Facility" means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. 
A "Collection Facility" is a center for the acceptance, by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in Section 4 Criteria and Standards. Collection Facilities may include the following: 
1.  Reverse Vending Machines which occupy an area of not more than fifty (50) square feet. 
2.  Bulk reverse vending machines occupying no more than five hundred (500) square feet. 
3.  Large collection facilities which occupy a permanent building or store front. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Redemption" and "Redeem" means the return to a recycling center of an empty beverage container for a refund of at least the redemption value and any applicable redemption bonus. 
"Rest Home" means any premises licensed under Section 2300 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State of California. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.37) 
"Rooming House"—See Boarding House. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.38) 
"Sanitarium" means a health station or retreat or other place where patients are housed, and where treatment is given, but excluding mental institutions or institutions for treatment of persons addicted to the use of drugs. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.39) 
"Service Station" means a use which provides for the servicing of motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto, limited to the retail sale of petroleum products and automotive accessories; automobile washing by hand; waxing and polishing of automobiles; tire changing and repairing (excluding recapping); battery service, charging and replacement, not including repair and rebuilding; radiator cleaning and flushing, excluding steam cleaning and repair; installation of accessories; also including the following operations if conducted within a building; lubrication of motor vehicles; brake servicing limited to servicing and replacement of brake cylinders and brake shoes; wheel balancing; the testing, adjustment, and replacement of carburetors, coils, condensers, distributor caps, fan belts, filters, generators, points, rotors, spark plugs, voltage regulators, water and fuel pumps, water hoses and wiring. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.40; Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.70, 5-21-13) 
"Setback Lines" means a line established by this Chapter to govern the placement of buildings or structures with respect to lot lines, streets or alleys. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.41) 
"Side and Front of Corner Lots" means the narrowest frontage of a corner lot facing the street is the front, and the longest frontage facing the intersecting street is the side, irrespective of the direction in which the dwelling faces. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.42) 
"Signs" means any advertising display or structure. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.43) 
"Small Animal Hospital or Clinic" means a place where small animals, such as dogs, cats, birds, and the like, are given medical or surgical treatment. (Ord. No. 352, Sec. 2) 
"Small Family Day Care Home" pursuant to California Health and Safety Code definition and the applicable development standards in TCC Section 9271aa. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
"Special Event" means any commercial, civic, patriotic, religious, cultural, community or political event taking place on a specific date or dates or other such occurrence as determined by the Director of Community Development. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Specialty Store" means a market or retail store other than convenience stores with fewer than 3,500 square feet in gross floor area with limited hours of operation, located in a retail center with more than three (3) retail tenants, that offers a combination of unique foods and beverages not commonly found in convenience or food markets or other retail stores for off-site use or consumption and where alcoholic beverage sales are incidental with no more than fifteen (15) square feet of the retail floor devoted to display of non-refrigerated alcoholic beverage sales for off-site consumption and no sales of refrigerated alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 1237, Sec. 2, 6-4-01) 
"Specified Anatomical Areas" shall mean: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(a)  Human genitals, pubic regions; 
(b)  Buttock; and 
(c)  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Specified Sexual Activities" shall mean: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. (Ord. No. 819, Sec. 1, 2-19-80) 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare accepted by the City of Tustin, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined herein. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.44) 
"Street Line" means the boundary between a street right-of-way and property. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.45) 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or in the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground, including swimming pools, excluding driveways, patios or parking spaces. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.46) 
"Structural Alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.47) 
"Supermarket" means a full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned foods, or nonfood items and some perishable items. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Travel Trailer" means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation, and for travel or recreational purposes, which does not at any time exceed eight (8) feet in width and forty (40) feet in length and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur's license, or both, without violating any provision of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Travel Trailer Park" means any area or tract of land or a separate designated section within a mobile home park where one (1) or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of travel trailers or camp cars used for travel or recreational purposes. (Ord. No. 329, Sec. 2) 
"Unit" means any building designed or used for the shelter or housing of one (1) or more persons, and shall include apartments. (Ord. No. 790, Sec. 4, 2-20-79) 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.49) 
"Use, Accessory" means a use incidental or subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to the main use of a lot or a building located on the same lot. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.50) 
"Vend" or "Vending" means offering food, beverage, or product of any kind for outdoor sale on any publicly or privately owned sidewalk, drive aisle, street, alley, or unenclosed place open to the public, including the movement or standing of a pushcart or portable vending device for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of products. (Ord. No. 1123, Sec. 2, 6-6-94) 
"Vending Machines": 
A "Reverse Vending Machine" is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one (1) or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the State. A Reverse Vending Machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. (In order to accept and temporarily store all three (3) container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of Reverse Vending Machines may be necessary.) 
A "Bulk Reverse Vending Machine" is a Reverse Vending Machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet; is designed to accept more than one (1) container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. (Ord. No. 993, Sec. 1, 9-8-87) 
"Yard" means an open space other than a court on the same lot with a building, which open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in Section 9271. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.51) 
"Yard, Front" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest line of the building; provided, however, that if any Official Plan Line has been established for the street upon which the lot faces, the front yard measurement shall be taken from such Official Plan Line to the nearest line of the building. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 2) 
"Yard, Rear" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the main building. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 11.53) 
"Yard, Side" means a yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (Ord. No. 353, Sec. 3)  
9298 - INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
a 
Continuity of Law 
Except as specifically provided herein, this chapter shall not be interpreted to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way affect any existing provision of any law or ordinance or regulations or permits previously adopted or issued relating to the erection, construction, moving, alteration or enlargement of any building or improvement; provided however, in any instances where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the erection, construction, establishment, moving, alteration or improvement of buildings or the use of any building or structure that is imposed or required by an existing law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 12.1) 
b 
Criteria for Use Determination 
Whenever the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission or City Council is called upon to determine, in cases of ambiguity, whether or not the use of any land or structure in any district is similar in character to the particular uses or plans allowed in the district, the Director of Community Development, Planning Commission or the City Council shall consider the following factors as criteria for their determination, as applicable: 
(1)  Effect upon the public health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood involved and the City at large. 
(2)  Effect upon traffic conditions. 
(3)  Effect upon the orderly development of the area in question and the City at large, in regard to the general planning of the whole community. 
(4)  All other pertinent facts. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 10; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 21, 11-17-90) 
c 
Interpretation 
If any ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate provisions of the chapter, the Director of Community Development shall make an interpretation or the Planning Commission shall ascertain all pertinent facts and make an interpretation based on its findings and thereafter such interpretation shall govern. 
d 
Responsibility of Enforcement 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Development or designee to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the use of land or buildings in the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, alteration, or addition to any buildings or structures. Any permit or license of any type issued by any department or officer of the City of Tustin issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be null and void. (Ord. No. 175, Sec. 11; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 22, 11-17-09) 
e 
Procedures 
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter and any use of land or buildings operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. The City Council may commence the necessary action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoining thereof in the manner prescribed by law in the courts which may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will accomplish such abatement and restraint. The remedies provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy or remedies or penalties provided in this chapter or any other law or ordinance. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 13.2) 
f 
Appeals 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. (Ord. No. 157, Sec. 13.3; Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 23, 11-17-09) 
g 
Consistency With All Laws 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any use, entitlement, authorization, license, or permit allowed or issued under this Code, including without limitation any accessory or ancillary use, shall be consistent with applicable state and federal law. Any use or activity that is illegal under local, state, or federal law shall be deemed a prohibited use in all districts within the City. (Ord. No. 1322, Sec. 2, 12-4-06) 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.71, 5-21-13)  
9299 - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
a 
Office Created 
An Office of the Zoning Administrator is hereby created pursuant to Section 65900 et seq., of the California Government Code. 
b 
Duties 
The Community Development Director, or his/her designee, acting as the Zoning Administrator, shall have dual responsibility with that of the Planning Commission to hear and decide in accordance with Council policy and provisions of this chapter, and has the authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny the following requests when such requests constitute a reasonable use of property not permissible under a strict literal interpretation of the regulations. The Zoning Administrator reserves the right to forward any matter listed below to the Planning Commission for consideration and action. Requests for minor adjustments Zoning Administrator variances in excess of the limitations prescribed in this subsection, or those development standards not specifically listed in this subsection, shall be subject to the approval of a variance by the Planning Commission. Requests for conditional use permits or other specified development applications not specifically listed in this subsection shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit or other discretionary review by the Planning Commission or other reviewing body as applicable. 
(1)  Minor adjustments: 
(a)  A decrease of not more than five (5) percent of the required building site area. 
(b)  A decrease of not more than ten (10) percent of a required building or landscaping setback. 
(c)  An increase of not more than twenty (20) percent in the maximum permitted height of a fence solid hedge or wall, subject to city approved structural design. 
(d)  An increase of not more than ten (10) percent of the permitted projection of steps, stairways, landings, eaves, cornices, canopies, overhangs, masonry chimneys, raised porches and fireplaces into any required building setback. 
(e)  An increase of not more than ten (10) percent in the maximum permitted building height. 
(f)  A decrease in the number of required off-street parking spaces for nonresidential land uses up to a maximum of ten (10) percent. 
(g)  A decrease of not more than ten (10) percent in the permitted distances between detached accessory structures and main structures. 
(h)  An increase of not more than ten (10) percent in the maximum permitted driveway area within the front yard setback for residential districts or the front yard for commercial and industrial districts. (Ord. No. 1240, Sec. 2, 8-6-01; Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
(i)  A decrease in the number of required off-street parking spaces for residential land uses by a maximum of one (1) parking space. When an accessory dwelling unit is being added under the provisions of Section 9222 or 9223, parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Code. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 1479, Sec. 14, 4-4-17) 
(j)  A increase of not more than ten (10) percent of the maximum sign area allowed, per zoning regulations. 
(2)  Variances when required by the City Code: 
(a)  A decrease of not more than ten (10) percent of an individual required building site area. 
(b)  An increase of not more than twenty (20) percent of the permitted projection of steps, stairways, landings, eaves, cornices, canopies, overhangs, masonry chimneys, raised porches and fireplaces into any required building setback. 
(c)  A decrease in the number of required off-street parking spaces for nonresidential land uses up to a maximum of twenty (20) percent. 
(d)  A decrease of not more than twenty (20) percent in the required setbacks for buildings, landscaping, swimming pools, spas and equipment. 
(e)  An increase of not more than twenty (20) percent of the maximum sign area allowed, per zoning regulations. 
(3)  Conditional Use Permits when required by the City Code: 
(a)  Dish antennas. 
(b)  Bulk Reverse vending machines. 
(c)  Business operations (including storage) conducted within view from public right-of-way. 
(d)  Large recycling locations. 
(e)  On-premises dry cleaning. 
(f)  Minor CUPs for existing development where there would be no change of primary use, there would be no expansion of floor area, and the request would not alter the original intent of the project or site. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverage sales establishments. (Ord. No. 1493, Sec. 6, 9-4-18) 
(h)  Secondhand sales when pawning is not included. 
(i)  Development or construction of new buildings in the Commercial General (CG) or Industrial (M) Districts where more than fifty (50) percent of the total area, or any portion of the ground floor, is designated for use by professional or general offices. 
(j)  Accessory buildings used as guest quarters. 
(k)  Temporary uses for a period of more than one (1) year. 
(l)  Reserved. (Ord. No. 1317, Sec. II, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 1497, Sec. 4(Att. C), 7-3-18) 
(4)  Specified development applications: 
(a)  Soil remediation activities, subject to the same findings as required for a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Time extensions of not more than twelve (12) months from the original expiration date for minor adjustments, conditional use permits, variances, design reviews, subdivisions and other development applications, subject to the same noticing requirements that were given at the time the project was originally approved. 
(c)  Except where design review is required by the planning commission pursuant to an adopted specific plan, (a) design review applications within redevelopment project areas; (b) minor design reviews within redevelopment project areas which include modifications to existing structures and/or existing facade or site modifications which constitute a change in three (3) or less major design elements which do not result in a completed facade upgrade, (c) single-family homes not part of a subdivision, (d) residential room additions and (e) new or modified accessory structures associated with existing development. 
(d)  Amendment to conditions of approval established by Planning Commission or City Council. Condition amendments that are determined by the Community Development Director to be minor in nature and will not alter the original intent of the project or site. Examples would include changes to exterior materials, colors, elevations, landscaping, walls/fences and hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 1429, Sec. II.72, 5-21-13) 
c 
Application Process 
(1)  Submittal requirements. Applications for minor adjustments, conditional use permits or other specified development applications that would be subject to action by the Zoning Administrator shall be filed with the Community Development Department pursuant to the department's current application procedures and fee schedule. Applications should be accompanied with a written description as to how the applicable positive findings for the project type applied for identified in subsection (3) below can be justified. A single application may include more than one (1) request applicable to the same project. Applications subject to action by the Zoning Administrator shall be processed and approved, conditionally approved or denied within the time limits established by state law for actions of development projects. 
(2)  Public Hearing and Noticing Requirements. Upon determination that an application is complete, the Community Development Department shall schedule the matter for consideration by the Zoning Administrator. If a public hearing is required for the type of application considered, notice of such public hearing shall be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65091. Minor adjustments shall be considered by the Zoning Administrator without a public hearing. Additional noticing time as specified in Government Code Section 65091 may be required to comply with noticing requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. In the event of a conflict between required noticing times, the longer time shall be given. 
(3)  Required Findings 
(a)  Minor adjustments shall be granted only when such adjustments are found to be in conformance with the General Plan and when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, or surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification. Any minor adjustment granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which the subject property is situated. 
(1)  Minor adjustment to reduce the required amount of nonresidential parking shall be granted only when, in addition to the findings in Section 9299c(3)(a) above, the following findings can also be made: 
(a)  The intent of the parking regulations is preserved; 
(b)  The parking provided will be sufficient to serve the use intended and potential future uses of the same site; and 
(c)  The adjusted decrease in the number of parking spaces shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or materially injurious to properties located in the general vicinity. 
(2)  Minor adjustment to reduce the required amount of residential parking shall be granted only when, in addition to the findings in Section 9299c(3)(a) above, the findings in Section 9264b, can also be made. (Ord. No. 1354, Sec. II, 11-4-08) 
(b)  Variances may be granted only when such variances are found to be in conformance with the General Plan and when because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, or surroundings, the strict application of the Zoning Code is found to deprive the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identified zone classification. 
(c)  Conditional use permits shall be granted only when such conditional use permits are found to be in conformance with the General Plan and when the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the use applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular use, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use, or injurious or detrimental to property and improvements in the neighborhood or the general welfare of the city. 
(d)  Design review applications may be approved only if such applications are found to be in conformance with the General Plan and if the location, size, architectural features and general appearance of the proposed development will not impair the orderly and harmonious development of the area, the present or future development therein, the occupancy thereof, or the community as a whole. In making such findings, the following items shall be considered: 
(1)  Height, bulk and area of buildings 
(2)  Setbacks and site planning 
(3)  Exterior materials and colors 
(4)  Type and pitch of roofs 
(5)  Size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings 
(6)  Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television antennas 
(7)  Landscaping, parking area design and traffic circulation 
(8)  Location, height and standards of exterior illumination 
(9)  Location and appearance of equipment located outside of an enclosed structure 
(10)  Location and method of refuse storage 
(11)  Physical relationship of proposed structures in the neighborhood 
(12)  Appearance and design relationship of proposed structures to existing structures and possible future structures in the neighborhood and public thoroughfares 
(13)  Proposed signing 
(14)  Development guidelines and criteria as adopted by the City Council 
(4)  Zoning Administrator Action. After consideration of the application, and after making the appropriate findings as required above, the Zoning Administrator shall take action to approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be final unless appealed pursuant to subsection d below. The Zoning Administrator shall provide notice to the applicant within two (2) business days following the action. (Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 24, 11-17-09) 
d 
Appeals 
Any person may appeal any decision of the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. (Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 25, 11-17-09) 
e  Repealed (Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 26, 11-17-09) 
f  Repealed (Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 27, 11-17-09) 
(Ord. No. 552; Ord. No. 1116, Sec. 1, 5-16-94; Ord. No. 1157, Sec. 1, 12-4-95)  
CHAPTER 3 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 1430, adopted Sept. 17, 2013, amended ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3 pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1177, adopted Feb. 18, 1997. 
 
PART 1 - PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICABILITY OF SUBDIVISION CODE 
 
9311 - PURPOSE, INTENT AND APPLICABILITY OF SUBDIVISION CODE 
a  Title 
Article 9, Chapter 3, of the Tustin City Code is and may be cited as the Subdivision Code of the City of Tustin, hereafter referred to as "the Subdivision Code." 
b  Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of the Subdivision Code is to implement the Subdivision Map Act related to the division of land within or partially within the City of Tustin by establishing regulations concerning the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps provided under the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the City regarding the maps. To fulfill these purposes, the intent of the Subdivision Code is to: 
1.  Promote orderly growth and development to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare; 
2.  Promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land; and 
3.  Provide for adequate traffic circulation, utilities, and other services in the City. 
c  Authority and Relationship to General Plan 
The Subdivision Code is enacted based upon authority vested in the City of Tustin by the State of California, including, but not limited to: the State Constitution and the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410 et seq.). 
The Subdivision Code is a tool used by the City of Tustin to implement the goals, objectives and policies established in the Tustin General Plan. 
d  Applicability of Subdivision Code 
The Subdivision Code shall apply to all divisions of land within or partially within the City of Tustin, except as provided in 9312 (Exclusions from the Subdivision Code). In the event that this chapter is silent or does not address a specific subdivision issue, procedure, or requirement, the City shall defer to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
Every division of land proposed within or partially within the City of Tustin shall be consistent with the Tustin General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, Article 9, Chapter 2 (Zoning Code) and other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code. 
The type and intensity of land use as shown on the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, Article 9, Chapter 2, (Zoning Code), or other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code shall determine, together with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Code, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities, and other public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. 
e  Subdivision Manual 
The Director of Community Development ("Director") shall formulate such rules, procedures and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer the Subdivision Code. Such rules and procedures shall be referred to as the Tustin Subdivision Manual. The Subdivision Manual was initially adopted by the Tustin City Council (Resolution No. 98-18). The Director is hereby authorized to incorporate further amendments into the Subdivision Manual; provided such amendments are consistent with the Subdivision Map Act and this Subdivision Code. 
f  Standards 
All public street improvements to be installed or agreed to be installed in a subdivision shall conform to the City of Tustin's "Street Design Manual and Standard Plans." The City Engineer is hereby authorized to amend the City of Tustin's "Street Design Manual and Standard Plans," provided such amendments are consistent with this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
g  Responsibility and Delegation of Authority 
The following advisory agencies, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, are hereby authorized to discharge and administer the duties set forth in this Subdivision Code as follows: 
1.  City Council. The Tustin City Council shall have the responsibility and authority to conduct public hearings, and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove any subdivision application involving multiple, interrelated discretionary actions, petitions for reversion to acreage, and Subdivision Code modifications. The City Council shall also review and uphold or deny appeals from actions taken in compliance with Section 9321.b (Authority for Subdivision Decisions) of this Code. 
2.  City Engineer. The City Engineer, or designee, shall be responsible for: 
a)  Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the Subdivision Code; 
b)  Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative maps; 
c)  Processing and approving subdivision public improvement plans; 
d)  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications for public improvements; 
e)  Preparing and approving subdivision improvement agreements; 
f)  Inspecting, approving and accepting subdivision public improvements; 
g)  Accepting dedications and conveyances of real property and interests in real property offered at no cost to the City: and, 
h)  Amending the City of Tustin's "Street Design Manual and Standard Plans." 
3.  Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development, or designee, shall be responsible for: 
a)  Processing of tentative maps, final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps; 
b)  Establishing design and construction standards for private improvements; 
c)  Processing and approving subdivision private improvement plans; 
d)  Processing and approving proposed street names; 
e)  Inspecting, approving and accepting subdivision private improvements. 
f)  Processing and approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving lot line adjustments, parcel mergers, final maps, certificates of compliance and requests for extension of a tentative map, and the waiver of the Subdivision Code; and, 
g)  Interpreting all provisions of the Subdivision Code. 
4.  Director of Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks and Recreation, or designee, shall be responsible for determining if the proposed park land dedications and/or recreation improvements related to a subdivision comply with the Subdivision Code. 
5.  Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative maps, and review and recommend to the City Council actions, findings and conditions pertinent to the application for a division of land, any subdivision application involving multiple interrelated discretionary actions, and review and uphold or deny appeals from actions taken in compliance with 9321.b (Authority for Subdivision Decisions). 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9312 - EXCLUSIONS FROM THE SUBDIVISION CODE 
Those activities identified in Sections 66412 (except subsection (d) related to Lot Line Adjustments), 66412.1, 66412.2, 66412.5, 66412.6 or 66426.5 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be excluded from the requirements of the Subdivision Code. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9313 - WAIVER OF SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS 
a  Waiver of Tentative Map Requirements 
Any subdivider may, upon formal application, request the waiver of one or more of the requirements for a tentative or final map for the following activities: 
1.  Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees. 
2.  Divisions of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the City, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc. 
3.  The unmerger, in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Code, of real property which has been merged pursuant to the Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the City. 
4.  Where tenants purchase a mobile home park subject to the provisions of Section 66428.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
b  Waiver Findings 
After the waiver application is deemed complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, the Director shall approve or deny the application within 50 calendar days. The requirements for a tentative map or final map shall not be waived, in whole or in part, unless the Director makes a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code and the Tustin General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, Article g, Chapter 2 (Zoning Code) and other applicable provisions of the Code. The subdivider shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Tustin Planning Commission in compliance with 9321.h (Appeals). 
c  Certificate of Compliance Required 
The Director shall file with the County Recorder a Certificate of Compliance for the land to be divided, in compliance with 9333.c (Certificate of Compliance), and a plat map showing the division. The certificate of compliance shall include documentation by the County Tax Collector in compliance with 9325.b.5 (Tax Certificate). 
If the application for a Certificate of Compliance is filed over one (1) year following the Determination of Compliance, the application for a Certificate of Compliance shall be accompanied by the current vesting deed(s) and such other information as may be required to ascertain the status of each parcel included in the application, as well as a map drawn to an engineer's scale of the subject property with dimensions showing the location and use of all structures on the property and all streets adjacent to and providing access to the property. The application shall not be considered as complete until all the application documents, including the vesting deed(s) and map have been received together with the processing fee. 
Conditions may be imposed to provide for, among other things, payment by the subdivider of parkland dedication, drainage, and other fees that are permitted under the Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Map Act, or other relevant law. 
The decision of the Director shall be considered final unless an appeal is filed in compliance with 9321.h (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9314 - MODIFICATION OF SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS 
A subdivider may request a modification to any Subdivision Code regulation or requirement, consistent with the following application procedures and findings. This modification procedure shall not apply to modifications of Zoning Code requirements. 
a  Application 
An application for a modification shall be made by the subdivider on forms and with such fees or deposits as may be prescribed by the Department or by resolution adopted by the City Council. The application shall set forth the nature and extent of the requested modification, the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the applicant for the request for a modification and be accompanied by a written statement identifying the special grounds or circumstances that will enable the required findings to be made. 
b  Required findings for approval 
An application for a modification shall be considered by the City Council concurrently with the application for a tentative map, vesting tentative map, or other application, following receipt of a recommendation on the matter from the Planning Commission. To the extent that provisions of the Subdivision Code conform to the Subdivision Map Act, they may not be waived. In approving or conditionally approving a modification of the regulations or requirements included in this chapter, the City Council shall make the following findings: 
1.  Because the land involved in the subdivision is of an unusual size or shape; or is subject to title limitations of record that effect or limit its development; or is affected by topographical location or condition of land involved that affects its development; or the use to which the land involved will be devoted requires the modification, it is impossible or impracticable for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
2.  The subdivision is in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act, the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, Article 9, Chapter 2 (Zoning Code), and other applicable provisions of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
PART 2 - SUBDIVISION PROCESSING 
 
9321 - SUBDIVISION AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION PROCESSING 
a  Introduction 
This part provides standard procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and processing of applications for divisions of land required by the Subdivision Code. 
b  Authority for Subdivision Decisions 
Table 2-1 (Review Authority) identifies the City official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application for divisions of land required by the Subdivision Code. 
Table 2-1 
Review Authority 
Type of Application 	Decision Body 	Appeal Body 
Code Interpretation 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
Certificate of Compliance 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
Final Maps 	Director 	City Council 
Lot Line Adjustments 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
Parcel Mergers 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
Reversion to Acreage 	City Council 2 	— 
Tentative Maps, including Vesting 	Planning Commission 	City Council 
Extension of Tentative Map 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
Acceptance of Dedications or Improvements 	City Engineer 	Planning Commission 1 
Subdivision Code Waiver 	Director 	Planning Commission 1 
 
1 The Planning Commission's decision may be appealed to the Council. 
2 The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council. 
c  Application Filing and Fees 
Applications for divisions of land shall be processed in compliance with this section and the City's Subdivision Manual. 
1.  Application Contents. Applications for divisions of land shall be filed with the Department. An application shall be considered complete when: 
a)  All necessary forms, materials and exhibits as identified in the City's Subdivision Manual have been provided and accepted as adequate; and, 
b)  All necessary application fees and/or deposits have been accepted. 
The tentative map, final map and other drawings which are to be ultimately recorded shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The maps and exhibits shall be clearly drawn and contain the necessary information as determined by the Department. The Department may also require additional materials, exhibits, data or information determined necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and/or the Subdivision Code. 
2.  Eligibility for Filing. Applications may be made by the owner(s) of the subject property or by any other person, with the written consent of the property owner. 
d  Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment 
Processing of any submitted application will not commence until after all required information is received and accepted and the Department confirms that the application is complete. All applications filed with the Department in compliance with the Subdivision Code and the City's Subdivision Manual shall be initially processed as follows: 
1.  Review for Completeness. The Department shall review all applications for accuracy before they are accepted as being complete. 
a)  Notification of Applicant. The applicant shall be informed, as required by the Government Code, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in a letter, must be provided. 
b)  Environmental Information. The Department may require the applicant to submit such additional information as may be deemed reasonably necessary for environmental review of the project in compliance with 9321.d.3 (Environmental Assessment) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
c)  Expiration of Application. If a pending application is not capable of being deemed complete within six (6) months after the first filing with the Department, the application shall be deemed withdrawn unless an extension is granted by the Director. A new application, including fees, plans, exhibits and other materials, will be required to commence processing of any subdivision on the same property. 
2.  Referral of Application. At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act, any application filed may be referred to any public agency that may be affected or have an interest in the proposed subdivision. 
3.  Environmental Assessment. Once the application is determined to be complete, all subdivision applications shall be reviewed as required by CEQA to determine whether the proposed subdivision is exempt from the requirements or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether the proposed subdivision is covered by previous environmental documents, whether a Negative Declaration may be issued, or whether an Environmental Impact Report shall be required. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of environmental documents shall be in compliance with CEQA and other guidelines established by the Department. 
e  Concurrent Processing 
When a proposed division of land or decision body action requires more than one land use approval, all applications shall be processed concurrently as interrelated permits for a project and shall not be bifurcated unless otherwise authorized by the Director upon the request of the applicant. The highest designated decision body for all such applications shall take final action on the multiple applications. For example, any division of land determined by the Department to be inconsistent with the General Plan would require concurrent consideration of an application to eliminate the inconsistency. 
f  Notice of Public Hearing 
With five (5) days of determining a tentative parcel or tentative tract map application complete, the Department shall: 
1.  Send notice and a copy of the tentative parcel or tentative tract map to the affected public agencies and utilities which may, in turn, forward to the Department their findings and recommendations. The agency or utility may send a written report to the Planning Commission. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the agency or utility and shall make recommendations as deemed appropriate. If a written report is made by an agency or utility, such report may be returned to the City within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the proposed tentative map. In the event that an agency or utility fails to respond within the 15-day period, such failure to respond shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the agency or utility; and 
2.  Send a notice and a copy of the tentative parcel or tentative tract map application by certified mail to the governing board of the affected public School Districts. The notice shall contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information which would be relevant to the affected School District(s). The governing board(s) of the affected School District(s) may review the notice and may send a written report to the Planning Commission. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected public School District and may make such recommendations as the governing board of the affected School District(s) deems appropriate. If a written report is made by the governing board, such report shall be returned to the City within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the proposed tentative map. In the event that the District fails to respond within the 15-day period, such failure to respond shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the affected public School Districts. 
Whenever a public hearing or meeting is scheduled to be held pursuant to this chapter, notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the location of the proposed subdivision; the identity of the hearing body; and a general explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be given at least 10 calendar days before the hearing in accordance with the provisions of the City's Subdivision Manual and Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091. 
A proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project shall be noticed in accordance with Sections 66452.17 through 66452.20 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
Additional noticing time as specified may be required to comply with noticing requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. In the event of a conflict between required noticing times, the longer time shall be given. 
The Department may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in the Subdivision Code. 
The decision body shall consider any input received from any interested party, including any reports from affected agencies, utilities or School Districts prior to approving, conditionally approving, or disapproving an application for division of land. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it should be noted that the Subdivision Map Act or other state codes may require additional notice for certain applications. 
g  Public Hearings 
Whenever a public hearing is required by the Subdivision Code, and the application for subdivision and any environmental review has been determined to be complete, and the application has been determined to be in compliance with this Code, all other applicable Codes, Specific Plans, General Plan and the City of Tustin's "Standard Drawings and Improvement Design Standards," in effect as of the filing date, or that includes application(s) that propose actions that, if approved by the decision body, would correct any noncompliance, the Department shall set the time, date, and place of the public hearing before the decision body in accordance with the deadlines for action provided in this Code. 
h  Appeals 
The subdivider, or any other interested party, may appeal any action of the decision body to the appeal body as identified in 9321.b (Authority for Subdivision Decisions). Appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk during normal business hours within 10 calendar days of the date of the decision and be accompanied by a deposit or fee as required by City Council resolution or ordinance. All appeals shall be made in writing and shall specify the decision appealed from, the specific action or relief sought by the appellant in the appeal, and reasons why the action taken by the decision body should be modified or reversed. Timely filing of a written appeal shall automatically stay all actions and put in abeyance all approvals or permits which may have been granted; and neither the applicant nor any enforcing agency may rely upon the decision, approval, or denial or other action appealed from, until the appeal has been resolved. Failure to file a written appeal in accordance with this subsection shall constitute a waiver thereof. 
The appeal shall be scheduled for consideration by the appropriate appeal body identified in 9321.b (Authority for Subdivision Decisions) within thirty (30) days of receipt of an appeal, with the same noticing as required by Section 9321.g (Public Hearings), unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Director and the Property Owner/Applicant. If there is no regular meeting of the appropriate appeal body within the next 30 days for which notice can be given pursuant to Section 9321.f, the appeal may be heard at the next regular meeting for which notice can be given, or within 60 days from the date of the receipt of the request, whichever period is shorter. The hearing shall be de novo and the appeal body may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the matter in accordance with this Code or remand the matter to the decision body for further proceedings in accordance with directions of the appeal body. A decision of the City Council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9322 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
a  Purpose and Applicability 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of a complete application in compliance with subsection 9321.c (application filing and fees) for a lot line adjustment of four or fewer adjacent parcels in a manner so that any land taken from one parcel will be added to an adjoining parcel in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act. 
b  Application Processing and Review 
Each application shall be analyzed by the Department to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section, the Subdivision Map Act and the City's Subdivision Manual. 
1.  Application review shall be limited to a determination of the following: 
a)  Four or fewer existing, adjoining parcels are involved; 
b)  No greater number of parcels will result from the lot line adjustment; 
c)  The parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to the Tustin General Plan, and any applicable specific plan, zoning and building ordinances. 
2.  No conditions or exactions shall be imposed on the approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform the proposal to the City's General Plan, zoning and building ordinances, and/or to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the approval of the approval of the lot line adjustment, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. 
3.  No tentative or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. 
4.  No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. 
c  Decision 
Upon determining that a complete application has been submitted and that the application complies with the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code and Subdivision Manual, the Director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed lot line adjustment. 
An approved lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed, which shall be recorded with the office of the County Recorder in accordance with the provisions of Section 66412(d) of the Government Code. If a Record of Survey is prepared and filed, a Certificate of Compliance shall also be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9323 - TENTATIVE PARCEL AND TRACT MAPS 
a  Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of a complete application in compliance with subsection 9321.c (Application Filing and Fees) for tentative maps for the subdivision of land in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, all applicable zoning regulations, the Subdivision Code, and the Subdivision Manual. 
b  Applicability and Requirements 
Each application shall be consistent with the provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code and the City's Subdivision Manual. Proposed divisions of land shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Divisions of Land; Four or Less Parcels: Tentative Parcel Map Requirements. 
a)  A tentative parcel map shall be required for all subdivisions creating four (4) or less parcels or where: 
(1)  The land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the City; 
(2)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; 
(3)  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway, which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the City as to street alignments and widths; 
(4)  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or 
(5)  The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of any environmental subdivision pursuant to Section 66418.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
b)  A tentative parcel map shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, that are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 calendar days notice in writing). 
(2)  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a finding is made by the Director in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. 
For purposes of this subsection, land conveyed to or from a governmental agency shall include a fee interest, an easement or a license. 
2.  Division of Land; Five or More Parcels: Tentative Tract Map Requirements. 
a)  A tentative tract map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five (5) or more parcels, five (5) or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five (5) or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five (5) or more dwelling units, except where a parcel map is required pursuant to Section 9323b.1 of this Code. 
b)  A tentative tract map shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks. 
(2)  Mineral, oil, or gas leases. 
(3)  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code. 
(4)  The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, use permit, or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation as defined in Section 234 of the Public Utilities Code, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including, but not limited to, antennae support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources and other equipment incidental to the transmission of cellular communications, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the advisory agency or legislative body. 
(5)  Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. As used in this subdivision, "agricultural purposes" means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
(6)  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other local agency ordinances regulating design and improvement. 
(7)  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel. 
(8)  The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2, but this Section shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of those units. Subdivisions of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet. (California Government Code Sections 66412,66412.1,66412.2 and 66412.5.) 
c  Application Processing and Review 
A complete application for a tentative map shall be filed with the Department in compliance with 9321.c (Application Filing and Fees). Each application shall be analyzed by the Department to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, Subdivision Manual, Tustin General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, Article 9, Chapter 2, (Zoning Code) and other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code and state law. 
1.  Tentative map applications shall be determined to be complete by the Department only when: 
a)  All necessary application forms, materials and exhibits as established by the Department are accepted as adequate; 
b)  A preliminary soils, geology and seismicity report prepared in accordance with the California Building Code and City's Grading Manual is accepted as adequate, except for subdivision for finance and conveyance purposes only; 
c)  A preliminary title report showing the legal owners and any encumbrances and easements is accepted as adequate by the City Engineer. Said title report shall be current within three (3) weeks of the submittal of the final map and be updated every six (6) months from the date of the original submittal until final action on the application is taken; 
d)  All necessary determinations and documents to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act have been certified or adopted; and 
e)  All fees and/or deposits have been submitted and accepted. 
2.  Tentative maps shall be considered by the Planning Commission in compliance with 9321.b (Authority for Subdivision Decisions), with a noticed public hearing. 
3.  Tentative map applications which the Department determines are eligible for categorical exemption from CEQA, or which will rely upon a previously certified environmental impact report, shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Commission within 50 calendar days of the date when the Department has determined the application complete. 
4.  Tentative map applications which the Department determines to be complete but that require the preparation of an environmental document in compliance with CEQA shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Commission in conjunction with the environmental document, except that the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation for applications involving multiple, interrelated discretionary actions. 
5.  The Planning Commission shall, after a public hearing, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a tentative map supported by the following findings: 
a)  The proposed map is consistent with the Tustin General Plan or any applicable specific plan, the Zoning Code, this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, and other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code. 
b)  The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the Tustin General Plan or any applicable specific plan, the Zoning Code and other applicable provisions of the Tustin City Code. 
c)  The site is physically suitable for the proposed type and density of development. 
d)  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. However, the City Council may approve or conditionally approve a tentative map even if it is unable to make this finding if an environmental impact report was prepared for the project, and a finding was made that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report that would mitigate damage to the environment or to fish and wildlife and their habitat. 
e)  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not cause serious public health problems. 
f)  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection the City Council may approve the map if it finds that alternative easements for access through, or for use of, the property will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
g)  The waste discharge from the proposed subdivision into a community sewer system will not result in or add to violations of existing requirements prescribed by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
h)  Corrective measures have been proposed by a civil engineer registered by the State if the preliminary soils report identifies the existence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected would lead to structural defects within the subdivision. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure within the subdivision which has been found to contain critically expansive or defective soils unless the approved corrective measure is incorporated in the construction plans. 
i)  Any tentative map where residential development of more than 500 dwelling units is proposed shall include a finding indicating, or a condition requiring, confirmation that a sufficient water supply is available, based on the submittal to the City of a written verification of a "Sufficient Water Supply" as that term is defined in Section 66473.7 of the Subdivision Map Act, from the applicable public water utility provider, or that the proposed subdivision is exempted by Section 66473.7(i) of the Subdivision Map Act from providing said verification. 
In the event that one or more of the findings included in this section cannot be made to support approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the Planning Commission shall disapprove the tentative map except when the subdivider files a tentative map concurrently with an interrelated land use application (i.e., zone change, general plan amendment, etc.) intended to make the development proposal consistent with the above findings, whereupon the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the City Council. 
As a condition of approval of a subdivision map, the subdivider may be required to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication to the public, through the appropriate public agency, of all real property both on- and off-site as required for public use or benefit. Any condition requiring dedication shall specify whether the real property shall be dedicated by easement or in fee title, as identified in Section 9331 of this Code and shall also be so identified upon the tentative map and final map. 
The Planning Commission's action on the tentative map shall be final unless appealed, except that the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation for applications involving multiple, interrelated discretionary actions to the City Council at a public hearing to be held within 30 calendar days of the Commission's action. Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with 9321.g (Public Hearings). All applicable time frames for the Commission to recommend on the tentative map application specified by the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, or other relevant law, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Commission. 
The decision making body shall take action, after a public hearing, to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the tentative map. If the decision making body does not approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within the time limits specified in this section, or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative map as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code and the City's Subdivision Manual, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to certify its approval. All applicable time frames for the decision making body to act on the tentative map application specified by the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, or other relevant law, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the decision making body. 
d  Findings and Decision 
The decision making body shall record its decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The City Council may approve an application for a tentative map, with or without conditions, supported by the findings required by Section 9323c, the Subdivision Map Act and by the findings required by the California Environmental Quality Act. The decision making body may require, as a condition of its approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of permit issuance. 
e  Post Approval Procedures 
1.  Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the Tustin City Council pursuant to Section 9321h. The decision of the City Council is final. 
2.  Expirations. The approval of a tentative map shall expire within twenty-four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval, or after any extension of period of time not to exceed an additional twelve (12) months, or such other period as may be authorized by State Law. Prior to the expiration of said period, or any extension granted pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed, and a final map to be prepared in accordance with the tentative map as approved, and filed in accordance with Government Code Section 66456 et seq. 
3.  Extensions. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by filing a written request with the Department and paying applicable fees as established by City Council resolution. The filing of such application automatically extends the map until the extension is acted on. The Director shall determine whether sufficient evidence was provided in the application that there are no changed circumstances and/or that the subdivider has made a good faith effort to establish the subdivision. Extension(s) not exceeding an aggregate total of 36 months may be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved. No extension shall be granted that would extend the tentative map more than six years beyond the date of the resolution adopted by the decision making body approving or conditionally approving the tentative map unless otherwise authorized by State Law. As a condition to granting an extension of time, the Director or, upon appeal, the City Council may require compliance with any additional requirements deemed necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this Subdivision Code. The period of extension specified in this section shall be in addition to any extension authorized by Government Code Section 66452.6(a). The subdivider may appeal the decision of the Director if filed with the City Clerk within 15 calendar days of the date of the action. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9324 - VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL AND TRACT MAPS 
a  Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of a complete application for vesting tentative parcel and tract maps for the subdivision of land in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the City's Subdivision Manual. 
b  Applicability, Filing and Processing 
Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or the Subdivision Code requires or authorizes the filing of a tentative map, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead, in accordance with the provisions herein. The filing of a vesting tentative map, as opposed to a tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
Except as provided in this section, a vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in Section 9323 and shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
c  Rights of a Vesting Tentative Map 
1.  Subject to the time limits established by Section 9323 of this Code, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards as described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
2.  A permit, approval, extension, or entitlement sought after approval of a vesting tentative map may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined: 
a)  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; or 
b)  The condition or denial is required to comply with state or federal law. 
3.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
a)  An initial time period of one (1) year beyond the recording of the final map. When several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one (1) year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of the said final maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 9323.f. (Post Approval Procedures) or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps are not timely recorded. 
b)  The one (1) year initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design review, if the time used by the City to process the application exceeds 30 calendar days from the date that a complete application is filed. At any time prior to the expiration of the one (1) year initial time period, the subdivider may apply for a one-year extension. The Director shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the request. The subdivider may appeal the decision of the Director, if filed with the City Clerk within 15 calendar days of the date of the action. 
c)  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
4.  An approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the City from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development in accordance with subdivision c(2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9325 - FINAL MAPS 
a  Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of final maps in compliance with Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Code. 
b  Requirements 
An application for a final map may be filed with the Department in compliance with 9321.c (Application Filing and Fees). The final map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer and shall contain the information identified in the Professional Land Surveyor's Act, Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the City's Subdivision Manual, unless waived by the Director. 
Final map submittals shall be accompanied by the following data and reports. The Director, City Engineer or City Attorney may also require additional materials, exhibits, data or information as deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, and Subdivision Manual. Final map applications shall be determined to be complete by the Director, only when the following actions have been completed: 
1.  Applications Forms. All necessary application forms, materials and exhibits identified in the City's Subdivision Manual (including a formal "Owner's Consent" form are accepted by the Department as complete; 
2.  Improvement Plans. The subdivider has either completed the required improvements, or entered into an agreement with the City committing to do the required improvements, as required by Section 9332 (Improvements) of this code and by conditions of the tentative map; 
3.  Title Report. The subdivider has submitted a certificate of title, a policy of title insurance, or title guarantee issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the State to write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein accepted as adequate by the Department. Said title report shall be current within three (3) weeks of the submittal of the final map and be updated every year unless otherwise requested by the Director from the date of the original submittal until final action on the application is taken; 
4.  Survey. Final Maps shall be based on a field survey in conformity with the Professional Land Surveyor's Act. The survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures. 
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one (1) exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set prior to recording as required by the City Engineer. 
5.  Tax Certificate. The subdivider has submitted a certificate from the County Tax Collector stating that all taxes or special assessments collected as taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payment of all taxes or special assessments which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the County; 
6.  Dedications and Easements. All dedications or easements have been made by certificate on the final map unless use of a separate instrument for such dedication has been approved by the City Engineer. Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility have been accepted as adequate; 
7.  Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines have been accepted as adequate; 
8.  Governing Documents. For a common interest development within the meaning of Sections 1350 et seq. of the State Civil Code, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code have been provided. All subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include any Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Community Development and City Attorney; 
9.  Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, has been issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the City, which shall be maintained complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons who consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedications, and all acknowledgements thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary; 
10.  Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving, or other required improvements have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement has been filed for the improvement thereof and accepted as adequate; 
11.  Prior to recordation of a final map, street names shall be identified and approved by the Director in accordance with the Subdivision Manual. 
12.  In addition to the normal full size plan submittal, the approved version of all final maps shall be submitted in computer aided design and drafting (CADD) format consistent with CADD conventions and guidelines established by the City Engineer. 
13.  Liability Agreement and Insurance. A hold-harmless agreement obligating the subdivider to hold the City and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death to any person, and for injury to property which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider's subcontractors in connection with the subdivision has been filed and accepted by the City. A certificate of insurance reporting to the City the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdividers' own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death to any person, and for injury to property which arise from the operations of the subdivider or subcontractors in connection with the subdivision naming the City as an additional insured has been filed and accepted by the City. The agreement and certificate required by this subsection shall be subject to prior review and approval by the City Engineer and City Attorney; 
14.  Fees and Deposits. All fees and/or deposits have been submitted and accepted; and 
15.  Corrections. Any and all corrections and/or additions to the final map have been made and are acceptable to the City Engineer. 
c  Multiple Final Maps 
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the Director of Community Development in writing of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map. In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. If the subdivider did not provide written notice of its intent to file multiple final maps at the time of the tentative map application was filed, multiple final maps may only be filed with the concurrence of the Director. The right of the subdivider to file multiple final maps shall not limit the City's authority to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple maps. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. 
d  Application Processing, Review and Approval 
Each application shall be analyzed by the Department to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, the Subdivision Manual, and any conditions of approval of the tentative map. Upon determination of a complete final map the Director shall approve or disapprove the final map within the time frames established by the Subdivision Map Act. The Director shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. An approval shall be based upon a finding that the final map is in substantial compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, the tentative map and all conditions thereof. 
In conjunction with Director approval of a final map, the City Engineer shall have the authority to accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the City Engineer, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Engineer may at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind the action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
The City Engineer is also authorized to accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which requires a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. 
e  Post Approval Procedures 
1.  City Engineer Signature. The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer the original map and any duplicates per County requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blueline duplicate. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the City Engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the County Recorder. 
2.  Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the final map by the Director, and signature by the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the County Recorder. After recordation of the final map, the subdivider shall forward one electronic copy in PDF (portable document format) of the recorded final map to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9326 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
a  Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of subdivided property reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the Subdivision Manual. This section shall apply to final maps. 
Subdivisions may also be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to Section 66499.20-½ of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Code. 
b  Initiation of Proceedings. 
Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by resolution of the City Council or with the submission of a formal application by all of the owners of record of the property. 
c  Applicability and Requirements 
A complete application shall be submitted to the Department that shall contain the information required by the City's Subdivision Manual and any other information deemed necessary by the Director or City Engineer to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
d  Application Processing 
A complete application for a reversion to acreage shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Council following receipt of a recommendation on the matter by the Planning Commission. Noticing of the public hearing will be given in compliance with 9321.g (Public Hearings). 
e  Findings and Decision 
The Council shall record its decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Council may approve the reversion to acreage, with or without conditions, supported by the findings required by Section 66499.16 of the Subdivision Map Act. The Council shall require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  Dedication or offers of dedication for streets, public rights-of-way or easements necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Code; 
2.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or the Subdivision Code; and, 
3.  Such other conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or the Subdivision Code or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
f  Post Approval Procedures 
1.  City Engineer Signature. The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer the original tracing of the map and any duplicates per County requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blue line duplicate. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the City Engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the City Clerk. When reversion becomes effective, all fees and deposits not retained per Section 9326.e (Findings and Decision) must be returned. 
2.  Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the final map by the Council, and signature by the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-18)  
9327 - PARCEL MERGERS 
a  Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the submittal and processing of a complete application for parcels to be merged in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the City's Subdivision Manual. 
b  Applicability 
Except as provided in Section 66451.11(b)(A) through (E), of the Subdivision Map Act, two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner may be merged, if any one of the parcels or units of land does not conform to the minimum parcel or lot size required by the City's Zoning Code and that the merger is otherwise consistent with the purposes of the Subdivision Code, the Zoning Code, and the general plan, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
1.  At least one (1) of the affected parcels or units of land is undeveloped with any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure other than an accessory structure which is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit of land. 
2.  With respect to any affected parcel or unit of land, one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
a)  The parcel comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
b)  The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
c)  The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply; 
d)  The parcel does not meet slope stability standards; 
e)  The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability; 
f)  The parcel's development would create health or safety hazards; or, 
g)  The parcel is inconsistent with the General Plan, Zoning Code, and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
3.  The owner of the affected parcels has been notified of the merger proposal pursuant to Section 66451.13 of the Subdivision Map Act, and is afforded the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Section 66451.14 of the Subdivision Map Act. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded in compliance with 9327.c1 (Notice of Intention to Determine Status). Subsection 2 shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b)(A) through (E) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. 
c  Parcel Mergers Initiated by the City 
1.  Notice of Intention to Determine Status. 
Prior to recording a notice of merger, a notice of intention to determine status shall be prepared by the Director and delivered to the current owner of record by certified mail, unless the requirement for notice has been waived by the owner pursuant to 9327b3. The notice shall state that the affected parcels or units of land may be merged pursuant to the Subdivision Code and that, within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the Planning Commission to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The Notice of Intention to Determine Status shall be filed with the County Recorder by the Director on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner. 
2.  Hearing on Determination of Status. 
The owner of the affected property may file a written request for hearing by the Planning Commission within thirty (30) calendar days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the Department shall set a time, date and place for consideration by the Planning Commission and notify the owner of such hearing by certified mail. The Planning Commission shall consider the matter within sixty (60) calendar days following the receipt of the owner's request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the Director and the property owner. 
The Planning Commission shall provide the property owner with an opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger specified in the Subdivision Code. 
After consideration of the evidence presented, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. 
3.  Determination of Merger. 
If the Planning Commission makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, the Director shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail, and a notice of merger shall be filed with the County Recorder by the Director within thirty (30) calendar days of the conclusion of the Commission's action, unless the decision has been appealed in compliance with 9327.e (Appeal). The notice of merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property. The notice of merger under the Subdivision Code shall be in a form approved by the Director prior to being filed for record with the County Recorder. 
If the Planning Commission makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed with the County Recorder by the Director within thirty (30) calendar days after the Commission's determination, unless the decision has been appealed in compliance with 9327.e (Appeal), and a clearance letter shall be delivered to the owner by certified mail. 
4.  Determination When No Hearing is Requested. 
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing pursuant to 9327.b3, the Director shall make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed, unless the decision has been appealed in compliance with 9327.e (Appeal), with the County Recorder by the Director within ninety (90) calendar days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status in compliance with 9327.c1 (Notice of Intention to Determine Status). 
d  Parcel Mergers Initiated by the Property Owner 
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units of land is initiated by the record owner, the owner may waive in writing the right for consideration by the Planning Commission and to all notices required by the Subdivision Code. Upon receipt of such waiver, the Director shall make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, the Director shall simultaneously file with the County Recorder a notice of intention to determine status, the waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a notice of merger. 
e  Appeal 
The decision of the Director or Planning Commission shall be considered final unless an appeal is filed in compliance with 9321.h (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9328 - CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS 
a  Tentative Maps 
Prior to final map approval, the City or the subdivider may request amendments to the approved tentative map, including vesting tentative maps, or conditions of approval. The Director shall determine whether a proposed amendment is a substantial or a minor amendment. 
1.  Substantial Changes Proposed to an Approved Tentative Map. 
Substantial changes proposed to an approved tentative map shall only be permitted upon the filing and responsible decision maker approval of a new tentative map, as specified in the Subdivision Map Act, and the Subdivision Code. 
2.  Changes in Conditions of Approval, Minor Corrections, and Amendments to an Approved Tentative Map. 
Changes in conditions of approval and minor corrections and amendments to an approved tentative map may be approved by the Director upon the filing of an application and paying applicable fees, as established by Council resolution provided that: 
a)  No lots, units, or building sites or structures are added; 
b)  The changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; and 
c)  There are no resulting violations of the Tustin General Plan, Zoning Code, and applicable Specific Plan, the Subdivision Code, or the Subdivision Map Act. 
A correction or amendment of a map shall be indicated on the tentative map. An approval of a request for minor corrections and amendments shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map unless an application for extension is concurrently approved. 
b  Final Maps 
1.  After a final map is filed in the office of the County Recorder, the map may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map for any of the following purposes: 
a)  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; or 
b)  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; or 
c)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; or 
d)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, retirement from practice or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; or 
e)  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; or 
f)  To correct any additional information filed or recorded pursuant to Section 66434.2 of the Subdivision Map Act, if the correction does not impose any additional burden on the present fee owners of the real property and does not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; or 
g)  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the County Surveyor or City Engineer that does not affect any property right, including, but not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. As used herein, "error" does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final map; or 
h)  To modify conditions of approval if the Director finds that: 
(1)  There are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such map no longer appropriate or necessary; 
(2)  The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; 
(3)  The modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and 
(4)  The map as modified conforms to the required findings of approval specified in Section 9323c of this code. 
2.  The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, and the City's Subdivision Manual. The amending map or certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction on the date of the filing or recording of the original recorded map. The City Engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction within twenty (20) working days of submittal for compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, and the City's Subdivision Manual and shall either certify it and file it with the office of the County Recorder or return it with a written statement of the changes necessary to make it conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, or the City's Subdivision Manual. If the resubmitted corrections are approved, the City Engineer shall have ten (10) working days to present it to the County Recorder for recordation. 
3.  Modifications made pursuant to Section 9328b1(h) shall be set for public hearing before the responsible decision maker consistent with the noticing provisions of 9321.g (Public Hearings). The hearing by the responsible decision maker shall be confined to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. Modifications identified in Section 9328b1(a) through (g), shall be reviewed and certified by the City Engineer. 
4.  Upon filing of the amending map or certificate of correction by the City Engineer, the County Recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index. respectively. Thereafter, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
PART 3 - DEDICATIONS, IMPROVEMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
9331 - DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT FEES 
a  Dedication of Streets, Alleys, Bicycle Paths and Other Public Rights-of-way or Easements 
To be consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan and to the extent permitted by Law, the subdivider may be required, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of real property both on- and off-site required for public use or benefit, including, but not limited to, streets and alleys (including access rights), drainage, public greenways, parks, bicycle paths, trails, scenic easements, public utility easements, local transit facilities as provided in Section 66475.2 of the Subdivision Map Act, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider may also be required to improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, public utility easements, and other public easements. Improvements shall be made in accordance with 9332 (Improvements). 
b  Waiver of Direct Access Rights 
The City may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision. Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. 
c  Dedications/Fee Title 
All dedications of property to the City for public purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, in the City's discretion, a grant of an easement may be accepted for the following purposes: Open space easements, scenic easements or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the City, in its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The City may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication of fee title. 
d  Parkland Dedication 
To implement the Conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element of the General Plan which contains policies and standards for parks and recreational facilities, the subdivider shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, at the option of the City except as otherwise provided in Government Code Section 66477, for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community parks and recreational facilities to serve the subdivision, and in accordance with the standards and formula contained in this section. 
1.  General Provisions 
a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the division of real property defined as a "subdivision" by Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
b)  Exceptions. Park land dedications or fees in lieu thereof shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Industrial subdivisions. 
(2)  Commercial subdivisions. 
(3)  Condominium projects or stock cooperatives in an existing apartment building which is more than five (5) years old and no new dwelling units are added. 
(4)  Subdivisions containing less than five (5) parcels and not used for residential purposes. 
c)  Waiver. Parkland dedication fees may be waived by the City Council in its discretion upon the submission and approval of agreements for specific projects designed and guaranteed for low income, senior and handicapped citizen occupants. 
2.  Standards and formula for land dedication: 
a)  The public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that three (3) acres of usable park land per one thousand (1,000) potential population be devoted to local park and recreational purposes. 
b)  When the requirements of this section are complied with solely on the basis of the dedication of parkland, the minimum amount of land to be provided shall be computed by multiplying the number of proposed dwelling units by the parkland acres per dwelling unit in accordance with the appropriate density classification in the following table: 
Dwelling Units per Gross Acre 	Average Persons per Dwelling Unit 	Parkland Acres per Dwelling Unit 
0—7 	3.39 	.0102 
7.1—15 	2.85 	.0086 
15.1—25 	2.24 	.0067 
Mobile home parks 	2.24 	.0067 
 
Source: Tustin General Plan Land Use Element, as amended 
These density ranges, average person per dwelling unit and/or parkland acreage per dwelling unit shall be used to achieve a parkland dedication rate of three (3) acres of parkland per one thousand (1,000) persons unless alternate density ranges, average persons per dwelling unit and/or parkland acreage per dwelling unit are established in an adopted Specific Plan adopted in compliance with Government Code Section 65450 et seq., Disposition and Development Agreement in compliance with California Community Redevelopment Law, or other agreement. 
3.  Fees in lieu of dedication. 
When there is no public park or recreational facility required within the proposed subdivision, the subdivision is less than fifty (50) parcels, or the project is a conversion of an existing apartment complex to multiple-owner occupancy not exempted herein, the subdivider shall pay a park fee, on a per unit basis, reflecting the value of land required for park purposes. The value of the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication. 
The fair market value shall be determined by a Master Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser acceptable to the City and at the expense of the subdivider; and the determination shall consider the value of a buildable acre of land at the time the final map is to be recorded, as if otherwise the land would be fully developed to the residential density shown on the tentative map for which the fees are required. If more than one (1) year elapses between the appraisal and recording of the final map, the City will require that a new appraisal be prepared at the expense of the subdivider. For purposes of this section, the determination of fair market value of a buildable acre shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, the approval of and conditions of the tentative subdivision map, the General Plan, zoning, property location, off-street improvements facilitating use of the property, and site characteristics of the property. 
If a subdivider objects to the fair market value as determined by the MAI appraiser, an appeal may be made to the Planning Commission. The subdivider shall have the burden of proof in contesting the appraised value. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the dedication and acceptance of land for park and recreation purposes in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less, where the subdivider proposes such dedication voluntarily and the dedication and land is acceptable to the responsible decision maker. 
For subdivisions in excess of fifty (50) parcels, the responsible decision maker may elect to receive a fee in lieu of land dedication. The value of the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for dedication as determined above. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, dedication of land may be required by the City for a condominium, stock cooperative, or community apartment project which exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, regardless of the number of parcels. 
4.  Combination of dedication and fees. 
Whenever the requirements of this section are complied with by both the provision of parkland and the payment of a park fee, the amount of the park fee shall be computed by determining the required amount of parkland in accordance with the provision of subsection d.2, and subtracting the amount of parkland actually provided. The remainder shall be converted to "fee" on a per unit basis in accordance with the provisions of subsection d.3. 
5.  Credit for private open space. 
Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas may be credited against the requirement for dedication of parkland, as provided for in subsection d.2, provided the responsible decision maker finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that all of the following standards are met: 
a)  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; 
b)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement; 
c)  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the subdivision and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the responsible decision maker; 
d)  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, including provisions for bicyclists, and location of the private open space land; 
e)  The facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provision of the Recreational Element of the General Plan, and are approved by the responsible decision maker; 
f)  That the open space for which one hundred (100) percent credit is given is a minimum of one (1) acre and provides at least one (1) of the park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreation improvements that will meet the specific recreation needs of future residents of the area: 
(1)  "Recreational open spaces" which are generally defined as park areas for active recreation pursuits such as soccer, baseball, softball, and football, and have at least one (1) acre of maintained turf with less than five (5) percent slope. 
(2)  "Court areas" which are generally defined as tennis courts, badminton courts, basketball courts, shuffleboard courts, or similar hard-surfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games. 
(3)  "Recreational swimming areas" which are defined generally as fenced areas devoted primarily to swimming, diving, or both. They must also include decks, lawn area, bathhouses, or other facilities developed and used exclusively for swimming and diving and consisting of no less than fifteen (15) square feet of water surface area for each three (3) percent of the population of the subdivision with a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of water surface area per pool, together with an adjacent deck and/or lawn area twice that of the pool. 
(4)  "Recreation buildings and facilities" which means facilities designed and primarily used for the recreational needs of residents of the development. Partial credit may be awarded for sites which do not incorporate the required basic elements or are less than one (1) acre when deemed beneficial to the community by the responsible decision maker. 
Because private common areas meet only a portion of resident needs, the computed credit value shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the otherwise required public land dedication or in lieu fees. 
The determination of the Planning Commission as to whether credit shall be given and the amount of credit shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed to the City Council. The decision of the City Council is final. 
6.  Credit for public park and recreational facility improvements. 
a)  A subdivider may elect to provide improvements to land dedicated for public park or recreational use when a combination of fees and dedications are required. The responsible decision maker may credit the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon against the payment of fees or dedication of land required herein. 
b)  Credit shall not be allowed for single-purpose commercial recreation facilities whether dedicated to the public or in private ownership. 
7.  Choice of land dedication, improvement, fees, or combination. 
a)  Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to dedicate, improve, pay a fee, or combination of methods shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the time of filing a tentative map for approval, the subdivider of the property shall, as a part of such filing, indicate whether the subdivider desires to dedicate property for park and recreational purposes, improve the parkland, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of the foregoing. If the subdivider desires to dedicate land for this purpose, the subdivider shall designate the area thereof in the tentative map as submitted. 
(2)  At the time of the tentative map approval, the responsible decision maker shall determine as a part of such approval, whether to require a dedication of land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, accept improvement, or a combination of such methods. 
(3)  Where dedication is required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provision of the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, and Subdivision Manual. Where fees are required, the same shall be deposited with the City prior to the approval of the final map. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City prior to approval of the final map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final map. 
b)  Determination. When land is proposed to be dedicated, the responsible decision maker shall determine the appropriateness of the land to be dedicated based upon the following: 
(1)  The conservation/Open Space/Recreation Element of the City's General Plan; and 
(2)  The topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; and 
(3)  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication. The determination of the Planning Commission as to whether land shall be dedicated, fees charged, dedicated land improved, or any combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed to the City Council. In no event, may the dedications, amount of fees or value of improvements exceed the subdivider's dedication requirements as set forth in Section 9331.d.2 (Standards and Formula for Land Dedication) unless the subdivider voluntarily agrees. On subdivisions involving fifty (50) lots or less, only the payments of fees shall be required. The determination of the City Council is final. 
8.  Responsibilities and Enforcement. 
a)  It is the responsibility of each property owner who proposes to create residential building sites to provide an equitable portion of parklands as required by this Code. Dedications for the provision of parklands and/or the payment of fees shall commence at the earliest possible instance of land development planning. Where parkland is to be provided, such provisions shall be included, where applicable, in zone changes, planned community texts and development plans, tentative and final maps, and conditional use permits. 
b)  It is the duty of the Director of Parks and Recreation to verify that the requirements of this part are complied with, and to notify all interested parties and agencies of such compliance. 
c)  It is the duty of the Director of Community Development to enforce the provisions of this part that are applicable to the issuance of a building permit. 
d)  The Director of Parks and Recreation shall prepare a schedule for approval by the City Council, specifying how and when it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop park and recreation facilities. Fees shall be committed within five (5) years of collection. 
e)  Any required in-lieu fees for residential development shall be paid on the date of final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. The City may require fees to be paid at the time of building permit issuance for non-residential development and on residential development (other than low income housing described in Government Code section 66007(b)(2)) if the fees will be used to construct a public improvement for which the City has established an account, the City Council has authorized expenditures from the account and the City has adopted a proposed construction schedule or to reimburse itself for funds already spent on the improvement. 
9.  Limitation of use of land and fees. 
The land and fees received under this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to serve the area from which received, and the location of the land and amount of fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision, the community, and the general area from which it is received. 
e  Reservations 
1.  General. 
Based on the General Plan, or applicable specific plan, as a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may be required to reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section. 
2.  Standards for Reservation of Land. 
Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the General Plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the City to reserve sites as so determined by the City in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the General Plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. 
The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall be consistent with the General Plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to penmit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
3.  Procedure. 
The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two (2) years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by the Director upon mutual agreement. 
4.  Payment to Subdivider. 
The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area. 
5.  Termination. 
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. 
f  Local Transit Facilities. 
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may be required to dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, landing pads, park-and-ride facilities, and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision, if (a) the subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the general plan or contains one hundred (100) acres or more, and (b) if the City finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be made available to the subdivision. The irrevocable offer may be terminated as provided in subdivisions (c) and (d) of Section 66477.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
Only the payment of fees in lieu of the dedication of land may be required in subdivisions that consist of the subdivision of airspace in existing buildings into condominium projects, stock cooperatives, or community apartment projects, as those terms are defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
g  Bridges and Major Thoroughfares 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or prior to issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, and in order to implement the Circulation Element of the General Plan and, in the case of bridges, the transportation provisions thereof. 
2.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
a)  "Construction" shall mean design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, actual construction and inspections. 
b)  "Major thoroughfare" shall mean a roadway as shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system. 
3.  Payment of Fees Generally. 
a)  Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area of benefit established pursuant to this division, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned to such property pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares. 
b)  At the time a building permit is issued for construction on any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, unless such fees have been paid pursuant to subsection c)(1) of this section. 
c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 3.a) and 3.b) of this section: 
(1)  Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. 
(2)  Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit. 
4.  Consideration in Lieu of Fees. Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a building permit, the City Council may accept consideration in lieu of the payment of fees required pursuant to this section; provided that the City Council first finds, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and provided further that the substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the City Council. 
5.  Public Hearing. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public hearing shall be held by the City Council at which time the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment, and the fee to be collected, shall be established. Notice of the public hearing shall be given consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section 65091 and shall include preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and the method of fee apportionment. 
6.  Amount. The amount of fees and the areas of benefit established pursuant to this section may be established by resolution of the City Council. 
7.  Exemptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 6, payment of such fees shall not be required for: 
a)  The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one (1) or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided that the total value, as determined by the Building Official, of all such alteration, enlargement or construction completed within any one (1) year period does not exceed one-half (½) of the current market value, as determined by the Building Official, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land, and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by applicable sections of the California Building Code. 
b)  The following accessory buildings and structures: private garages, children's playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings. 
8.  Protest. 
a)  At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility or major improvement, any person may file a protest against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be benefitted by the improvements or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify such property, and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the City Clerk and no other such protests shall be considered. Any protest may be withdrawn, in writing, by the owners making such protests, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing. 
b)  If there is a written protest filed with the City Clerk by the owners of more than one-half (½) of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half (½) of that to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, unless by a four-fifths vote of all the members of the City Council the protest shall be overruled; and the City Council shall not, for one (1) year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement, or that portion thereof so protested against, under the provisions of this section. 
h  Supplemental Improvement Capacity 
1.  As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the City shall, subject to the provisions of Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. 
2.  The City Council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a)  The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, of a reasonable charge for such use. 
b)  The contribution to the subdivider of that part of that cost of the improvement(s) that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefitted to reimburse the City for such costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider. 
c)  The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefitted. 
3.  No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 65091 and the City Council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof. 
4.  In addition to the notice required by Government Code Section 65091, written notice of the hearing shall be given to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. 
i  Drainage Fees [Reserved] 
j  Solar Access Easements [Reserved] 
k  Interim School Facilities 
1.  Authority, Purpose and Intent. 
a)  This section is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 65970 et seq. of the Government Code for the purpose of providing interim school facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development. 
2.  [Reserved] 
3.  Action by School Districts. The governing body of an affected School District(s) may, from time to time, adopt a notice of findings and file the same with the City Clerk for consideration by the City Council that makes both of the following findings supported by clear and convincing evidence: 
a)  That conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs including the reason for the existence of those conditions. 
b)  That all reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and no feasible method for reducing those conditions exists. 
The notice of findings shall specify the mitigation measures considered by the school district, including a completed application to the Office of Public School Construction for preliminary determination of eligibility under the Leroy F. Greene State School Building Lease-Purchase Law of 1976, and include a schedule for land use of fees required by Section 65976 of the Government Code. 
4.  Action by City Council. The notice of findings and schedule for land use of fees shall be made available to the public for 60 calendar days after the date of receipt by the City. Following the completion of the public review period but not later than 150 calendar days of the receipt of the notice of findings and schedule for land use of fees, the City Council shall either concur or not concur, or may extend the period to concur or not to concur for one 30-day period. Failure to act within the prescribed time period shall not be deemed as an act of City Council concurrence in the notice of findings. If it concurs in the notice of findings, the City Council shall not approve an ordinance rezoning property to a residential use, grant a discretionary permit for residential use, or approve a tentative subdivision map for residential purposes, unless the City Council makes one of the following findings: 
a)  That there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social, or environmental factors which in the judgment of the City Council would benefit the City, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development; or, 
b)  That the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for classroom and related facilities for elementary or high schools are being required as a condition to the approval of a residential development, in accordance with the provisions of Section 65974 of the Government Code. 
The decision concerning whether to require the dedication of land, payment of fees of an appropriate combination shall be determined after consultation with the affected school district(s) concerning the needs of the school district(s) as they relate to the impacted school or schools. 
The amount of any fee shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.9 (commencing with Section 65995) of the Government Code, and shall be prescribed by resolution of the City Council, and shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
5.  Use of Fees and Land-Accounting. 
a)  The school districts shall use the land and/or fees solely to alleviate the conditions of overcrowding within the affected attendance area. 
The school districts shall annually provide to the City Council the report required by Section 65978 of the Government Code. If the report has not been filed as required, there shall be a waiver of any performance of the payment of fees or the dedication of land. If it is determined that overcrowding conditions no longer exist, or the period of time for the dedication of land or the payment of fees has been completed, the City of Tustin shall cease levying any fee or requiring the dedication of any land pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, Subdivision Code, and Subdivision Manual. 
6.  City's Right to Disapprove Development or Require Other Fees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the City to disapprove new residential development for any lawful reason, including, but not limited to, the impact that such development may have on a school or schools within the school districts which cannot be alleviated by the provisions of this section. 
l  Permanent Classroom Facilities 
The City may not require, as a condition of approval of a tentative map for a residential subdivision, dedication of land or payment of in-lieu fees or a combination of both in order to provide permanent facilities for school purposes. Nothing in this chapter is intended as a limitation on the school districts' authority to directly levy a fee, charge, dedication or other form of requirement against any development project, pursuant to Section 53080 of the Government Code, in order to provide temporary and permanent facilities for school purposes. 
m  Reimbursement to a Telephone Corporation or Cable Television System for Undergrounding or Relocation 
Whenever the City imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding, or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, the subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding, or relocation. All of these costs shall be billed to the subdivider directly by the telephone corporation or cable television system after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. In no event shall the City be obligated to pay such reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9332 - IMPROVEMENTS 
a  General 
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on and off-site, in accordance with the standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter and by the City Council's resolution or resolutions establishing such standards. 
No final map shall be approved by the Director until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the City agreeing to do the work. 
b  Required Improvements 
1.  General. All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or by City ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions. Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels shall be noted in the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map. Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with 9332.k (Completion of Improvements). 
2.  Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions. 
3.  Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed and shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff generated by a 100-year flood. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. 
4.  Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
5.  Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas, electric, telephone and cablevision facilities. 
6.  Underground Utilities. The provisions of this Subsection are in addition to, and not a substitute for other underground provisions of this Code. 
a)  All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by Public Utilities Commission regulations. Undergrounding shall be required for overhead lines on either side of peripheral streets. 
b)  The subdivider may request that the undergrounding requirement along peripheral streets be waived. The City Engineer may, at his or her discretion, accept a fee in lieu of the undergrounding upon a determination that the amount of the fee is based upon the reasonable estimated cost of that portion of a future undergrounding project attributable to the subdivision. The requirement for undergrounding or payment of an in-lieu fee shall be a condition of approval of the tentative map. Any failure to include said condition shall not be deemed as an act of the City Council to waive the requirement, except as provided in Section 9332b6(c). 
c)  Undergrounding requirements may be waived or modified by the City Council only upon finding: 
(1)  The subdivision is within an area where existing utilities have not been undergrounded and that deferral will be allowed since undergrounding is impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood is absent of similar improvements; and 
(2)  Overhead utilities will have no significant visual impact. 
d)  If the undergrounding requirements are waived as allowed by findings c)(1) and (2) above, the in-lieu fee as established by the City Engineer shall be made a condition of approval of the tentative map. 
e)  In-lieu fees shall be deposited in a special undergrounding account to be used as approved by the City Council for future undergrounding of utilities throughout the City. 
7.  Fencing. Each parcel or lot within the subdivision that is adjacent to property containing a public facility shall have an approved fence or wall adequate to prevent unauthorized access between properties. 
8.  Other Improvements. Other improvements including, but not limited to, grading, street lights, traffic signals, fire hydrants, signs, street lines and markings, street trees and shrubs, landscaping, monuments, bicycle facilities and fences, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with this Code, the General Plan and the City standards and specifications. 
9.  Off-Site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the City shall, within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the City fails to meet the one hundred twenty (120) calendar day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the City may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the City acquires title or an interest in the land. 
The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. 
c  Deferred Improvement Agreements 
1.  Subdivisions of Four (4) of Less Parcels. The frontage improvements along peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the City Engineer. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or the owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the City, in a form acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney, for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future specified in the agreement. The agreement shall provide for the following: 
a)  Construction of improvements shall commence within ninety (90) calendar days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the City and shall be completed within the time specified by Section 9332.k. 
b)  That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, the City is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid. 
c)  That the agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the City, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment. 
d)  That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs incurred by the City, in successfully enforcing the obligation, including reasonable attorney's fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property. 
e)  The terms "subdivider" and "owner" shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it. 
f)  Any other improvement security as required by Section 9332h. 
g)  Any other provisions required by the City as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Code. 
The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable articles of this code in effect at the time of construction. 
2.  Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the City to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder. The improvements shall be at the subdivider's expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder, upon finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
a)  The public health and safety, or 
b)  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
d  Design 
1.  General. The design and layout of all required improvements, both on-site and offsite, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, and Subdivision Map Act and applicable provisions of this code. 
2.  Energy Conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. 
Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure and to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. 
In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and other design improvement requirements. The provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities, or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed. 
The requirements of this subsection do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building and no new structures are added. 
For the purpose of this subsection, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
3.  Cable Television Service. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall provide one (1) or more City franchised cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each parcel in the subdivision. 
This subsection shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. 
e  Access 
All lots or parcels created shall have direct access to a public street improved to the standards set forth in this article. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the responsible decision maker determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created with access to private streets, such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and material specifications of any proposed public or private street, the topography and means of access to each lot, and the drainage, sewer and water service and fire protection for the lots served by such private street(s). Private street(s) shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications and any other applicable plans and specifications of the City as approved by the Director of Community Development. Construction of private street(s) shall be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of the lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the maintenance of such private streets, which method shall be subject to the prior approval of the Director of Community Development. 
Reserved strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the City when required by the City. 
f  Improvement Plans 
Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and must be signed and sealed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the State of California. Improvement plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, all improvements required pursuant to Section 9332b. The form of all plans shall conform to all requirements identified in the Subdivision Manual and as may be established by the City Engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the City Engineer. 
g  Improvement Security 
1.  Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided below. 
No final map shall be signed by the City Engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved. 
2.  The form of security shall be one (1) or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the City Engineer: 
a)  Bond or bonds by one (1) or more duly authorized corporate sureties in the form prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act. 
b)  A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the City Engineer, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies. 
c)  Any other form of security, at the option of the City Engineer, as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. 
3.  Amount of Security. A performance bond or other security in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of fifty percent (50%) of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to subdivider's contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the City in enforcing the obligations secured. The surities on the performance bond and payment bond shall not be the same. 
The estimate of improvements costs shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall provide for: 
a)  Not less than five percent (5%) nor more than ten percent (10%) of the total construction cost for contingencies. 
b)  Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction. 
c)  All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the City Engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation. 
4.  Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the City, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of one (1) year following acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one (1) year warranty period. 
5.  Reduction in Performance Security. The City Engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than ten percent (10%) of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the City Engineer; however, in no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, this code or the improvement agreement. 
6.  Release of Improvement Security 
a)  The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the City Engineer and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies. 
b)  Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the City Engineer, be reduced to an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the amount of all claims therefore filed with the City. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
c)  The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided: 
(1)  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected. 
(2)  Not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the City Engineer. 
h  [Reserved] 
i  Construction and Inspection 
The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard engineering specifications and all other standard plans and specifications of the City. 
Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved. All improvements are subject to inspection in accordance with the City's approved specifications. 
j  Completion of Improvements 
1.  Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels. The improvements for subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within twelve (12) months, or such later time as approved by the City Engineer, not to exceed thirty-six (36) months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the responsible decision maker. 
Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the City may, by resolution of the responsible decision maker and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs. 
2.  Subdivision of Four or Less Parcels. The completion of improvements for subdivisions of four (4) or less parcels shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the City when the completion of the improvements are found to be necessary for the public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the City Engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision. 
3.  Extensions. The completion date may be extended by the responsible decision maker upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement. 
The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the City. 
In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required: 
a)  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the City Engineer; 
b)  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the City Engineer; 
c)  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; 
d)  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. 
The responsible decision maker may impose additional requirements as recommended by the City Engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. 
The costs incurred by the City in processing the agreement shall be paid by the subdivider at actual cost plus twenty-five percent (25%) of such cost for overhead expenses. 
4.  As-Built Plans. Revisions for as-built drawings are to be made in the Engineering Division offices. The subdivider or engineering representative may request duplicate mylars for the subdivider's use. 
k  Acceptance of Public Improvements 
1.  With respect to all subdivisions, when all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans submitted, the completed subdivision public improvements shall be considered by the City Engineer for acceptance. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. 
2.  Acceptance. If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the City Engineer and public improvements have been dedicated on the final map, the City Clerk shall file an acceptance of public improvements with the County Recorder. 
3.  Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the City Engineer may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements. Such improvements will be accepted by the City Engineer only if the City Engineer finds that it is in the public interest to do so and such improvements are for the use of the general public. 
Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
9333 - ENFORCEMENT 
a  General 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Director in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Manual, as applicable. 
b  Certificate of Compliance 
1.  Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request the Director to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the Subdivision Manual. 
2.  If it is determined that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Code, the Director shall file a Certificate of Compliance with the County Recorder. The Certificate of Compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, and the Subdivision Manual. 
3.  If it is determined that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the Subdivision Code, or the Subdivision Manual, the Director may, as a condition to granting a Certificate of Compliance, impose conditions to ensure compliance. Upon the making such determination and establishing such conditions, the Director shall file a Conditional Certificate of Compliance with the County Recorder. 
Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
4.  A recorded final map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
5.  Subject to the provisions of Section 66499.35(e) of the Subdivision Map Act, an official map prepared pursuant to Section 66499.52(b) of the Subdivision Map Act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
c  Indemnification/Action Against Map Approvals 
In accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.9(b), the subdivider shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees and agents from any claim, action, or proceeding to attack or set aside the map approval. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
PART 4 - DEFINITIONS 
 
9341 - DEFINITIONS 
Words and phrases used in this Chapter are as defined in the Subdivision Map Act and Chapter 2 (Zoning) of Article 9 of this Code unless set forth below. If any word or phrase is not defined, the dictionary definition shall prevail. 
"Acreage" shall mean any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this chapter, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage. 
"Advisory agency" shall mean a designated official or an official body charged with making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon or having authority by the Subdivision Code to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove subdivisions. 
"Appeal board" shall mean a designated board or other official body charged with making determinations upon appeals with respect to divisions of real property, the imposition of requirements or conditions thereon, or the kinds, nature and extent of the design or improvements, or both, recommended or decided by the advisory agency to be required. 
"Amending Map" shall mean a map filed in accordance with the Subdivision Code to correct or amend a recorded final map. 
"Block" shall mean the area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
"Business and Professions Code" shall mean the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. 
"City Clerk" shall mean and refer to the City Clerk of the City of Tustin unless otherwise specified. 
"City Engineer" shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Tustin unless otherwise specified. The City Engineer may delegate land surveying functions to a person authorized to practice land surveying either with City staff or through a City contract. 
"Community apartment project" shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
"Condominium" shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 1350 of the Civil Code. "Council" shall mean and refer to the City Council of the City of Tustin as established by City Ordinance. 
"County" shall mean the County of Orange. 
"County Recorder" shall mean the County Recorder of the County of Orange. 
"County Surveyor" shall mean the County Surveyor of the County of Orange. 
"Conversion" shall mean the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in the space within residential, industrial or commercial buildings. 
"Day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
"Department" shall mean the Community Development Department of the City of Tustin unless otherwise specified. 
"Director" shall mean the Director of the Community Development Department unless otherwise specified. 
"Easement" shall mean a nonpossessory right, interest or privilege that the City, other public entity or private party has in another's land. 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" shall mean a detailed statement prepared pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), State Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq., and State and City CEQA Guidelines promulgated pursuant thereto, describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects. 
"Environmental subdivision" shall have the same meaning as provided in Government Code section 66418.2(a). 
"Fair market value" shall mean the value of property as determined by the Advisory Agency based upon appraisal by an MAI appraiser acceptable to the City and at the expense of the subdivider. The determination of "Fair Market Value" shall consider the value of a buildable acre of land at the time of development. All costs of appraisal shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the recordation of any final map or the issuance of any building permit. 
"Final map" shall mean a final tract or parcel map prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter and designed to be filed for recordation in the Office of the County Recorder. 
"General plan" shall mean the General Plan of the City of Tustin. 
"Government Code" shall mean the Government Code of the State of California. 
"Improvement" shall mean streets, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, utilities, landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and acceptance of the final map thereof. 
"Improvement" shall also mean other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by or by a combination of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity approved by the City, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan, or any applicable specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications, where applicable. 
"Legislative body" shall mean and refer to the City Council of the City of Tustin. 
"Lot" shall mean a unit or portion of land separate from other units or portions by description, as on a final map, or by such other map approved by the County or by the City under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the City ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purposes of sale, lease, or financing. 
"Lot line adjustment" shall mean a modification of a lot boundary line or lines between two or more existing adjacent lots or parcels where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
"Merger" shall mean the joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land under one (1) ownership into one (1) parcel. 
"Notice of Findings" shall mean a statement adopted by a School Board, and forwarded to the Advisory Agency, declaring the existence of an impacted school or schools, in accordance with the findings and other requirements of Section 65971 of the Government Code. The declaration of impact may include the schedule required by Section 65976 of the Government Code. 
"Parcel" see "Lot". 
"Parcel map" shall mean a map showing a subdivision of four (4) or less parcels as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Chapter and designed to be filed for recordation in the Office of the County Recorder. 
"Park" shall mean a parcel, or contiguous parcels of land which is owned, operated, and maintained by a public agency or private association and which provides recreational land and facilities for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents and visitors of the City. The City of Tustin designates parks within the Tustin General Plan and the Subdivision Manual. 
"Person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the County, this and any other city or county, municipality, district, or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Planning Commission" shall mean and refer to the Planning Commission of the City of Tustin as established by City Ordinance. 
"Remainder" shall mean that portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision. A remainder of five (5) acres or more need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder. 
"Right-of-way" shall mean a specifically defined area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage or use has been recorded. 
"Standard engineering specifications" shall mean those standard subdivision public improvement plans and specifications as prepared and/or approved by the City Engineer and those standard subdivision private improvement plans and specifications as prepared and/or approved by the Director of Community Development. 
"Stock cooperative" shall be defined as provided in Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
"Street—Private" shall mean any street, access way, or the like, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision for which dedication and ownership is privately held and is utilized as access to a development. Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications. 
"Street—Public" shall mean any duly dedicated street, avenue, or the like which the City has accepted and regularly maintains, or which the County duly accepted and regularly maintained prior to the incorporation of the City, or upon which public funds have been expended for improvements or rights-of-way used by the public generally. 
"Subdivider" shall be as defined in the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision" shall be as defined in the Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision Map Act" shall mean the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California as provided in Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1430, Sec. 2, 9-17-13)  
CHAPTER 4 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
9401 - PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote community identity and effective business identification through the regulation and design of signs and sign structures within the City of Tustin. Because signs and graphics are an essential element of our community, their location, number, size and design have a significant influence upon the community's visual and economic environment. The regulation of signs is considered necessary to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare through consideration of traffic and pedestrian safety and community aesthetics. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9402 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms as used in this Chapter shall have the respective meanings as set forth except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. For ease of reference, each term that is defined in this section appears in title caps in the text of this Chapter. A supplemental graphic presentation of certain definitions is provided as information and is included as section 9412. 
"Abandoned sign" is a sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
"Act of God" is a natural occurrence such as wind, rain, flood, fire or earthquake. 
"Aerial sign" is a sign which is inflatable or designed to be flown or attached to the ground, building, structure or other object, which may or may not include copy. 
"A-frame sign" means a Sign generally not securely attached or fixed to the ground or to a permanent structure used as a stationary advertising devise and usually supported by two (2) upright sign faces. 
"Aggregate area" is the combined permitted Sign sizes of all signs on any one (1) parcel, site, building, structure or other premises, excluding temporary signs, noncommercial signs, special event signs, public information signs and traffic signs. 
"Alter" means to change color (other than copy color), size, shape, position, location, or method of illumination of a sign. This shall not include replacement of face copy on cabinet type signs. 
"Animated sign" means any sign designed to attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole or any part, including, but not limited to, signs which swing, twirl, revolve, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which can change color or shades of color; or any other method or device which suggests movement, but not including flags or banner signs. 
"Arcade" is a covered passageway projecting from the exterior wall of a building and supported by posts or columns attached to the ground. 
"Arcade sign" means a sign projecting beneath or on the underside of any structural overhang or passageway and perpendicular to the front building facade; see section 9412. 
"Attached sign" is any sign permanently affixed to a building or affixed to the external surface of a building (including wall signs). 
"Audible sign" is any sign that contains loudspeakers or emits sounds. 
"Automobile service business" is a business whose primary purpose is gasoline sales, ancillary uses may include auto repair, tire sales and auto supply sales. 
"Awning" is a roof-like structure extending over a door, window or all or any portion of a building wall and projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building; see section 9412. 
"Awning sign" is a Sign painted on, printed on or attached to the front surface of an awning. 
"Balloon" means a sphere of nonporous material filled with air or gas. 
"Banner sign" means any publicly visible advertising device, not on the interior side of a window, made of cloth, paper, plastic, cardboard, metal or any other usually flexible material, which may indicate the identity or give or ask information about or convey a message, either directly or indirectly, about a person, entity, business, commodity, service or idea. 
"Beacon" means any stationary or moving light source or light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move located outside of or inside a building, or within three (3) feet of a window and flashing with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same lot as the light source. 
"Bench sign" means a seat located upon or adjacent to a public or private right-of-way for the purpose of persons resting and which is capable of displaying a sign or advertising device. 
"Building frontage" means the lineal extent of a building which fronts on either a street or parking area and used as the basis for determining the maximum sign area and number of signs allowed; see section 9412. 
"Bulletin board" means a Sign that signifies an institution or organization on the premises of which it is located and that contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of the individuals connected with it, and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution or similar messages. 
"Business identification sign" is a Sign which serves to identify only the name, address, and lawful use of the premises upon which it is located and shall not include the listing of pricing information or specific brand names unless the pricing or brand name is incorporated into the name of the business or is a trademark or company name symbol identifying the business or activity provided as in the case of a logo. Said signage is not intended as an advertising device. Identification of product, trade and service information is permitted, and is considered supplemental provided it is subordinate to business identification. Supplemental signs shall be considered subordinate if no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is used for this purpose. 
"Canopy," same as "awning". 
"Canopy sign," same as "awning sign". 
"Center" is a commercial, industrial or professional use, consisting of one (1) or more buildings sharing common facilities such as off-street parking, access or landscaping. In each case, a center will consist of two (2) or more retail stores or businesses, but may not necessarily be under a single ownership. 
"Center identification sign" means any freestanding sign which advertises or directs attention to a shopping center or area having two (2) or more separate businesses or activities therein. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign on which the copy changes either automatically through mechanical means, electrical or electronic time or temperature controls or manually in the field. 
"Channel letters" means individual letters or figures, illuminated or nonilluminated, affixed to a building or freestanding sign structure. 
"Commercial enterprise" means a business that conducts business in the City of Tustin and holds a valid City of Tustin business license, unless it is exempt from having a business license. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Commercial sign" means a sign relating to the sale of any merchandise, product, service, commodity or other item or activity for private benefit or gain. Commercial signs include, but are not limited to: 
1.  A business identification sign. 
2.  A garage sale sign. 
3.  A real estate open house sign. 
(Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Community Development Director" means the City of Tustin Community Development Director or his or her designee. 
"Construction sign" means a temporary sign identifying the name of the project under construction, street address, emergency phone number and name of person to contact; see section 9412. 
"Corporate flag" means a flag which has the name, logo, trademark, or symbols of a business or corporation which cannot be construed to mean official flags. 
"Copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations illuminated or non-illuminated incorporated into a sign. 
"Decorative flag" means a temporary sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material which is individually mounted a flag pole device and is not a corporate flag or official flag. 
"Double-faced sign" is a sign with two (2) faces that are placed back-to-back with a distance separation of no greater than eighteen (18) inches and in which both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time. 
"Electrical sign" means any sign containing electrical wiring which is attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source for the purposes of illuminating its surface. 
"Erect" means to build, construct, attach, place, suspend, affix or Install. 
"Exempt sign" means signs exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter. 
"Facade" means the exterior walls of a building exposed to public view. 
"Festoons" means a nonmetallic string of ribbons, nonmetallic tinsel, small flags, pinwheels, bunting, pennants and other like items. 
"Flag" means cloth or other lightweight material of distinctive size, color and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal, emblem, or a device used to attract attention. 
"Flashing sign" means any directly or indirectly Illuminated Sign that exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
"Flat Roof" means a roof having no slope, or one with only a slight pitch so as to drain rainwater. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. III.1, 5-21-13) 
"Freestanding sign" means any non-moveable sign not affixed to a building, including but not limited to pole signs, ground signs, and construction signs; see section 9412. 
"Freeway sign" is a sign whose purpose is to identify a specific service oriented business (those offering eating facilities, lodging accommodations or an automobile service business) which is located adjacent to the freeway right-of-way, or separated from the right-of-way by a frontage road. 
"Garage sale sign" means a temporary sign announcing the limited sale, from a private residence, of goods, furniture, clothing or other similar articles. 
"Height" means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign including any architectural, ornamental or structural element of the sign to the finished grade adjacent to the sign structure. When calculating sign area, height is the vertical distance from the highest point to the lowest point of the sign. 
"Human sign" means a sign that is held or worn by a person. 
"Identification sign" means a sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified and shall not include a listing of pricing information or of specific brand names unless the pricing or brand name is incorporated into the name of the business or is a trademark or company symbol identifying the business or activity. Identification of product, trade and service information is permitted, and is considered supplemental provided it is subordinate to business identification. Supplemental signs shall be considered subordinate if no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is used for this purpose. 
"Illegal sign" means a sign not permitted or exempted by this Chapter at the time of its construction or erection. 
"Illuminated sign" is a sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, logograms, pictures or outlines illuminated by a source of energy directly or indirectly in order to make the message visible. The definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing and radiating signs. 
"Incidental sign" means a sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of services available on the premises such as a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of operation or emergency phone number. 
"Individual business" means a single commercial enterprise which is physically separate from and does not relate to any other commercial business, and is not a part of a shopping center. 
"Install" means to build, paint, erect, hang or in any manner affix or modify in any way. 
"Legal Nonconforming Sign" means a sign that was lawfully erected which does not comply with the most current adopted sign restrictions and regulations. (Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 9, 11-15-11) 
"Light bulb strings" means external or internal displays within twelve (12) inches of the inside of the window which consist of light bulbs, or strings of open light bulbs or lighted tubing. 
"Location" means a position on a Site or on a building where a sign may be placed. The location is regulated by setbacks from property lines for free-standing signs or a height limitation for wall-mounted signs. 
"Logo" means a name, symbol, feature or trademark that represents a business, enterprise, group or activity. 
"Maintenance (of signs)" means, for the purposes of this chapter, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
"Mansard" means a sloped roof or roof-like facade designed to give the appearance of a full pitched roof; see section 9412. 
"Marquee" means a permanent roof-like structure over an entry, projecting from and supported only by the exterior wall of a building. A marquee is architecturally a part of the building; see section 9412. 
"Master Sign Plan" means a comprehensive program for coordinating all tenant signs within a center. 
"Menu board sign" means a sign displaying food or items sold on the premises. 
"Monument sign" is any free-standing Sign mounted directly on a planter or pedestal base without air space beneath as distinguished from the support of a pole or poles and which is designed to incorporate features and building materials which complement the architectural theme of the buildings on the premises. 
"Multi-tenant identification sign (directory)" means a sign constructed so as to permit individual identification of businesses within a shopping, professional or industrial center. Such signs are solely for the purpose of identification of a business by name, general service or trade, and not to include the listing of individual products or services offered. 
"Nameplate" means a non-electric or mechanical on-premises identification plate, plaque or sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants; less than two (2) square feet in size. 
"Neon" means a glass tube filled with gas that emits light when energized. 
"Noncommercial sign" means any sign other than a sign relating to the sale of any merchandise, product, service, commodity or other item or activity for private benefit or gain. Noncommercial signs include, but are not limited to: 
1.  A political sign. 
2.  A protected speech sign. 
3.  A public event sign. 
4.  A non-profit event sign. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign erected legally which does not comply with the most current adopted sign restrictions and regulations. 
"Non-profit sign" means a temporary sign advertising events and/or other promotions open to the public and sponsored by a non-profit organization. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Official flag" means flags of the United States of America, the State of California, City or other governmental agency. 
"Off-premises sign" means a commercial sign or structure of any kind or character erected and/or maintained for advertising a business, activity, service or product not sold or produced on the premises upon which the sign is placed, including a billboard and any other outdoor advertising sign and structure. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"On-premises advertising display" means any structure, housing, device, figurine, statuary or other contrivance of a permanent or portable nature which is designed and intended to advertise specific products or services, services available or goods sold on the premises which the business or display is located or upon the building within which the business is located; see definition of "premises". 
"On-premises sign" means a sign which displays the name, use, service, trade or trademark, or symbol of the business or business activity provided on the premises on which the business or business activity is located. 
"Open house sign" means a sign which identifies a building for sale or lease which is open and available for inspection. 
"Ornamental sign" means a sign that includes decorative design details fabricated out of wrought iron, wood or similar product with the intent of making the Sign more compatible with the residential property on which it is located. 
"Owner" means a person recorded as such on official records and including any duly authorized agent or notary, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary and any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
"Painted sign" means any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance to the face of a wall, arcade, canopy or marquee of a building. 
"Parapet" means an extension of the structural walls, or other architectural feature screening from view on all sides of a building the rooftop equipment; see section 9412. 
"Parcel" or "lot" means: 
1.  A parcel of real property which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, approved pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (California Business and Professions Code, Sec. 11500, et seq.); or 
2.  A parcel of real property, the dimensions and boundaries of which are defined as a single lot by a lawfully recorded record of survey map; or 
3.  A parcel of real property shown on a parcel map as a single lot, lawfully recorded pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (California Business and Professions Code, Section 11500, et seq.); or 
4.  Two (2) or more parcels of real property which are combined by an appropriately recorded written instrument or by common fee ownership and usage. 
"Pennant" means a flag that tapers to a point or a forked double-point, and is often used alone or in a series and suspended from a rope, wire or string. 
"Permanent directional/information sign" means an on-premises sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information such as parking locations, exits, entrances, time and temperature. Such signs may not contain the name or logo of an establishment or information of a commercial nature. 
"Persons" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind whatsoever. 
"Plaque" means a flat thin piece of metal (or other material) placed on a building to identify a Site or an event or to commemorate an individual or an event. 
"Pole sign" means any free-standing sign supported by a structural member(s) with air space between the grade level and the bottom of the sign face. 
"Political sign" means any sign pertaining to a candidate for public office or a ballot issue pending before the electorate at a specific election. 
"Portable sign" means any sign capable of being carried or readily moved from one location to another, including, but not limited to an A-frame sign, "sandwich sign", a sign on wheels or a sign which leans against a stationary object, building or structure. Portable sign does not include a temporary off-premises commercial sign, temporary noncommercial sign, or human sign. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Premises" means the building as it relates to a wall sign within which a business is located; or as it relates to a ground sign, premises is defined as the project site upon which the business is located. 
"Primary wall" means a building wall containing a primary store entrance/exit which faces onto a street or designated parking area. 
"Project identification sign" means a temporary sign identifying a future occupant, project developer, architect, engineer, contractor or others participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located; see section 9412. 
"Projecting sign" means any sign which is not substantially parallel to the surface or plane of the supporting wall, fence, canopy or marquee to which it is attached. 
"Protected speech sign" means any sign containing a message of public interest, and containing no commercial speech. For the purpose of this Chapter, the term "protected speech sign" does not include political signs. 
"Public event sign" means a temporary sign installed by the City of Tustin advertising events and/or other promotions open to the public and sponsored by the City of Tustin. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Public parkway area" means the strip of land between the curb line and the sidewalk, and any City landscape easement adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
"Public right-of-way" means and includes all public streets, curbs, medians, islands, sidewalks and utility easements, now or hereafter owned in fee or easement by the City. 
"Public safety area" means a strip of land, twenty (20) feet in width, running parallel with, adjacent to and measured from the public right-of-way line. The public right-of-way line is the same as the property line; see section 9412. 
"Real estate sign" means a temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rent of the property upon which it is located, and the identification of the person or firm handling such sale, lease or rent. 
"Replacement value" means the total actual cost to repair or restore a sign to its original condition. 
"Responsible party" means the owner of the sign or, where ownership is not known, the owner of the property where the Sign is posted. In the absence of persuasive evidence to the contrary, the person who benefited from the sign shall be presumed to be the person who was responsible for the placement of the sign. For open house signs, the responsible party shall be the real estate licensee holding the open house and that real estate licensee's real estate broker of record. 
"Rider" means a changeable portion of a real estate sign that includes specific information relating to the property or broker. 
"Roof line" means either the uppermost edge of the roof or the top of the parapet; see section 9412. 
"Roof sign" means a painted sign or attached sign constructed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend above the visible roofline. 
"Secondary wall" means a building wall which contains no primary store entrance, but may have emergency exits, exits/entrances subordinate to the primary entrance which may face onto a street or designated parking area or access drive. 
"Seasonal or holiday sign(s)" means signs, such as Christmas decorations, which are used for a historical holiday or special time of the year and installed for a limited period of time, as defined in this Chapter. 
"Sign" or "signs" means any structure, device or contrivance and all parts thereof which are installed or used for identification purposes upon or within which any poster, bill, copy, lettering, painting, device or other advertising of any kind whatsoever is used, placed upon, or affixed to the building support structure, window area, canopy, awning or marquee. Product, trade and service information is considered supplemental information and may be included on the sign provided it is subordinate to business identification. Supplemental signs shall be considered subordinate if no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is used for this purpose. This definition includes signs directly applied to a building surface such as plastics, and menus. This definition shall not include official notices issued by a court or public body or officer, or directional warning or information sign or structures required by or authorized by law or Federal, State, County or City authority; see section 9412. 
"Sign area" means the entire area of the face or faces of the Sign, which is designed to carry copy, whether or not there is copy on all surfaces. Architectural design embellishments and structural elements such as a sign pedestal or pole are not construed to be part of sign area. The perimeter is defined by the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof or irregular shape that will encompass the extreme limits of the copy together with any frame or structural trim forming an integral part of the display such as a sign cabinet. In the case of a double-faced sign, the area shall be computed as only one (1) of the sign surfaces; see section 9412. 
"Sign copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign. 
"Sign program" means a comprehensive program intended to provide incentive, latitude and variety in order to achieve aesthetically appealing and compatible signage for shopping and professional office centers and industrial parks with two (2) or more occupants. A sign program may also be applicable for a single business proposing two (2) or more signs. 
"Sign structure" means the supports, uprights, braces, cables, framework, and display surface of a sign. 
"Site" means one (1) or more parcels of land identified by the assessor's records. The site shall include all parcels of land contained within, or a part of an integrated building development. An integrated building development shall include all parcels served by common accessways, driveways, parking and landscaping. 
"Special event" is a commercial, civic, patriotic, religious, cultural, community, or political event that recurs irregularly, if at all, and that takes place on a specific date or dates. "Special event" does not include routine commercial promotions. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Standard sign plans" means a comprehensive set of plans and materials required to be submitted before erecting, placing, rebuilding, reconstructing or moving any sign. 
"Storefront area" means the front area of a building in which the primary entrance to a store or business is located. The area is calculated by multiplying the width of the storefront (or tenant space in the case of a multi-tenant building) by the wall height (which includes all vertical surfaces between the finished grade and the roof); see section 9412 for a display of the storefront area calculation. 
"Street frontage" means lineal extent of a street which fronts on or is adjacent to either a building or parking area and used as the basis for determining the maximum sign area and number of signs allowed; see section 9412. 
"Supplemental signs" means signs identifying special features, trade, services or products of the business. Such signs may not include a listing of pricing information or specific brand names unless incorporated into the name of the business. Supplemental signs may be of a permanent nature, provided they are subordinate to business identification information. They shall be considered subordinate if no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is used for this purpose. 
"Temporary sign" means any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvass or other similar lightweight material, with or without frames, including painted windows, flags, streamers, pennants, banner signs and other signs not designed to be permanently attached to a building or anchored to the ground. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 2, 4-3-18) 
"Tivoli lights" is a brand of tube lights; see tube lights. 
"Tract identification sign" means a permanent sign designed to identify a single-family or multifamily residential subdivision or development. Such signs shall be limited to subdivisions containing a minimum of ten (10) units or ten (10) lots and a minimum total project size of one (1) acre. 
"Tube lights" are small decorative lights of a permanent nature. Light bulbs are usually one-half (½) watt in size and usually less than one (1) inch long and placed within a clear tube, approximately eight (8) inches apart. 
"Under-canopy" means a sign which is perpendicular to and suspended below the ceiling or roof of a canopy. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building is occupied, arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
"Vehicle-mounted sign" means any sign placed or maintained on a stationary automobile, truck, trailer or any other motor-driven device. 
"Vertical clearance" is the vertical distance between grade and the lowest part of any sign, including framework or embellishments. 
"Visual clearance area" is a triangular shaped portion of land established at a street intersection or driveway in which nothing is constructed, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the visibility of a motorist entering or leaving the intersection or driveway; see section 9404a3(b) and exhibit in section 9412. 
"Wall sign" means a sign attached parallel to or erected on the fascia, parapet or exterior wall of a building, structure, wall or fence with the exposed face of the sign in a line approximately parallel to the plane of the exterior wall; see section 9412. 
"Width of a sign" means the maximum horizontal dimension of a sign. 
"Window" is an opening in a wall surrounded by framework or casing and enclosed with transparent material. For the purpose of calculating window area on one (1) building elevation, a series of adjoining window panes separated by mullions or panels can be combined to establish total window area. 
"Window sign" means any sign attached, painted, or pasted, either permanent or temporary, on the interior or exterior of a window and intended to be viewed from the outside; see section 9412. 
"Wind sign" means any sign or portion thereof or series of signs, banner signs, balloons, flags, pennants, spinners, streamers, or other objects designed and fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9403 - SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
a  Permits required. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided specifically in this title, no sign shall hereafter be erected, re-erected, constructed or altered until a sign permit for such has been issued by the person or body having final authority to do so, or until a conditional use permit or planned sign program with respect to such a Sign has been granted by the Planning Commission in instances in which a conditional use permit is required. 
2.  A separate permit shall be required for each sign or group of signs in one (1) location. In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, all applicable building and electrical permits shall be obtained in accordance with the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Electrical Code. 
A tag issued by the city indicating the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign so as to be readily visible. The tag shall include the sign permit number, approval date and/or expiration date for any sign constructed in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
b  Permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be made by the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located, by a licensed contractor or an authorized agent of the property owner, as may be required by state contractors' law, on forms furnished by the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by all information and fees, as required for standard sign plans or master sign plans. The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. 
c  Review procedures. Each sign permit or temporary sign permit application, plans, and fees shall be submitted to the Community Development Department, pursuant to this Chapter, and shall be processed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied within the time limits established by state law for action on development projects by the Community Development Director, unless such approval authority is granted to the Planning Commission pursuant to this Chapter or the requirements contained in specific plans, planned developments, or planned community districts. All decisions by the Community Development Department or Planning Commission are final unless appealed in accordance with this Chapter. 
All signs proposed to be located within the public safety area shall also be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department prior to the issuance of any permits. 
d  Temporary sign permits. Temporary sign permits are required for signs intended for temporary display. This section shall not authorize signs identified as prohibited by section 9404 of this Chapter. Additional regulations for temporary signs are found in section 9406. As applicable, a separate building permit and/or electrical permit may also be required. In addition to a refundable cash bond, which guarantees the removal of the temporary display, the following requirements shall apply. 
1.  Banner signs. 
(a)  All banner signs must be fixed to a building and hung below a roof eave or mounted on poles. 
(b)  All banner signs shall be professionally made and constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic, PVC or similar material, and have slits for proper wind resistance, where necessary. 
(c)  No banner sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, except that a single banner sign of up to one hundred (100) square feet may be allowed on a building elevation of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet that faces a freeway or major arterial. 
(d)  One (1) display per building or street frontage, or in the case of a multi-tenant building, one (1) display per storefront area shall be allowed. As a substitute for a wall-mounted banner sign, one (1) pole-mounted banner sign per property street frontage is permitted. 
(e)  Every banner sign shall display a City-issued permit identifying the approved dates for the display. Banner signs displayed without a City permit or on non-approved dates may be removed by the City. 
(f)  Grand opening banner signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(g)  Special event information banner signs for purposes other than grand openings shall be permitted for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days from or around the date of the event, not more than four (4) times in any calendar year, and no more than twice in any calendar quarter. As an alternative, if specific nonconsecutive dates can be identified in writing, a banner sign shall be permitted for no more than sixty (60) days per calendar quarter and no more than one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year. 
(h)  Banner signs for the sponsorship of nonprofit events, including civic, public, religious, educational, or philanthropic events, shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days per event. Temporary banner signs shall be appropriate for the event. Copy of signage may contain names, logos, or corporate sponsors but such names, logos, or corporate sponsors may not exceed one-fourth (¼) of the aggregate area of signage. 
(i)  Banner signs are exempt from the requirement to provide a refundable cash bond. 
2.  Public event signs. Public event signs may be located within the public right-of-way subject to the following restrictions and criteria: 
(a)  All public event signs posted on the structures approved by the City shall be removed no later than seventy-two (72) hours after the event has occurred. 
(b)  All public event signs shall be professionally made and constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic, PVC or similar material, and have slits for proper wind resistance, where necessary 
(c)  No sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in horizontal length, with a maximum sign height or vertical dimension of four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 3, 4-3-18) 
3.  Decorative flags. Decorative flags shall meet the following criteria and any deviation from these criteria shall be approved by the Planning Commission, as provided for in section 9404c4. 
(a)  Decorative flags shall be installed on a flag pole device or frame, approved by the Building Official or installed directly upon a building or wall surface but in no case above the roof eave. 
(b)  No decorative flag may exceed six (6) square feet in area with a maximum pole height of twelve (12) feet. 
(c)  Original grand opening decorative flags shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. In addition, a change of ownership or change of business type qualifies for grand opening flags. 
(d)  Not more than five (5) decorative flags per site for purposes other than grand openings shall be permitted for thirty (30) days and not more than four (4) times in any calendar year nor more than twice in any calendar quarter. 
(e)  Decorative flags are permitted for non-residential projects and only for residential projects in conjunction with temporary project identification signs. 
4.  Beacons. Beacons used as part of the grand opening are permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. Temporary sign permits for grand opening beacons are subject to the approval of the Community Development Department. 
5.  Festoons. Festoons may be permitted in conjunction with a special event, subject to Planning Commission approval pursuant to section 9404c3. 
6.  Balloons. Nonmetallic balloons (individual, groupings or arch of balloons) may be permitted only one (1) time per year and in conjunction with a special event. Balloons shall meet the following criteria and any deviation from these criteria shall be approved by the Planning Commission, as provided for in section 9404c4. 
Individual or grouping of balloons: Individual balloons include balloons attached separately to the ground or building or attached to the end of a nonmetallic string. A grouping of balloons is two (2) or more balloons attached separately to nonmetallic string which are clustered together. 
(a)  Maximum size of balloons—Twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Maximum number—Thirty (30) Balloons. 
(c)  Maximum height—Fifteen (15) feet above grade. 
(d)  Location—Must be securely affixed to ground or building and must maintain a minimum twenty-foot setback from all property lines. 
(e)  Duration of display—Maximum of two (2) consecutive days, no more than one (1) time per year for arch, individual or string of balloons. 
Arch of balloons: An arch of balloons is a collection of helium-filled balloons that are attached close together to create a solid band of color forming an arch. 
(a)  Maximum size of balloons—Twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Maximum number—Three (3) Balloons per lineal foot. 
(c)  Location—Must be securely affixed at each end to ground or building and must maintain a minimum twenty-foot setback from all property lines. 
(d)  Duration of display—Maximum of two (2) consecutive days, no more than one (1) time per year for arch, individual, or string of balloons. 
7.  Portable signs within the Cultural Resource District and/or Old Town Commercial General Plan land use designation. Portable signs for sidewalk-adjacent businesses within the Cultural Resource District and/or Old Town Commercial General Plan land use designation may be placed within the sidewalk adjacent to the identified business, subject to review and approval by the City of Tustin in accordance with established design guidelines. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 4, 4-3-18) 
e  Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this Chapter, provided that they conform to the standards outlined below and contained in sections 9406 through 9411. Although the following signs do not require a sign permit, they may require a building and/or electrical permit. 
1.  Public signs placed by a governmental body or public utility, including signs required by law, community service signs, public transit signs, safety signs, trespassing signs, danger signs and all signs erected by a public officer in the performance of a public duty. 
2.  One (1) official flag per property. However, building permits shall be obtained for the flag poles where required by the Uniform Building Code. The flag pole shall meet the setback requirements and shall not exceed the allowable height of the zoning district or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. 
3.  Flags identifying the name and/or Logo of the business upon the premises. Such flags shall not exceed one (1) in number per site nor more than ten (10) percent of the permitted aggregate sign area for the business identified on the flag. Business flags shall be no higher than any state flag and must be lower than the federal flag if located on the site. The flag pole shall meet the setback requirements and shall not exceed the allowable height of the zoning district or fifty (50) feet, whichever is less. 
4.  Nameplates less than two (2) square feet in area, displaying only the following: 
(a)  Name of the premises upon which it is displayed; 
(b)  Name of the owner or lessee of the premises; 
(c)  Occupation of the owner or lessee. 
5.  Seasonal or holiday signs, holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message for one (1) continuous period not to exceed fifty (50) days during any given year. 
6.  Address numbers installed on a building which must be at least six (6) inches in height and in Arabic numerals. 
7.  Permanent plaques, cornerstones, or building names containing the name of the building and date of erection, or historical designation, provided that these are cut into a masonry surface, or constructed of bronze or other appropriate material of a permanent nature. 
8.  Incidental signs mounted, painted, attached to, or placed upon windows and intended to be viewed from the exterior, unless prohibited in an approved Master Sign Plan, provided that the aggregate area of such signs do not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window area upon which they are placed. 
9.  Non-illuminated on-premises real estate signs or open house signs subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  In residential zones, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage, with a maximum height of four (4) feet and maximum size of six (6) square feet. Ornamental signs may be a maximum of seven (7) feet high to top of structure, with a maximum of six (6) square feet for sign face. 
(b)  In professional districts, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage, with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet in size and six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  In commercial districts when a property has a street frontage of less than two hundred (200) lineal feet, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage, with a maximum size of sixteen (16) square feet and maximum six (6) feet in height. For properties with two hundred (200) lineal feet or more of street frontage, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage, with a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet in size and eight (8) feet in height. 
(d)  In industrial districts, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage, with a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in size and ten (10) feet in height. 
(e)  For vacant properties in any district with a minimum of five (5) acres in size, not more than one (1) sign per street frontage with a maximum of twenty (20) square feet in size and eight (8) feet in height. 
(f)  All such signs shall be installed on private property and only on the premises which the sign advertises. 
(g)  All such signs may contain a maximum of three (3) riders in excess of the above sign area limitation. The combined size of all riders including any spaces between riders shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in total sign height or vertical dimension and must be attached under the permanent sign face. 
10.  A permanent directional/information sign not exceeding six (6) square feet per face nor four (4) feet in height, limited to one (1) sign per vehicle entrance to the site. In addition, each tenant may have directional signs located on or next to the building, maximum size of four (4) square feet and not to exceed one (1) per store entrance. 
11.  Temporary off-premises commercial signs, subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  Temporary off-premises commercial signs must be associated with a legitimate commercial enterprise in the City of Tustin for which permanent business identification signs are not authorized. A maximum of twenty (20) temporary off-premises commercial signs per commercial enterprise shall be allowed within the city limits at any one (1) time. 
(b)  The signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and four (4) feet in height. 
(c)  Signs may only be located in the public parkway area, subject to the visual clearance area requirements, except as otherwise allowed by local, state, or federal law. 
(d)  Signs are not permitted to be attached to any traffic control device, tree, street light or utility pole or placed so as to impede public sidewalks. 
(e)  Signs shall not be posted on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, or Thursdays; or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, or Sundays. 
(f)  Signs shall only be posted between twenty-five (25) feet and three hundred (300) feet of a street intersection. A maximum of two (2) signs per commercial enterprise shall be posted per street intersection, and no more than one (1) sign per commercial enterprise shall be permitted in the public parking way area abutting any one (1) parcel of property. 
(g)  The name, address, and phone number of the responsible party shall be provided on the back of the sign. This information shall occupy a space no larger than ten (10) square inches. 
(h)  The responsible party for signs erected in the public parkway area shall be liable to the City of Tustin, private property owners and the general public for any injury to persons or property resulting from the placement and maintenance of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 5, 4-3-18) 
12.  Light bulb strings are permitted on a temporary or permanent basis, provided all of the following limitations are met: 
(a)  Maximum number—One hundred (100) light bulbs. 
(b)  Minimum separation between lights—Six (6) inches. 
(c)  Maximum size bulb—Three (3) inches in length, seven (7) watt. 
(d)  Color—Clear or white. 
(e)  Location—Not permitted on the exterior of a building or structure. May be located within twelve (12) inches of the interior of a window. Light bulb strings located more than twelve (12) inches from the interior of a window are not regulated by this Code. 
(f)  All such lights shall not flash, blink, chase or be otherwise animated. 
(g)  Standards above do not apply to decorative holiday lighting as permitted by section 9403e5. 
13.  Temporary non-commercial signs (except public event signs), subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  No person shall affix a temporary non-commercial sign on any traffic signal, utility pole, traffic control device, or tree. 
(b)  Written permission of the property owner is required for temporary non-commercial signs placed on private property. 
(c)  Temporary non-commercial signs on private property shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in size, and ten (10) feet in height. 
(d)  The name, address and telephone number of the responsible party for posting the temporary non-commercial sign shall be included on the sign. 
(e)  Temporary non-commercial signs in the public parkway area are subject to the following additional criteria: 
(1)  Signs shall only be posted between twenty-five (25) feet and three hundred (300) feet of a street intersection. No more than one (1) sign per sponsoring individual or organization shall be permitted in the public parkway area abutting any one (1) parcel of property. 
(2)  Signs shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) square feet in size and four (4) feet in height above grade. 
(3)  Signs shall not be installed or maintained in any manner so as to impede vehicles or permitted parking adjacent to curb, pedestrian walkways, hinder disabled access, or constitute a hazard to or endanger persons using the sidewalks. 
(4)  Signs shall not be located in any visual clearance area. 
(5)  Any person, party or group posting such signs shall be liable to the City of Tustin, private property owners and the general public for any injury to persons or property resulting from the placement and maintenance of the sign. 
(6)  A temporary non-commercial sign shall be posted for no more than forty-five (45) days per calendar quarter. Signs related to a specific event shall be removed no later than five (5) days after the event to which the sign relates. The date that the sign was posted and the name, address and phone number of the responsible party shall be provided on the back of the sign within a space no larger than ten (10) square inches. 
(7)  [Reserved.] 
(8)  If the Community Development Director finds that any temporary non-commercial sign has been posted or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, the responsible party shall be given notice to remove said sign(s) within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of said notice. The notice shall include a brief statement of the reasons for requiring removal. If the person so notified fails to correct the violation or remove the sign(s), the Community Development Director may cause said sign(s) to be removed without further notice. If the responsible party for the sign cannot in good faith be located within a reasonable time, the sign shall be deemed abandoned. 
(9)  Any temporary non-commercial sign that remains posted for more than forty-five (45) calendar days or for more than five (5) calendar days after the event to which the sign relates shall also be deemed abandoned. The Community Development Director may cause such abandoned signs and any signs, which constitute an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without prior notice. The City shall assess a charge against any person, candidate, entity, party or group posting or placing signs in violation of this section for the cost incurred in the removal. 
(10)  Signs in the public parkway area in violation of this section shall be subject to removal by City in accordance with section 9405e1(b) of this Code. 
(11)  Any person who intentionally defaces, obliterates, tears down, or destroys a sign installed in accordance with the provisions of this Code shall be subject to being charged with an infraction pursuant to section 1121 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 6, 4-3-18) 
14.  [Reserved.] (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 7, 4-3-18) 
15.  Human signs shall be permitted on private property and in public parkway areas and sidewalks, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Human signs shall be prohibited within two hundred (200) feet of any street intersection. 
(b)  Human signs shall be limited to a maximum of three (3) square feet in size. 
(c)  Human signs shall not block the visibility of any traffic control device or traffic signal for motorists. 
(d)  Human signs on public sidewalks shall yield to the passage of pedestrians. 
(e)  Human signs shall not spin, twirl, swing or gyrate. 
f.  Exceptions. When an application for a sign code exception has been submitted to the Community Development Department, the Community Development Director shall have authority to grant or conditionally grant an exception to allow no more than a ten (10) percent increase in height or sign area of an allowable sign subject to findings contained herein. The Planning Commission shall have authority to grant or conditionally grant all other exceptions to the various sign regulations contained in this Chapter subject to the following: 
1.  Sign size and placement restrictions of this chapter shall be as closely followed as practicable; 
2.  The intent and purpose of the sign regulations of the land use zone in which the sign is to be located shall be followed as closely as practicable; 
3.  There are special circumstances unique to the property to justify the exception; 
4.  Granting of the exception will not have a negative impact on surrounding properties; 
5.  The Sign application promotes the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community and that the granting of the exception meets the findings and intent of this Chapter. 
g.  Standard sign plans. All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of dimensioned plans and shall include the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number both of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. 
2.  The location by street address of the proposed sign. 
3.  An elevation of the sign showing the dimensions of the sign, the dimensions of the sign's supporting members, the maximum and minimum height of the sign, sign copy, proposed lettering and background color and lettering style. 
4.  A dimensioned elevation of that portion of the building exterior where the proposed location of the sign will be placed in relation to the face of the building. 
5.  A dimensioned site plan showing the proposed location of the sign in relation to the boundaries of the lot upon which it is to be situated and any pole or monument signs within fifty (50) feet of the site boundaries can be prepared on an eight and one-half (8½) inch × eleven (11) inch size paper. 
6.  Where the sign is to be attached to an existing building, a current color photograph of the face of the building to which the sign is to be attached and color photograph of all existing Signs on the building and sign structures labeled to show which signs will be removed and which will remain. 
7.  A sign plan shall indicate the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all electrical and mechanical connections, guy lines, supports and footing and materials to be used. 
8.  Means of lighting/illumination along with an electrical permit for all electrical signs. All electrical components for the sign shall be listed and approved by certified testing laboratory. 
9.  Any other information that the applicant believes to be needed to fully define the sign proposal. 
10.  Such other architectural, design, or engineering information as may be required by the Uniform Sign Code and Uniform Building Code for the specific sign proposal. 
11.  Any required permit and review fees as established by resolution of the City Council. 
h.  Master sign plans. A master sign plan is required for developments in specific plan, planned development and planned community districts, multi-use sites, multi-tenant centers and mixed use districts in the City. The purpose of a master sign plan is to encourage coordinated and quality sign design (integrated with architectural style of project) on sites where a large number of signs will occur. In addition, the master sign plan should include permanent directional/information signs to facilitate smooth internal circulation by the motorist. 
After approval of a master sign plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this ordinance unless a modification to the master sign plan is approved. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and this ordinance, the ordinance takes precedence. In addition to all of the requirements for standard sign plans contained in section 9403g of this Chapter, the following additional information shall be required for a master sign plan: 
1.  Plan specifications including the type and texture of materials and colors proposed for the signs and the building facade. 
2.  A colored elevation of the proposed signs as they would appear on the building facade. 
3.  Drawings illustrating the lettering styles and sizes proposed and the use of logos, if any. 
4.  Color photographs of buildings and signs on adjacent sites. 
5.  Any regulations that are more restrictive than those included in the sign code pertaining to use, location and size of signs. 
i.  Review criteria. 
1.  General criteria (applicable to all signs). Proposed signs and the materials, size, color, lettering, location and arrangement thereof shall conform to the following criteria: 
(a)  Signs shall be consistent throughout the site by incorporating common design elements such as quality of materials, letter style, colors (not more than three (3) excluding black and white per individual sign), illumination, sign type or sign shape. 
(b)  Signs shall be compatible with, and bear a harmonious relationship to the visual image and architectural design of the buildings they identify in terms of materials, colors, and design motif. 
(c)  Signs shall relate to a human scale, and shall be directed toward pedestrians as well as motorists. The base and supporting structure of all signs shall be consistent with the size and scale of the advertising surface. 
(d)  Signs shall contain only that information necessary to identify the businesses or uses of the property on which the sign is located and be in compliance with district regulations. Identification of product, trade and service information is permitted and considered supplemental provided it is subordinate to business identification. Supplemental signs shall be considered subordinate if no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is used for this purpose. 
(e)  Signs shall be appropriately visible, legible, as far as spacing and proportion of letters and details, and shall not dominate the visual quality of the site or obscure from view existing or adjacent signs. 
(f)  Signs shall be compatible with the visual characteristics of the development and signs in the surrounding area and shall not detract from adjacent developed properties. 
(g)  New signs in existing developments shall be designed in accordance with the established master sign plan for the building or center where the signs are to be located. If a master sign plan does not exist, any new signs shall be designed to be harmonious with other existing signs on the property and/or architectural theme or design features of the building(s) or required by any special criteria pursuant to section 9403h. 
(h)  Freestanding signs may be located in a required yard setback area provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Said location is not within a required visual clearance area as shown on section 9412 exhibits. 
(2)  All signs proposed to be located within the public safety area shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department. 
(3)  All such signs shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from an interior side property line or fifty (50) feet from another existing pole or monument sign located on an adjacent site, whichever is less restrictive. 
(4)  In the event of a lighted sign the location will not cause negative light and glare impacts on adjacent sensitive land uses. 
(i)  All signs shall conform to provisions contained in section 9404 of this Chapter and any previously approved master sign plan, on file with the Community Development Department. 
2.  Master sign plan criteria. In addition to general criteria listed in section 9403i of this Chapter, master sign plans shall be reviewed for conformance with the following criteria: 
(a)  Signs shall reflect a common theme, incorporating design elements in terms of materials, letter styles, colors, illumination, sign type and sign shape. 
(b)  Signs shall utilize materials, colors, and a design motif which are compatible and which reflect the special qualities of the architecture of the buildings on the site in both daytime and nighttime situations. 
(c)  For developments with existing signs, the master sign plan shall designate appropriate replacements, if any, which are consistent with the new signage. Where such signs cannot be replaced immediately, a schedule or phasing plan for bringing such signs into conformance with the master sign plan shall be submitted and become part of the approval. 
A cash bond, based upon the estimated cost to remove the sign, may be required to guarantee their removal. Bond is returnable upon successful completion of removal. If not removed, the bond will be forfeited and the sign will be removed by the City pursuant to the enforcement procedures of section 9405e. The sign plan should acknowledge that tenants desiring signs may not be identified during the building design process or may change over time. Therefore, care should be taken in size and placement to accommodate future changes. 
(d)  The master sign plan shall designate a person or firm as the primary liaison with the City for the purpose of requesting approval of the master sign plan and for submitting sign permit requests in conformance with the approved master sign plan. 
(e)  The master sign plan submitted by the applicant may establish more restrictive sign standards than those contained in this Chapter. Conversely, a master sign plan for a center may deviate from the specific standard for permanent business identification upon submittal and approval of a conditional use permit, provided that the center is a single development project of at least thirty thousand (30,000) building square feet or one (1) acre in project size. 
3.  Special criteria. The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may establish more specific design criteria by resolution within certain portions of the City to encourage signs which are in harmony with established architectural guidelines in those areas. The specific criteria may be more or less restrictive than the regulations included in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9404 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
a.  Prohibited sign types, prohibited materials and prohibited locations. Any sign, sign structure or advertising device which are not specifically permitted by the zoning district regulations in which the sign is located or which may have been erected in violation of the laws in effect at time of erection is prohibited. Such prohibited signs include, but are not limited to the following types, materials and locations. 
1.  Types of signs prohibited: 
(a)  Advertising bench signs. No person shall place within a public right-of-way, public parkway area, or in any public safety area within the City any advertising bench, or seat except: 
(1)  Upon obtaining a written permit from the City Council, and, 
(2)  Upon obtaining the approval of the City Engineer for the design and construction details. 
(b)  Advertising display bus shelter signs. No person shall place within a public right-of-way, public parkway area, or in any public safety area within the city any advertising display bus shelter, except in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  A franchise agreement or other contractual agreement acceptable to the City Attorney shall be required for all advertising bus shelters proposed within the public right-of-way or public parkway area. City Council approval shall also be required for all shelters located within a public safety area. 
(2)  The Planning Commission and City Engineer shall review and recommend to the City Council appropriate locations, design and construction details for all advertising bus shelters prior to award of franchise agreement or approval of alternative contractual agreement. However, in no case shall an advertising bus shelter be located within a residential neighborhood. The Planning Commission may also recommend certain guidelines to the City Council on appropriate standards for advertising and/or design. 
(3)  All advertising display bus shelters shall be located based upon ridership demand, as determined by the Orange County Transit Authority and City Engineer. 
(4)  Displays shall not contain advertising for tobacco or alcohol products. 
(c)  Aerial signs, unless approved pursuant to section 9404c of this chapter. 
(d)  Animated signs. 
(e)  Audible signs. 
(f)  Beacons. Unless approved pursuant to sections 9403d or 9404b of this Chapter. 
(g)  Festoons. Unless approved pursuant to section 9404c of this Chapter. 
(h)  Flashing signs. 
(i)  Light bulb strings, except holiday lights per section 9403e5, and not in conformance with section 9403e12. 
(j)  Obscene or unlawful signs. 
(k)  Off-premises signs, except those erected or caused to be erected by the City, temporary off-premises commercial signs, human signs, and temporary noncommercial signs. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 9, 4-3-18) 
(l)  On-premises advertising display. 
(m)  Painted signs. 
(n)  Portable signs, except those approved by the City within the Cultural Resource District and/or Old Town Commercial General Plan land use designation. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 9, 4-3-18) 
(o)  Projecting signs. 
(p)  Roof signs, except rooftop signs displaying only company name or logo on a flat roof so not to be seen from a horizontal plane of view below the roof line and approved as part of a Master Sign Plan pursuant to 9403h or 9404b6. (Ord. No. 1429, Sec. III.2, 5-21-13) 
(q)  Service, product and pricing signs. Any sign advertising specific brand names or pricing unless incorporated into the business name for the purpose of City business licenses and filing of fictitious business name as required by the State Board of Equalization. Specific pricing signs as required by state law and permitted in the Code are not subject to these limitations. Identification of product, trade or service information in excess of twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area is also prohibited. 
(r)  Signs constituting a traffic hazard. No person shall install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained any sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design any traffic sign or signal, or which makes use of the words "stop, look, danger," or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(s)  [Reserved.] (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 10, 4-3-18) 
(t)  Vehicle-mounted signs. Business signs on or affixed to trucks, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles, while parked on public or private property, excepting those vehicles used for the purpose of lawfully making deliveries or sales of merchandise or rendering services. 
2.  Materials prohibited: Nondurable signs. Paper, cloth or any matter or material not securely fastened to the surface of a sign or sign structure with the exception of approved temporary signs. 
3.  Locations prohibited: 
(a)  Signs in proximity to utility lines. No permit shall be issued for any sign, and no sign shall be constructed or maintained, which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from authorized communication or energized electrical power lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state or rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof. Signs are prohibited on any utility pole, traffic sign post, traffic signal or any other official traffic control device, in accordance with Section 21465 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Visual clearance area. No permit shall be issued for any sign and no sign shall be constructed or maintained which is located within the visual clearance area. This area shall be measured from each side of the driveway or access point to the adjoining street per current City standards. See the diagram in section 9412 showing visual clearance area. 
(c)  Signs on any public property, public right-of-way, and public parkway area. Signs on any public property, within public right-of-way, including the public parkway area, traffic control sign posts, utility poles, and trees are prohibited. No person, except a public officer in performance of public duty, shall affix by any means any form of Sign on any public property or within the public right-of-way. Temporary off-premises commercial signs, temporary noncommercial signs, and human signs shall be permitted within the public parkway area, but only in strict accordance with section 9403e. (Ord. No. 1483, Sec. 11, 4-3-18) 
(d)  Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall not extend over or into a public right-of-way or public parkway area, except for public event banners, subject to approval by the Community Development Director. 
(e)  Side yard setback area. A monument sign shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from side property lines or fifty (50) feet separation from another pole or monument sign located on an adjacent site, whichever is less restrictive. Additional regulations for monument signs are located in sections 9407 through 9411. 
b.  Signs subject to conditional use permit approval. The following types of signs are permitted only when reviewed by the Planning Commission and where a conditional use permit has been issued in accordance with the Tustin Zoning Code. An application for a conditional use permit for these types of signs shall be processed in accordance with conditional use permit procedures contained in the Tustin Zoning Code. Appeal procedures for conditional use permits shall also be governed by applicable sections of the Tustin Zoning Code. 
1.  Changeable copy signs (electronic or manual), except time and temperature signs which are permitted. 
2.  Pole sign. All pole signs not considered freestanding freeway signs pursuant to subsection 9404b(3) shall require approval of a conditional use permit. In addition to findings required to be made on granting of a CUP contained in the Tustin City Code, the following restrictions and criteria shall apply: 
(a)  Type of business. Only center identification signs are permitted to be pole signs. 
(b)  Size and scale of project. The center identified by the sign is a single development project of at least one hundred thousand (100,000) building square feet or five (5) acres in project size which has a minimum of three (3) or more tenants. 
(c)  Design. The pole sign is designed to reflect theme of the center it identifies and incorporates similar design elements, materials, colors and special qualities of the architecture of the building(s) in the center and is compatible with existing or proposed signage in the center. 
(d)  Location. The pole sign shall (1) be located within a landscaped area and is limited to one (1) per street frontage, (2) maintain a minimum of one hundred (100) lineal feet from any other monument sign or freestanding sign in the center, and (3) be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from interior side property line or maintain a minimum of fifty (50) feet from another pole or freestanding sign located on an adjacent site. 
(e)  Height and size. The sign shall be compatible with the size and scale of the project and shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in size. 
3.  Freestanding freeway signs. The purpose of a freeway sign is to provide identification for businesses that provide services to the freeway motorist. In addition to findings required by the Tustin City Code, the following restrictions and criteria shall apply: 
(a)  Type of business. Only businesses offering eating facilities, lodging accommodations or automobile services are permitted to have a freeway sign. 
(b)  Location of business. Only those permitted businesses that are located directly adjacent to the freeway right-of-way, or separated from the right-of-way by a frontage road may request a freeway sign. 
(c)  Location of sign. The sign may be located in such a manner as to be oriented towards and visible from the closest freeway lanes. In any event, the freeway sign shall maintain a minimum twenty-five-foot setback from a non-freeway property line or maintain a minimum of fifty (50) feet from another freestanding sign located on an adjacent site. 
(d)  Height and size. The sign shall be no higher or larger than necessary to provide identification to freeway motorist. In any event, the freeway sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in size. 
4.  Painted wall signs to include murals or graphics which do not promote a product or business but which depict a scene or image. 
5.  Beacons. Any beacon used (other than approved for grand openings) as a searchlight directing light beams into the atmosphere or at one (1) or more points on-site shall require a conditional use permit. 
6.  A master sign plan requesting deviations from standards contained in this chapter provided that the project is a center and a single development project of at least thirty thousand (30,000) building square feet or one (1) acre in project size. 
c.  Signs subject to Planning Commission Review. The following types of signs are permitted only after the Planning Commission has reviewed and approved the sign permit application for conformance with the review criteria outlined in section 9403d: 
1.  Tivoli lights or tube lights. External displays of small decorative lights of a permanent nature require approval by the Planning Commission. Tivoli lights are a brand of tube lights. 
2.  Neon/exposed light when intended as a permanent feature integrated with a building's architectural design. 
3.  Festoons. Festoons may be permitted on a temporary basis only in conjunction with a special event, provided the Planning Commission determines that it is consistent with the size and scale of the project and approves a temporary sign permit. 
4.  Temporary decorative flags and nonmetallic balloons. Any request to deviate from the location, size height, number or time limits for decorative flags or balloons as provided for in section 9403d shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. Prior to approval, the Commission shall determine that the proposal is compatible with the size and scale of the buildings on the site and project size. 
5.  Permanent decorative flags/banner signs. Any request to install permanent decorative flags or banner signs on a building or project site is subject to the design review procedures outlined in section 9272 of the Tustin Municipal Code and shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. In approving such flags or banner signs, the Commission shall determine that the permanent decorative flags or banner signs meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Consistent with project theme. 
(b)  Compatible with architectural design of project. 
(c)  Integrated into project design. 
(d)  Shall be maintained and replaced or removed when torn, frayed, faded or otherwise damaged. 
d.  Required signs. 
1.  Construction signs shall include such information as project name, emergency phone number and contact. All such Signs shall be removed prior to approval for occupancy. 
2.  Address numbers. As provided for in sections 4111 and 4112 of the Uniform Building Security Code, street address numbers shall be displayed in a prominent position so as to be easily visible to approaching vehicles. For residential uses, the numbers shall be no less than three (3) inches in height and for nonresidential uses the numerals shall be no less than six (6) inches in height. In all cases, the numbers shall be of a color contrasting with the background and located so they can be clearly seen and read. 
e.  Gasoline service station sign standards. 
1.  Pricing signs shall be visible from the street or highway adjacent to the sign, and when situated at an intersection, the sign shall be visible from each street. 
2.  The number of signs, sign area, location, height and type of signage shall conform to the individual business identification sign criteria. 
3.  Pricing signs shall be incorporated with the service station business identification sign. 
4.  Gasoline pump information signs shall be attached to pump islands and limited to two (2) per island column elevation. No products, Logos or business identification shall be included. 
f.  Permitted signs by zoning district and use. All signs shall be governed by the limits set forth in the sign regulations chart, attached to this chapter as sections 9406 through 9411 and incorporated herein by reference except if addressed elsewhere in this chapter. Signs not expressly authorized elsewhere in this chapter or on the sign standard charts shall be considered unauthorized. The sign chart lists the maximums permitted for number, sign area and height of allowed signs along with other standards. 
g.  Maintenance and construction of signs. 
1.  Standards. 
a.  All signs and sign structures shall be enclosed, structurally safe, kept in good repair, including replacement of defective parts and illuminating fixtures, repainting and cleaning, and otherwise in a presentable condition such that they do not detract from the appearance of the surrounding area and shall comply with the most current Uniform Building Codes, as locally amended. 
b.  All repairs to signs shall be at least equal in quality and design to the original signs. 
c.  All signs and sign material shall be constructed of permanent materials including but not limited to metal, wood or other comparable durable weatherproof material. No material more combustible than treated wood shall be used in the construction of any permanent sign. Any sign support used in the construction of any permanent sign shall be reviewed as part of the sign application. Brackets or other structural elements that contribute to the architecture or in any way contribute to the advertisement of a business shall be calculated as part of the aggregate area of signage permitted for the site. All cabinets, conductors, transformers or other equipment shall be concealed from public view. 
d.  Every sign erected which is subject to a permit shall have its sign permit number, name of erector, installation year, and voltage (if electrical) in a readily visible location. 
e.  Electric signs shall be indirectly illuminated. Illumination shall be either from the interior of a sign, behind letters (back lighting), channel lighting illuminated from finished grade, or another indirect lighting source. Letters and Logos may be internally lit but sign background shall be opaque. Illumination shall be considered excessive and not permitted when it prevents the normal perception of buildings or structures beyond or in the vicinity of the sign or when it shines directly onto residential zones or in any public or private right-of-way. All illuminated signs shall be designed, placed or arranged to prevent glare upon the public right-of-way, adjacent properties, and traffic circulation areas of the subject property and shall not create a menace to traffic or a nuisance to adjacent property. 
f.  All areas where wall signs are removed and background discoloration or holes remain shall be appropriately patched and painted to match the building surface within thirty (30) days of removal of said sign. 
2.  The Community Development Department shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign that does not conform to the standards set forth in subsection (1). 
3.  Hazardous signs. If a sign is damaged or not properly maintained to a degree that causes it to pose a physical danger to persons or property, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  A hazardous sign is a sign that poses a danger to the public or that could create a potential hazard and are declared to be a public nuisance. 
b.  Removal of hazardous signs. Upon discovering a hazardous condition, the Community Development Director may cause the immediate removal of a sign that is a danger to the public due to unsafe conditions. The determination that a sign has become hazardous or unsafe shall consider only the physical condition and characteristics of the sign, and shall not consider the message thereon. No hearing shall be required for the removal of hazardous signs. The Community Development Director is not required to give notice of intent to remove the sign prior to removal, but shall inform the responsible party that the hazardous sign has been removed within seven (7) days of removal, by certified United States mail, return receipt requested and by first class United States mail. 
c.  Signs removed in compliance with this section shall be stored for thirty (30) days, during which time they may be recovered by the responsible party upon payment to the City for costs of removal and storage. If not recovered within the thirty-day period, the sign and supporting structure shall be declared abandoned and title shall vest with the City. The reasonable cost of the removal and storage may be assessed against the owner of the sign(s) and/or the property owner. If not paid, the applicable costs may be imposed as a tax lien against the property. Notice of the imposition of the tax lien shall be sent to the owner of the property by certified United States mail, return receipt requested, as well as by first class United States mail. Costs of removal and storage (up to thirty (30) days) may be billed to the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9405 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
a.  Responsibility. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to administer and enforce all the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the currently adopted Uniform Building Code. 
b.  Interpretations. If any ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate application of the sign code, the Community Development Director shall make the final decision as to the application of this sign code. In making this determination, the Director shall consider (but not be limited to) the following items: 
1.  The general intent and purpose of the sign code. 
2.  Prior administrative interpretation of similar provisions of the sign code. 
3.  The general intent and purpose of similar provisions in the sign code. 
4.  The intent and purpose of the zone classification of the property involved. 
5.  The provisions of the general plan. 
6.  Any other applicable codes or requirements, legally permitted precedents or other relevant information applicable to the application. 
Any decisions of the Community Development Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the appeals procedure in this chapter. 
c.  Legal Nonconforming Signs. A legal nonconforming sign shall be made to conform to all provisions of this Chapter if the Director determines that any of the following events occur: 
1.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be changed to another nonconforming sign. 
2.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered so as to extend its useful life. A sign shall be considered to be structurally altered if the construction materials are physically replaced with new materials. The replacement of face copy in a cabinet-type sign does not constitute structural alteration. 
3.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be expanded or altered so as to change the size, shape, position, location or method of illumination of the sign. 
4.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be reestablished after discontinuance of the use for ninety (90) days or more. If any use is wholly discontinued for any reason, except pursuant to a valid order of a court of law, for a period of ninety (90) days, it shall be presumed that such use has been abandoned in accordance with Section 9405d. All other provisions of the enforcement Section 9405e shall apply. 
5.  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be reestablished after damage or destruction of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, including destruction by an act of God. 
(Ord. No. 1397, Sec. 10, 11-15-11) 
d.  Abandoned signs and advertising displays. Lawfully erected signs or advertising displays pertaining to activities or occupants that are no longer using a property shall be removed by the responsible party from the premises within sixty (60) days after abandonment. A sign is considered abandoned if the occupants are no longer conducting business for a period of ninety (90) days. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
e.  Enforcement, legal procedures, and penalties. Enforcement, legal procedures and penalties with all with recovery costs shall be in accordance with the following provisions and any provisions of state law as may be amended from time to time. 
1.  Notice and removal. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Where it is determined that a sign is constructed, erected or installed in violation of this Chapter; improperly maintained; abandoned; illegal; unsafe; or the sign permit has terminated, been revoked or is otherwise in violation of this Chapter; and written notice is required pursuant to this Chapter, such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the responsible party. If the notice cannot be sent or delivered to the responsible party, then the notice shall be attached to the sign. The notice shall give the responsible party an opportunity to cure the violation or to appeal the City's determination to remove without notice and shall include instructions for how to request a hearing or appeal. An invoice for costs may be included with the notice. 
(b)  Removal with notice. If the City is required to remove any signs or if no response is made to a notice of violation, the sign may be removed by the City. The sign will be stored by the City for a period of thirty (30) days and may be reclaimed by the responsible party after the payment of all removal and storage costs. Any sign not reclaimed within such time, may be destroyed or disposed of by the City. In the event the responsible party does not reclaim the sign, or pay all fees assessed by the City, the City may recover its costs through the cost recovery mechanism identified in this section. 
(c)  Removal without notice—Nominal value signs. Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary, nominal value signs in the public right-of-way, public parkway area, or easements, excepting political signs, if posted in clear disregard of the provisions of this Chapter, may be removed and destroyed without notice or hearing. Signs constructed of cloth, paper, cardboard or scrap wood, with hand drawn or painted lettering, unframed and unmounted or staked to the ground or nailed to a post and any other sign believed to have a value of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be determined by the Director of Community Development to have nominal value. 
2.  Nuisance. Notwithstanding any other provision under this Code, all illegal signs are declared to be a public nuisance and are subject to the public nuisance procedures set forth in Chapter 5, "Property Maintenance And Nuisance Abatement Regulations and Standards," of the Tustin Municipal Code. 
3.  Civil and legal procedures. Notwithstanding the enforcement tools described in this chapter, the City may concurrently utilize all available criminal and legal penalties available to it including infraction and misdemeanor citation provisions contained in Section 1121 of the Tustin City Code. 
4.  Cost recovery. The City shall have the right to recover from a responsible party the full costs of legal remedies, confiscation, storage and disposal of said sign. An account of all costs for confiscation, removal, storage and/or disposal shall be maintained by the Community Development Department. The total costs of abatement including all administrative costs shall constitute a special assessment against the sign owner and/or property owner. (Ord. No. 1367, Sec. II, 4-6-10) 
5.  Hearings. 
(a)  Unless stated otherwise in this Chapter, any person who has received a notice and/or invoice pursuant to this Chapter may request a hearing. Any hearing request must be in writing with the Community Development Director within ten (10) business days of the date of mailing of the notice/invoice. The request for hearing must set forth the basis of such person's objection. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Community Development Director shall set a hearing date before a hearing officer appointed by the City Manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request for a hearing. The Director shall provide the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) days advance notice of the hearing date. The hearing date may be changed by mutual consent of the Community Development Director, the person requesting the hearing, and the hearing officer. At the hearing, the person requesting the hearing will have an opportunity to present evidence supporting his/her position. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision. A copy of this decision shall be promptly sent to the responsible party. This decision shall be final unless appealed by the responsible party (also referred to as the "appellant"). 
(d)  If no appeal is filed, the responsible party, within seven (7) days, following the finality of the determination of the hearing officer shall commence the repairs or improvements or removal ordered, and such work shall be completed within ninety (90) days from the commencement thereof, unless otherwise agreed to by the Community Development Department. 
f.  Appeals. Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. (Ord. No. 1366, Sec. 28, 11-17-09) 
g.  Compliance with State and Federal Regulations. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as permitting signs which violate State or Federal law, or as eliminating the necessity of full compliance with all such laws affecting erection or maintenance of signs. 
h.  Severability. All of the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed together in order to accomplish the purpose of these regulations. If any provision of this Chapter is held by a court to be unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality shall apply only to the particular facts, or if a provision is declared to be unconstitutional as applied to all facts, all of the remaining provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be fully effective. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9406—9411 - CHARTS 
The charts on the following pages provide general regulations for signs defined in Section 9402. The regulations also serve as guidelines for sign programs and zoning districts. Each class of sign has specific regulations designed for a particular use of the sign. These regulations are provided in a matrix format which identifies class of signs, type of signs, sign area, quantity, height, location, illumination and permit requirements. Additional sign regulations are contained in Sections 9403 and 9404. (See charts at end of Section 9413.) 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07) 
Editor's note— See individual charts for legislative history pertaining to said chart.  
9412 - GRAPHICS 
The graphics on the following pages illustrate various types of signs, building frontage and sign area calculations. (See graphics at end of Section 9413.) 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07)  
9413 - NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS 
No provision of this Chapter shall be construed to limit the rights of owners of signs regulated by this Chapter to display noncommercial messages on any sign authorized by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1321, Sec. 2, 4-3-07) 
9406 TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
A. Construction 	Fence, wall, freestanding or pole 	Yes 	16 	One per street frontage 	16 	Attached to construction fence, wall or ground-mounted and subject to visual clearance requirements 	No 	a. Copy limited to name, address, phone number and emergency contact information only. 
b. Sign must be installed after issuance of grading and/or building permits for the project. 
c. Sign shall be removed prior to approval for occupancy of the project. 
B. Project Identification 	Fence, wall, freestanding or pole 	Yes 	32 	One per street frontage 	6 	Attach to fence, wall or ground-mounted and subject to visual clearance requirements 	No 	a. May include information on new developments, developer, architect, contractor, or information about sale or rent of site or building. 
b. Sign allowed during construction and for a period of 180 days from issuance of first occupancy permit. 
C. Real Estate (re-sale/lease/rent) 
 1. Commercial (on-site) 	Fences, wall, freestanding or pole 	See remark b. 	a) less than 200' street frontage: 16 
b) 200' or more street frontage: 24 	One per street frontage 	a) 6 
b) 8 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	a. Copy shall pertain to the resale, re-rent, or re-lease of the property. 
b. Check with the Building Department to determine if a building permit should be obtained. 
 2. Professional/Office (on-site) 	Fence, wall, freestanding or pole 	See remark b. 	16 	One per street frontage 	6 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	a. Copy shall pertain to the resale, re-rent, or re-lease of the property. 
b. Check with the Building Department to determine if a building permit should be obtained. 
 3. Industrial (on-site) 	Fence, wall, freestanding or pole 	See remark b. 	32 	One per street frontage 	10 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	a. Copy shall pertain to the resale, re-rent, or re-lease of the property. 
b. Check with the Building Department to determine if a building permit should be obtained. 
 4. Residential—Nonornamental (on-site) 	Stake or post 	No 	6 	One per street frontage 	4 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	
 5. Residential—Ornamental (on-site) 	Stake or post 	No 	6 	One per street frontage 	7 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	
 6. Reserved 								
 7. Vacant land any district 	Fence, wall, freestanding or pole 	See remark c. 	20 	One per street frontage 	8 	To be on premises for rent, lease, or sale only 	No 	a. Site shall contain a minimum of 5 acres. 
b. Copy shall pertain to the sale, rent or lease of the property. 
Check with the Building Department to determine if a building permit is required. 
D. Off-premises commercial 	Stake 	No 	4 	A maximum of two (2) signs per commercial enterprise shall be posted per street and intersection and one (1) sign abutting any one (1) parcel. 	4 	In public right-of-way between curb line and the sidewalk subject to visual clearance requirements 	No 	a. Subject to the regulations of Section 9403e11 of this Chapter. 
b. Permitted for legitimate commercial enterprise in the City of Tustin for which business identification signs are not allowed. 
E. Special event 
 1. Private property 	Banner (see remark d.) 	Yes 	32; 100 on a building elevation of at least 1,000 square feet that faces a freeway or major arterial 	One per street frontage 	Freestanding banners not to exceed 12' from finished grade. Maximum vertical sign height of 6 feet. 	Below roof eave or top of fence of wall. Shall be securely affixed to wall or fence, and subject to all Building Department requirements 	No 	a. Subject to temporary sign regulations in Section 9403d of this Chapter. 
b. Temporary sign permit is a discretionary permit which is subject to review and approval by the Community Development Department. 
c. Permitted for nonresidential projects only. 
d. May be freestanding or building mounted. 
	Flag 	Yes 	6 	5 	12 		No 	a. Subject to the regulations in Section 9403b of this Chapter. 
b. Permitted for nonresidential projects and residential projects only in conjunction with Project ID sign (class B above). 
 2. Public events 	Banner 	Yes 	140; Maximum horizontal width of 35 feet 	One 	On designated poles only. Maximum vertical height of 4 feet. 	Within the public right-of-way. 	No 	a. Subject to the regulations in Section 9403d of this Chapter. 
b. Permitted only for events and promotions open to the public and sponsored by the City of Tustin. 
 
(Ord. No. 1483, Secs. 12—14, 4-3-18) 
9407 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS* 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
A. Building identification 	Wall, monument, or canopy 	Yes 	15 	One per project entrance 	Monument: 6 	On building wall below roof eave, on canopy, or ground-mounted and must meet visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. May be used for multifamily housing projects only. 
b. Copy to identify only the name and address of project. Project address not included in sign area. 
c. If sign includes vacancy information which is physically and aesthetically integrated into the sign, then the maximum size of such sign may be 21 square feet. 
d. Changeable copy to identify vacancies is permitted without approval of a CUP. 
B. Permanent real estate 	Wall or monument 	Yes 	6 	One per project entrance 	Monument: 6 	On building wall below roof eave, on canopy, or ground-mounted and must meet visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. Permitted for multifamily housing projects only. 
b. Copy to identify only rental information. 
c. Changeable copy to identify vacancies is permitted without approval of a CUP. 
C. Tract identification 	Wall or monument 	Yes 	32 square feet of aggregate area per entrance 	Two per project entrance 	6 	On project wall or ground-mounted and must meet visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of identifying the name of the tract only. 
 
* Also applies to Planned Community Districts where Development Plan does not establish standards. 
9408 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS* 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
A. Center identification 	Monument 	Yes 	75 	One per street frontage 	6 	In landscaped area, subject to visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. Site shall have a minimum of 200 lineal street frontage per sign. 
b. Permitted for centers only. 
c. Minimum of 25' separation from side property lines or 50' from another existing pole or monument sign on an adjacent site, whichever is less restrictive. 
d. Subject to the regulations of Section 9403 of this Chapter. 
B. Individual business identification (not located within a center) 	1. Monument 	Yes 	32 	One per street frontage 	6 	In landscaped area, subject to visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. Permitted for single-tenant sites only. 
b. Site shall have a minimum of 150 linear feet of street frontage per sign. 
c. Minimum of 25' separation from side property lines or 50' from another existing pole or monument sign on an adjacent site, whichever is less restrictive. 
d. Subject to the regulations of Section 9403i.1(h) of this Chapter. 
	2. Wall or canopy 	Yes 	Primary wall: 15% storefront area, max. of 75 sq. ft. 	One primary 		Primary: Front wall or canopy area and below roof eave. 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of business identification only. 
b. Secondary signs shall face onto a street, parking area, or service road. 
c. Maximum of one secondary sign per building face. 
d. The amount of signage permitted on the primary wall may be switched with the signage on a secondary wall provided the Community Development Department determines that the secondary wall would be more visible to a street or parking area and would not have a negative impact on surrounding land uses. 
			Secondary wall: 5% of side or rear wall area, max. of 25 sq. ft. 	Two secondary 		Secondary: Side wall or other non-primary wall and below roof eave. 	Yes 	
	3. Window 	No 	25% of window area upon which sign is located 		Height of window 	Permitted only on the window surface 	Yes 	a. Copy may include hours, address, phone number, emergency information, or special announcements. 
b. Permanent display or window lettering authorized on interior or exterior surface of window or glass door. 
C. Individual business identification (within a center) 	1. Monument 	Yes 	32 	One per business 	6 	In landscaped area adjacent to street, and subject to visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. Permitted for individual tenant located in a freestanding building within a business center having a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor area. 
b. There shall be a minimum of 100 lineal feet separating each monument sign with a center. 
c. Monument signs shall maintain a minimum 25' separation from side property lines or 50' separation from another pole or monument sign on an adjacent site, whichever is less restrictive. 
d. Subject to the regulations of Section 9403i.1(h) of this Chapter. 
	2. Wall or canopy 	Yes 	Primary wall: 15% storefront area, max. of 75 sq. ft. 	One primary 	Height of window 	Primary: front wall or canopy area below and roof eave 	Yes 	a. for the purpose of business identification only. 
Secondary signs shall face onto a street, parking area, or service road. 
c. Maximum of one secondary sign per building face. 
d. The amount of signage permitted on the primary wall may be switched with the signage on a secondary wall provided the Community Development Department determines that the secondary wall would be more visible to a street or parking area and would not have a negative impact on surrounding land uses. 
			Secondary wall: 5% of side or rear wall area, max. of 25 sq. ft. 	Two secondary 		Secondary: side wall or other non-primary wall and below roof eave 	Yes 	
	3. Arcade 	Yes 	6 	One double face 	Below arcade 	Attached to the underside of arcade, and perpendicular to storefront. 	Yes 	a. Minimum of 7-foot clearance between sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign. 
b. Permitted only for individual businesses located within a center. 
	4. Window 	No 	25% of window area upon which sign is located 		Height of window 	Permitted only on the window surface. 	Yes 	a. Copy may include hours, address, phone number, emergency information, or special announcements. 
b. Permanent display or window lettering authorized on interior or exterior surface of window or glass door. 
D. On-premises directional 	Wall or freestanding 	No 	4 	One per street access to project and one per store entrance 	Freestanding: 4 	Freestanding: Subject to visual clearance requirements. 
Wall: On building wall on 1st floor and in no case higher than 15' from ground. 	Yes 	a. Copy limited to information relating to parking, exit/entrance, directional and similar information, but in no case business or product identification. 
b. Signs shall be designed to be viewed from within the site by pedestrians and/or motorists. 
c. May provide more than 1 per entrance in order to facilitate smooth internal circulation if a deviation is granted in a Master Sign Plan. See Section 9403i.2. 
E. Tenant directory 	Monument 	Yes 	75 sq. ft.; 6 sq. ft. per tenant 	One per center 	6 	Subject to visual clearance requirements 	Yes 	a. Must be incorporated within Center Identification Sign, class A above. 
b. Tenant signs shall be of uniform size, design and background color. 
F. Gasoline Service Station Uses 
1. Business identification 	a. Monument 	Yes 	32 	One per business 	6 	In landscaped area, subject to visual requirements. Located at angle where street intersects on corner sites, or facing directly to streets on interior lots. 	Yes 	a. Pricing information shall be incorporated within business identification monument sign. 
b. Site shall have a minimum of 150 lineal feet of street frontage. 
c. On corner lots, only 1 sign is permitted and must be located at the corner of the site. 
	b. Wall or canopy 	Yes 	Primary wall: 15% storefront area, max. of 75 sq. ft. 	One primary 		Primary: Front wall or canopy area and below roof eave. 	Yes 	a. For purposes of identification only. 
b. Secondary signs shall face onto street, parking area, or service road. 
c. Maximum one secondary sign per building face. 
d. The amount of signage permitted on the primary wall may be switched with the signage on a secondary wall provided the Community Development Department determines that the secondary wall would be more visible to a street or parking area and would not have a negative impact on surrounding land uses. 
			Secondary wall: 5% of side or rear wall area, max. of 25 sq. ft. 	Two secondary 		Secondary: Side wall or other non-primary wall and below roof eave 	Yes 	
	c. Window 	No 	25% of window area upon which sign is located 		Height of window 	Permitted only on the window surface 	Yes 	Copy may include hours, address, phone number, emergency information, or special announcements. 
2. Gasoline pump information 	Wall 	No 	2 	Two per pump island elevation 	6 	Attached to pump islands only, not on top of or attached to gasoline pumps 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of providing instructions only; does not include state and federal required signs. 
b. No advertisement or products, logos, or business identification allowed. 
3. Price information 	Wall or monument 	Yes 	See remarks a. and c. 	Monument: One 
Wall: One 	See remarks a. and c. 	Visible from each adjacent street or highway 	Yes 	a. Pricing information shall be incorporated with business identification signage, Class F.1, above. 
b. Prices of all major grades sold on-premises shall be identified. 
c. Minimum 6-inch high letter size. 
 
* Also applies to Planned Community Districts where Development Plan does not establish standards. 
9409 PROFESSIONAL/OFFICE DISTRICTS* 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
A. Building or center identification 	Wall or monument 	Yes 	24 	One per street frontage 	Monument: 6 	Wall: Below roof eave. 
Monument: In landscaped area and subject to visual clearance requirements. 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of identifying the name of a building or center only. 
b. Where building is occupied by a single tenant or a major tenant, this sign may identify a business name in place of Sign B., listed below. The name on this sign shall be determined by the property owner. 
B. Tenant directory 	Wall or monument 	Yes 	75 sq. ft.; 6 sq. ft. per tenant 	One per building entrance 	6 	Wall or ground-mounted in landscaped area 	Yes 	a. Must be incorporated within center or building identification sign. 
b. Tenant signs shall be of uniform size, design and background color. 
C. Business identification 	1. Wall or canopy 	Yes 	6 square feet with a maximum horizontal width of 12 feet 	One per tenant 		On building wall or canopy on the 1st floor and in no case higher than 20 feet above the ground 	No 	a. For the purpose of business identification only. 
b. The maximum letter height of 16" is permitted. 
	2. Arcade 	Yes 	6 square feet per face 	One double-faced sign per tenant 	Below arcade 	Attached to the underside of arcade and perpendicular to storefront 	No 	Minimum of 7-foot clearance between sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign. 
D. On-premises directional 	Wall of freestanding 	Yes 	4 	One per street access to project and one per store entrance 	Freestanding: 4 	Freestanding: A minimum of 20-foot setback from property line and subject to visual clearance requirements 
Wall: On 1st floor and in no case higher than 15' above the ground 	No 	a. Copy limited to information relating to parking, exit/entrance, directional and similar topics, but in no case business or product information. 
b. Signs shall be designed to be viewed from within the site by pedestrians and/or motorists. 
c. May provide more than 1 per entrance in order to facilitate smooth internal circulation if a deviation is granted in a Master Sign Plan. See Section 9403i.2. 
 
* Also applies to Planned Community Districts where Development Plan does not establish standards. 
9410 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS* 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
A. Center identification 	Monument 	Yes 	75 	One per street frontage 	6 	In landscaped area and shall meet visual clearance requirements 	Yes 	For the purpose of identifying the name of the center only. 
B. Business identification for individual tenants within a center 	Wall or canopy 	Yes 	12 	One per tenant 	N/A 	Wall or front of canopy, and below roof eave 	Yes 	a. Signs for the purpose of business identification only. 
b. Sign shall face onto a street or parking area only. 
C. Individual business identification 	1. Wall 	Yes 	64 	One per street frontage 	N/A 	Front wall below roof eave 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of business identification only. 
b. For single tenant sites only. 
	2. Monument 	Yes 	32 	One per street frontage 	6 	In landscaped area and shall meet visual clearance requirements 	Yes 	a. For the purpose of business identification only. 
b. For single tenant sites only. 
D. Tenant directory 	Monument or wall 	Yes 	75 sq. ft; 6 sq. ft. per tenant 	One per center 	6 	In landscape area and shall meet visual clearance requirements 	Yes 	a. Must be incorporated within center identification sign. 
b. Tenant signs must be of uniform size, design and background color. 
 
* Also applies to Planned Community Districts where Development Plan does not establish standards. 
9411 PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS* 
Class 	Type of Sign 	Permit 
Required 	Maximum Sign Area 
(in sq. ft.) 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Height (in feet) 	Location 	Illumination Allowed 	Remarks 
All signs in this district shall be subject to a Conditional Use Permit. Must also submit a Master Sign Plan 								
 
* Also applies to Planned Community Districts where Development Plan does not establish standards. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
CHAPTER 5 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
9500 - NEED DECLARED 
Recognizing the existence of the Redevelopment Agency in the City of Tustin as established by California Health and Safety Code Section 33000, the City Council declares that there is a need for the Redevelopment Agency to function in the City of Tustin. Recognizing further the existence of a Community Development Commission in the City of Tustin as established by California Health and Safety Code Section 34110, the City Council declares that there is a need for a Community Development Commission to function in the City with respect to the Redevelopment Agency as its governing body and to exercise such other powers regarding community development that the City Council may desire to delegate to the Commission subject to such conditions as the City Council may impose. 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 1; Ord. No. 1330, Sec. 1, 2-20-07)  
9501 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY CREATED 
A.  The City Council, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 33200, declares itself to be the Tustin Redevelopment Agency, the redevelopment agency of the City, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities shall be deemed vested in the City Council as the Agency. 
B.  The City Council, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 34120, declares itself to be the Tustin Community Development Commission, the community development commission of the City and that this Commission shall be the governing body of the Redevelopment Agency of the City, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities shall be deemed vested in the City Council as the Community Development Commission. 
C.  The Tustin Community Development Commission shall not exercise the powers, duties or responsibilities of a housing authority nor shall the Commission operate and govern a housing authority unless the City Council adopts an ordinance amending this Chapter declaring the need for the Commission to function as the housing authority for the community. 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 2; Ord. No. 1330, Sec. 2, 2-20-07)  
9502 - AGENCY NAME 
The Agency created by this Chapter shall be known as the "Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency," governed by the "Tustin Community Development Commission." 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 3; Ord. No. 1330, Sec. 3, 2-20-07)  
9503 - COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES OF MEMBERS 
Members of the City Council shall receive no additional compensation for serving as members of the Community Development Commission. However, members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses, including travel, incurred in the discharge of their duties as members of the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 4; Ord. No. 857, Sec. 1, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 1330, Sec. 4, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1384, Sec. 1, 7-6-10) 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 1384, adopted July 6, 2010, provided the provisions of section 1 (amending § 9503) shall become effective September 1, 2010.  
9504 - TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF AGENCY 
The territorial limits of the Agency shall be the territorial limits of the City of Tustin. Designated survey areas for redevelopment projects shall be established by Resolution, adopted by the City Council, or in the alternative, the City Council may by Resolution authorize the City Planning Commission to designate survey areas. The Project Area shall be selected by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 33320.1 and following. 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 5)  
9505 - AGENCY POWERS AND FORM OF ACTION 
The Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency and the Tustin Community Development Commission shall be vested with all powers as provided by the Community Redevelopment Law and Part 1.7 of Division 24 of the California Health and Safety Code. The Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency and the Tustin Community Development Commission shall take actions by resolution unless otherwise specifically provided under such provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 696, Sec. 6; Ord. No. 1330, Sec. 5, 2-20-07)  
9506 - REGULAR MEETINGS 
Regular meetings of the Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each calendar month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. in the City Council Chambers, 300 Centennial Way, Tustin, California. When the regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the following day. 
(Ord. No. 1326, Sec. 5, 1-15-07)  
CHAPTER 6 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
9600 - AUTHORITY AND SCOPE. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq. All development agreements entered into after the effective date of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9601 - APPLICATION FORMS. 
The Director of Community Development shall prescribe the form of each application, notice and document provided for or required under this chapter for the preparation, processing and implementation of development agreements. The application shall include as separate documents, and/or concurrent land use actions and supporting documents by reference, the following information: 
(1)  Duration of the agreement; 
(2)  The permitted uses of the property; 
(3)  The density or intensity of use of the property; 
(4)  The maximum height and size of proposed buildings; 
(5)  Provisions for reservation of dedication of land for public purposes; 
(6)  Fiscal impact statement; 
(7)  Phasing and project completion date; 
(8)  Consistency with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. 
The Director of Community Development may require an applicant for a development agreement to submit such information and supporting data as the Director of Community Development considers necessary to process the application. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9602 - FEES 
The City Council shall establish and from time to time amend by resolution a schedule of fees imposed for the filing and processing of each application and document required by this chapter. The fee may be waived in whole or in part by the City Council. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9603 - QUALIFIED APPLICANT 
An application for a development agreement may only be filed by a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property for which a development agreement is sought or the authorized representative of such a person. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9604 - PROPOSED AGREEMENT 
Each application shall be accompanied by the development agreement proposed by the applicant. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9605 - REVIEW AND FILING OF APPLICATION 
The Community Development Department shall endorse on the application the date it is received. The Director of Community Development shall review the application and determine the additional requirements necessary to complete the agreement. He may reject the application if it is not completed in the manner required by this chapter. After receiving the required information, the Director of Community Development shall prepare a staff report. The staff report shall analyze the proposed development and shall contain a recommendation as to whether or not the development agreement proposed or in an amended form would be consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
PART 2 - NOTICES AND HEARING 
 
9606 - DUTY TO GIVE NOTICE 
The Director of Community Development shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of the development agreement and any other public hearing required by law or this chapter. Notice of intention to consider adoption of the development agreement may be given concurrently and as a part of the required public hearing notice for consideration of related land use proposals. The development agreement may include all or a part of the concurrent approved land use proposals. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9607 - PROCESSING 
The Planning Commission shall consider the proposed development agreement and make a recommendation thereon to the City Council in the manner set forth in this chapter. The Planning Commission shall forward its recommendations to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the time specified for the public hearing in the notice of intention. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9608 - NOTICE OF INTENTION 
Upon completion of the staff report required by section 9605, the Director of Community Development shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of a development agreement. The notice shall contain: 
(a)  The time and place of the public hearing. 
(b)  A general explanation of the development agreement, including a general description of the property proposed to be developed. 
(c)  Other information that the Director of Community Development considers necessary or desirable. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9609 - MANNER OF GIVING NOTICE 
All notice required by this chapter shall be given in the following manner: 
(a)  Mailing or delivery to the applicant and to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the development agreement or by publication as authorized by Section 65854.5(b) of the Government Code. 
(b)  Mailing by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request therefor with the Director of Community Development. 
(c)  Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the City. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9610 - FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE 
The failure to receive notice by any person entitled thereto by law or this chapter does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9611 - HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION 
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed development agreement at the time and place specified in the notice of intention. The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the City Council in writing. The recommendation shall include whether or not the proposed development agreement: 
(a)  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specified plan. 
(b)  Is compatible with the uses authorized in the district in which the real property is located. 
(c)  Is in conformity with the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare, and good land use practices. 
(d)  Will be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare. 
(e)  Will adversely affect the orderly development of property. 
(f)  Will have a positive fiscal impact on the City. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9612 - HEARING BY CITY COUNCIL 
After the recommendation of the Planning Commission or after the expiration of the time period specified in section 9607, the Director of Community Development shall give notice of a public hearing before the City Council in the manner provided for in sections 9608 and 9609. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9613 - DECISION BY CITY COUNCIL 
(a)  After it completes the public hearing and considers the recommendation, if any, of the Planning Commission, the City Council may accept, modify or disapprove the proposed development agreement. It may, but need not, refer the matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing back to the Planning Commission for report and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the City Council. 
(b)  The development agreement may not be approved unless the City Council finds that the development agreement is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9614 - APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT 
The development agreement shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance. Upon the adoption of the ordinance, the City shall enter into the development agreement by the execution thereof by the City Manager. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9615 - AMENDMENT AND CANCELLATION 
(a)  Either the City or the applicant or successor in interest thereto may propose an amendment or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement. 
(b)  The procedure for proposing and approving an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into a development agreement. 
(c)  Except as provided for in section 9618, the development agreement may only be amended or cancelled in whole or in part by the mutual consent of all parties to the development agreement. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9616 - RECORDATION 
(a)  No later than ten (10) days after the City enters into the development agreement, the City Clerk shall record with the County Recorder a copy of the development agreement. 
(b)  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement, or if the City terminates or modifies the agreement for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Clerk shall cause notice of such action to be recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9617 - PERIODIC REVIEW 
(a)  The City Council shall review the development agreement at least every twelve (12) months from the date the development agreement is entered into until expiration of the term of the agreement. 
(b)  The Director of Community Development shall give the applicant or successor in interest thereto at least thirty (30) days' advance notice of the time at which the City Council will review the development agreement. 
(c)  The City Council may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for a report and recommendation. 
(d)  The applicant or successor in interest thereto shall demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. 
(e)  If, as a result of such periodic review, the City Council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the City Council may commence proceedings to enforce, modify, or terminate the development agreement. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9618 - MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION 
(a)  If, upon a finding under section 9617(d), the City Council determines to proceed with modification or termination of the development agreement, the City Council shall give notice to the applicant or successor in interest thereto of its intention to do so. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The time and place of the hearing; 
(2)  A statement as to whether or not the City Council proposes to modify or terminate the development agreement; 
(3)  Any proposed modification to the development agreement; 
(4)  Other information which the City Council considers necessary to inform the applicant or successor in interest thereto of the nature of the hearing. 
(b)  At the time set for the hearing on the modification or termination, the City Council may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for further proceedings or for report and recommendation. The City Council may take such action as it deems necessary to protect the interests of the City. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
9619 - IRREGULARITY IN PROCEEDINGS 
No action, inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission as to any matter pertaining to the application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any other matters of procedure whatsoever unless after an examination of the entire record the court is of the opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. (Ord. No. 923, Sec. 1, 12-3-84)  
CHAPTER 7 - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 1465, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, repealed Ord. No. 1376 (adopted Dec. 1, 2009) from which this Chapter 7 derived. Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 1465 enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
9701 - PURPOSE 
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide for water efficient landscapes in compliance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
9702 - APPLICABILITY 
a 
Beginning January 15, 2016, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this Chapter shall apply to the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than 500 square feet, which require a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. 
2.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet, which require a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. 
3.  New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this Chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines. 
4.  For new or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcel within a project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscaped area and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (Estimated Total Water Use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of the Guidelines. 
b 
Section 9704b of the Landscape Water Use Standards of this Chapter shall apply to: 
1.  All landscaped areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and 
2.  All landscaped areas installed after January 15, 2016, to which Section 9702a is applicable. 
c 
This Chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state, or federal historical sites; 
2.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
3.  Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
9703 - IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES 
a 
Prior to installation, a Landscape Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City's Community Development Department for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Any Landscape Documentation Package submitted to the City shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines. 
b 
The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a certification by a landscape architect appropriately licensed in the State of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed landscape architect and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Guidelines. 
1.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. 
2.  Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the City. 
3.  Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a Certification of Completion in conjunction with a Certificate of Use and Occupancy or Permit Final process, as provided in the Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
9704 - LANDSCAPE WATER USE STANDARDS 
a 
For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Section 9702a of this Chapter, the Estimated Applied Water Use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) is calculated using an ETAF of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the City; as provided in the Guidelines. 
b 
Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the local agency. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
9705 - DELEGATION 
The City may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
9706 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms as used in this Chapter shall have the respective meanings as set forth except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
"Aggregate landscaped areas" pertains to the areas undergoing development as one project or for production home neighborhoods or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project, but will eventually be individually owned. 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Budget-based tiered-rate structure" means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping. 
"Community Aesthetics Evaluation" means a process that is performed to ensure the aesthetic standards of the community and irrigation efficiency intent is maintained when a permit, plan check, or design review is not required. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Estimated Applied Water Use" means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system. 
"ET adjustment factor" or "ETAF" is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. 
A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this Chapter and the Guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. 
"Guidelines" refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the City, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Chapter. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Chapter. 
"Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
"Landscaped area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Applied Water Use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape Documentation Package" means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of "landscaped area," meeting the requirements under Section 9702 of this Chapter. 
"Local agency" means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Chapter including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service, 
"Maximum Applied Water Allowance" or "MAWA" means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The Estimated Applied Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance. 
MAWA=(ETo)(0.62)[(ETAFxLA)+((1-ETAF)xSLA)]. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this Chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. The applicable threshold is 500 square feet for new landscapes which require a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. 
"Non-pervious" means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by the City for new construction or rehabilitated landscape. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Chapter are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species." Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
"Recycled water" or "reclaimed water" means treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A of the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum Applied Water Allowances. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 9702a, where the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet. 
"Smart irrigation controller" means an automatic irrigation controller utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with non-volatile memory that shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as applicable. 
"Special landscape area" means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and, where turf provides a playing surface. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system. 
"Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
(Ord. No. 1465, Sec. 2, 12-15-15)  
CHAPTER 8 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, enacted provisions pertaining to floodplain management regulations designated as Article 9, Ch. 8, herein set out. Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 1005 repealed Ord. No. 807 in its entirety; such ordinance, being uncodified, pertained to the same subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1226, adopted Feb. 7, 2000, amended Secs. 9801—9806 to read as herein set out. 
 
9801 - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE 
(a)  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65580, and 65800 conferred upon local government units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Tustin does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(b)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood areas; 
(7)  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 1319, Sec. 2, 11-6-06)  
9802 - DEFINITIONS 
[For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
"Area of special flood hazard": See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Breakaway walls" are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
(2)  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, and the placement of manufactured homes. 
"Flood or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land area from (1) the overflow of floodwaters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels suddenly caused by an unusual high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, and flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
"Floodplain management regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway". 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a) listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "basement" definition). 
(1)  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles; building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  The wet flood proofing standard in subsection 9804a(3)(e); 
(b)  The anchoring standards in subsection 9804a(1); 
(c)  The construction materials and methods standards in subsection 9804a(2); and 
(d)  The standards for utilities in subsection 9804b. 
(2)  For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by this community. 
"One hundred year flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood which has a one (1) percent annual probability or being equalled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood", which will be the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Person" means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include land installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
"Structure" means a walled or roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage' means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(i)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(ii)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 1319, Sec. 3, 11-6-06)  
9802.1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
a 
Applicability 
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the City of Tustin. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study dated January 3, 1997, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated January 3, 1997, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The study and FIRMs are on file with the City of Tustin. 
b 
Compliance 
No development shall occur without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
c 
Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
d 
Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00) 
e 
Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter and another provision of this Code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. No. 1319, Sec. 4, 11-6-06)  
9803 - ADMINISTRATION 
a 
[Development Permit Required] 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but are not limited to: plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures. The location of fill, storage of materials or drainage facilities; the following information shall be required: 
(1)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO or VO of the City's FIRM, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
(2)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  All appropriate certifications listed on Section 9804c(4) of this chapter; and 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
b 
Designation of the Floodplain Administrator 
The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
c 
Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review: 
(a)  Review all applications for development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(b)  Determine that all other required State and Federal permits have been obtained, including permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; 
(c)  Determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
(d)  Determine that the proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the area where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effects of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City. 
(2)  Whenever a watercourse is proposed to be altered or relocated, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
(a)  Notify adjacent communities, the Orange County Flood Control District and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(b)  Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(3)  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
(a)  The certification required in Section 9804a(3)(a) (floor elevations); 
(b)  The certification required in Section 9804a(3)(b) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding); 
(c)  The certification required in Section 9804a3(c) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
(d)  The certification required in Section 9804a3(d) or 9804a3(a) (wet floodproofing standard); 
(e)  The certified elevation required in Section 9804c2 (subdivision standards); 
(f)  The certification required in Section 9804e1 (flood encroachments). 
(4)  Use of other base flood data. When base flood calculation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 9802a, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer Section 9804. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption. 
(5)  Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of flood-related erosion hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 9806. 
(6)  Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 9802b herein. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00)  
9804 - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
a 
Standards of Construction. 
[In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following standards are required:] 
(1)  Anchoring 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(b)  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 9804d. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other services facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(d)  Require within Zones AH or AO of the City's FIRM, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(3)  Elevation and floodproofing. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements within Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the City's FIRM shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures shall meet the standards in Section 9804a(3)(c). Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvement in Zone AO on the City's FIRM shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures shall meet the standards in Section 9804a(3)(d). Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(c)  New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures in Zones A1-30, AE and AH shall either be elevated in conformance with Section 9804a(3)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
(i)  Shall be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and 
(ii)  Shall have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(iii)  Shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for satisfying this subsection. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(d)  New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures in Zone AO on the City's FIRM shall be elevated in compliance with Sections 9804a(3)(b) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
(i)  Shall be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(ii)  Shall have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(iii)  Shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted methods of practice for satisfying this subsection. Such certifications shall be provided by the Floodplain Administrator. 
(e)  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirements must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(f)  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 9804e. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
b 
Standards for Utilities 
(1)  The Building Official for on-site work shall require all new and replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system; for on-site work, the Building Official shall, and for off-site work the City Engineer shall, require that new and replacement sanitary sewer systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from systems into floodwaters; and 
(2)  New, or additions to, on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
c 
Standards for Subdivisions 
(1)  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(2)  All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(5)  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
d 
Standards for Manufactured Homes 
All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall: 
(1)  Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and 
(2)  Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
(a)  over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the mobile home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side; 
(b)  frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side; 
(c)  all components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
(d)  any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored. 
(3)  For new manufactured homes parks and manufactured home subdivisions, for expansions of existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions, and for existing manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions where the cost of repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of replacement value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced, and for manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision, it shall be required that: 
(a)  Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or that manufactured homes are on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above the base flood level; 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  In the instance of elevation on pilings, that: 
1.  Lots are large enough to satisfy Title 25 California Administrative Code. 
2.  Piling foundations are placed in stable soil, and reinforcement is provided for pilings. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
e 
Floodways 
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Section 9804e(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 9804. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00) 
f 
Standards for Recreational Vehicles 
(1)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions or utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(b)  Meet the permit requirements of Section 9803 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 9804d.  
9805 - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
a 
Variance Board 
(1)  The City Council of the City of Tustin shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  In passing upon variance applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
(a)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(c)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(d)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(e)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(f)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(g)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(h)  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(i)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
(j)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(3)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in Section 9805a(3) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(4)  Upon consideration of the factors of Sections 9805a(2) and 9805a(3) and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(5)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of variances actions and shall report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88) 
b 
Conditions for Variances 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(c)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the public, or conflict with existing local news or chapters. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that all provisions of section 9805b are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder, County of Orange and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00)  
9806 - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
a 
Appeal Board 
(1)  The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(2)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and shall transmit any findings of the Board of Appeal in writing to the appellant. (Ord. No. 1005, Sec. 2, 4-4-88; Ord. No. 1226, Sec. 2, 2-7-00)  
CHAPTER 9 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
9901 - PURPOSE 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to meet the requirements of State law for development of a trip reduction and travel demand element as part of the City's Congestion Management Program (hereafter referred to as CMP) and adoption and implementation of a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. 
New commercial, industrial, and mixed-use development including employment centers of one hundred (100) persons or more may adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicle emissions, deteriorating levels of service, and possibly significant additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing transportation system. In order to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions. The existence of this chapter is intended to achieve the following objectives: 
(1)  Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development; 
(2)  Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes; 
(3)  Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion, and public expenditure and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing; 
(4)  Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a countywide basis to reduce transportation demand; 
(5)  Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and/or local transportation demand management (hereafter referred to as TDM) programs. (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
9902 - SCOPE 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new or expanded projects where additional square footage will result in a total of one hundred (100) or more employees based on a total employment projection developed by the City of Tustin using the employee generation factors by type of use promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated based on the proportion of development devoted to each type of use utilizing employee generation factors by type of use promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
This chapter is not intended to supersede or replace the obligation of any property owner or business owner to comply with other TDM program requirements including those contained in and implemented by Regulation XV of the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP). (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
9903 - DEFINITIONS 
The following terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"Alternative transportation modes": Any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant motorized vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking. 
"Applicable development": Any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in section 9902 of this chapter. 
"Average vehicle ridership (AVR)": Is calculated by dividing the number of employees who report to the worksite or other work-related activity between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, by the number of vehicles driven by these employees over that five-day period. The AVR calculation requires that a five-consecutive-weekday average be used. The averaging period cannot contain a holiday. An example of calculating AVR using a weekly averaging period for an employer with three hundred (300) employees all reporting to work between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, is: 
Employees reporting to work: 
Monday 	— 	300 
Tuesday 	— 	300 
Wednesday 	— 	300 
Thursday 	— 	300 
Friday 	— 	+300 
		1,500 
 
Total number of commute motorized vehicles driven to the worksite by these employees 
Monday 	— 	270 
Tuesday 	— 	250 
Wednesday 	— 	280 
Thursday 	— 	265 
Friday 	— 	+262 
		1,327 
 
1,500 divided by 1,327 equals 1.13 AVR 
This calculation does not include any credits for telecommuting, clean fueled vehicles, or compressed workweeks. 
"Congestion management program": A State mandated plan implemented through Assembly Bill No. 1791 to promote a coordinated approach to land use and transportation decisions. 
"Developer": The builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
"Discretionary": An action regulated by one's own choice. 
"Employee": Any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite. 
"Employment Generation Factors": Factors developed for use by the jurisdiction for projecting the potential employment of any proposed development project. For purposes of this chapter employee generation factors by type of use shall be those promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
"Employer": Any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project. 
"Facility": The total of all buildings, structures and grounds that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, that comprise or are associated with an applicable development project. 
"Level of service (LOS)": A measure of the operational quality of a road or intersection ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst). As required by CMP legislation, the LOS standard for the CMP Highway System must be at "E" or at the existing LOS, whichever is further from LOS "A", for any intersection or roadway segment. 
"Mixed-use development": New development projects that combine any one of these land uses with another: residential, office, commercial, light industrial, and business park. 
"New development project": Any nonresidential project being processed after the effective date of this chapter where discretionary action by a decision-making body is required. 
"Operational programs and strategies": Implementation of a range of techniques that require ongoing monitoring that can effect actual business operations and employee behavior at the facility or worksite to encourage reduction in peak-hour vehicle trips and use of alternative transportation modes. These techniques may range from establishment of ridesharing programs to the use of parking fees, cash allowances or other incentives or disincentives. Operational programs and strategies are distinct from facility standards which encourage trip reduction through modifications in facility or worksite design. 
"Peak-period": Those hours of the business day between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday. 
"Property owner": The legal owner of the applicable development project who serves as the lessor to an employer or tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility, as appropriate, to an employer or tenant. 
"Reciprocal preferential carpools parking agreement": A document between landowners and/or tenants which the City approves. 
"Site development plan/permit": A precise plan of development that may be subject to public hearing before the Planning Commission and as more fully described in design review section 9272 of the Tustin Municipal Code. 
"Tenant": The lessee of facility space at an applicable development project who also serves as an employer. A tenant may be responsible for implementing the provisions for this ordinance as determined by the property owner. 
"Transportation demand management (TDM)": The implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle (SOV), such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak-period. 
"Trip reduction": Reducing the number of work related trips taken between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, in SOVs. 
"Worksite": A building, or grouping of buildings located within the City which is in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, and which is owned or operated by the same employer or by employers under common control. (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
9904 - FACILITY STANDARDS 
Developers of new and expanded nonresidential properties shall provide the following trip reduction support facilities within each development which the City approves: 
a 
Preferential Parking for Carpool Vehicles 
At least ten (10) percent of the employee parking spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool vehicles by marking such spaces "Carpool Only". Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool vehicles in which at least two (2) of the persons will be employees or tenants of the proposed project, or where a reciprocal preferential carpool parking agreement with other developments has been established. Such carpool spaces shall be located near the building entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the City's Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. 
For purposes of this and other sections, the factors listed below shall be used by the City to determine the number of employee parking spaces. The City recognizes the importance of reserving spaces for visitors, the handicapped and executives in preferential locations. 
  General 
 Type of Use 	Percent of Total Parking 
Devoted to Employee Parking 
Business and professional offices (excluding medical/dental) 	85 
Hospital and medical/dental offices 	70 
Commercial uses 	30 
Industrial uses 	90 
Warehousing/storage 	90 
 
b 
Bicycle Parking Facilities 
Bicycle racks or parking facilities shall be provided in a secure location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle. A bicycle parking facility or rack shall be a stationary object to which the user can lock the bicycle frame and both wheels with a user-provided cable, chain and/or lock. Said facility shall support bicycles in a stable position with no damage to wheels, frames or components. Such spaces shall be located near a building's employee entrance(s) or other high visibility locations as approved by the City. The intent of this section is to provide facilities which fulfill security and accessibility needs of bicyclists while preserving the visual appearance of a development. Parking for five (5) bicycles shall be provided for every one hundred (100) employees or fraction thereof. 
c 
Shower and Locker Facilities 
Shower and locker room facilities for employees of each sex shall be provided in each building of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more gross square feet. For any development containing one hundred thousand (100,000) or more total combined gross square feet, but which does not contain any single building of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more gross square feet, the City Planning Commission may elect, at its discretion, to approve a requirement imposed by City staff on such development to provide shower and locker room facilities. 
d 
Trip Reduction Information 
All applicable developments shall include, on site, appropriate signage and/or informational boards for the education of employees and tenants and marketing of alternate commute modes. Applicable developments shall include, in a central location accessible to all employees and tenants, a commuter information center with current transit maps, routes and schedules for public transit; ridesharing match lists; available employee incentives; and ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations. 
e 
Carpool and Vanpool Loading Areas 
The City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee shall determine the necessity for the design and location of passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers from carpool and vanpool vehicles if determined necessary. A typical passenger loading area shall be equivalent in size to one (1) percent of the required parking for the site. Such passenger loading areas shall be located as close as reasonable to the building employee entrance(s) and should be designated in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area, City streets, or fire, police and paramedic access to the applicable development. 
f 
Bus Stop Improvements 
Bus stop improvements including bus pullouts, bus pads, bus shelters and any necessary right-of-way for bus shelters, shall be required for all applicable developments located along high traffic volume streets and established bus routes where required by the City. 
Bus stop improvements shall be designed and located in accordance with local transit agency design guidelines and is subject to approval of the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee which approval shall be based on traffic engineering principles including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses; 
(2)  The level of transit ridership at the location. 
Approval from the City's Department of Community Development shall also be required for the actual architectural design of any proposed bus stop improvement or shelter. (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
9905 - TRIP REDUCTION/TDM STRATEGY PLAN AND ANNUAL REPORT 
(a)  Prior to issuance of building permits for any phase of an applicable development, the developer or property owner or their designee shall develop a trip reduction/TDM program for the entire proposed development site, including any anticipated phasing and shall submit such plan to the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. The TDM must be designed to reduce trips to achieve one and five-tenths (1.5) AVR. It is the City's objective that the planning of applicable development projects should include facility standards and a trip reduction/TDM strategy plan that is feasible and which has a reasonable expectation of having a measurable impact towards achieving the purpose of this chapter. 
The plan shall identify initial trip reduction/TDM proposed programs and strategies to achieve the AVR objectives which may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Establishment of carpool, buspool, or vanpool programs; 
(2)  Vanpool purchase incentives; 
(3)  Cash allowances, passes or other public transit subsidies and purchase incentives; 
(4)  Parking fees for SOVs; 
(5)  Full or partial parking subsidies for ridesharing vehicles; 
(6)  Preferential parking for ridesharing vehicles; 
(7)  Computerized commuter rideshare matching service; 
(8)  Guaranteed ride-home program for ridesharing; 
(9)  Alternative workweek and flex-time schedules; 
(10)  Telecommuting or work-at-home programs; 
(11)  On-site lunch rooms/cafeterias; 
(12)  On-site commercial services such as banks, restaurants and small retail; 
(13)  On-site day care facilities; 
(14)  Designation of an on-site transportation coordinator for the project. 
(b)  Single-phase development projects shall achieve TDM AVR objectives within five (5) years of issuance of any certificate of occupancy. Multi-phased projects shall achieve the objectives for each phase within three (3) years of the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  An applicant may perform the TDM programs through tenants or lessees in the project. However, agreements that tenants or lessees will so perform shall not relieve applicant or its successors of that duty to perform or require performance. 
(d)  If conditioned as part of subdivision approval of a project, recorded codes, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall include provisions to guarantee adherence to the TDM objectives and perpetual operation of the TDM program regardless of property ownership, inform all subsequent property owners of the requirements imposed herein, and identify potential consequences of nonperformance. 
Each space use agreement (i.e., lease document) shall also include TDM provisions for the site as a means to inform and commit tenants to and participate in helping specific applicable developments meet TDM performance requirements. 
e 
Annual report: 
(1)  All property owners or their designees shall submit an annual status report on the TDM program to the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee beginning a year after the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. The report shall be prepared in the form and format designated by the City which must either approve or disapprove the program within sixty (60) days. If no response is sent by the City within sixty (60) days, said report shall be deemed automatically approved. 
(2)  The TDM performance reports shall focus on ridesharing and trip reduction incentives offered by the project and shall consist of a report that: 
a  Estimates AVR levels attained; 
b.  Verifies that the plan incentives have been offered; 
c.  Describes use of those incentives offered by employers; 
d.  Evaluates why the plan did or did not work, and an explanation of why the revised plan is likely to achieve the AVR target levels; and 
e.  Lists additional incentives which can be reasonably expected to correct deficiencies. 
f.  Evaluates the feasibility and effectiveness of trip reduction/TDM program and strategies, as implemented. 
(3)  In the event that TDM objectives are not met, the City shall notify the property owner in writing of failure to comply. If the TDM performance objectives are not satisfied, the property owner shall either: 
a  Submit to the City within thirty (30) days of notification by City a list of TDM measures that will be implemented to meet the TDM objectives within one hundred eighty (180) days of written notification by the City of Tustin. At the end of the one-hundred-eighty-day period, the property owner shall submit a revised performance report to determine compliance with TDM objectives. No further measures will be necessary if the TDM objectives are met. 
b.  Should the TDM objectives not be satisfied by the end of the one-hundred-eighty-day period, the property owner(s) shall pay a TDM penalty fee to the City in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council. Said penalty fee shall be used to improve street capacity through construction of physical improvements to be selected by the City of Tustin from the list of areawide improvements identified in the City's CMP. 
Appeal of any decision regarding the trip reduction annual report/TDM may be brought forward to the City Council for appeal pursuant to appeal procedures identified in section 9906(d) and 9906(e) of this chapter. (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
9906 - ADMINISTRATION 
(a)  For the purpose of determining whether applicable developments are complying with the provisions of this chapter, the developer shall submit project compliance data/report indicating that requirements of this chapter have been implemented. City shall monitor such compliance in a manner it deems appropriate and reasonable. Monitoring mechanisms may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To verify compliance with the facility standards required under section 9904: 
a  Local procedures for design review, as appropriate; 
b.  Field-site inspections; 
c.  Other building site reports/surveys which the City of Tustin may deem appropriate. 
(2)  To monitor compliance with requirements for trip reduction/TDM programs and strategies under section 9905, the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee may: 
a  Review and approve the baseline trip reduction/TDM plan submitted per section 9905 following consultation/negotiation with the building owner or designee (employer); 
b.  Review and approve the annual reports per section 9905; 
c.  Require other reports, site surveys, or operational audits which may be deemed appropriate as determined by the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. 
(b)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the City shall initiate enforcement action(s) following written notice to the property owner or designee (employer), which may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To enforce compliance with the facility standards under section 9904: 
a  Withhold issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy; 
b.  Issue a stop work order. 
(2)  To enforce compliance with the trip reduction/TDM programs and strategies under section 9905: 
a  Withhold issuance of a building permit until the initial plan as specified in section 9905 is submitted. 
b.  Impose a penalty fee, in an amount as may be determined by resolution of the City Council if the annual report is not submitted within thirty (30) days following written notice from the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. 
c.  Impose a penalty fee, in an amount as may be determined by resolution of the City Council, if an initial trip reduction/TDM strategy plan or subsequent annual report modifications thereto are not implemented as approved by the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee. 
d.  Notification of failure to comply with or make reasonable progress toward the AVR performance standards established in section 9905 and those strategies contained in the trip reduction/TDM strategy plan when monitoring by the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee determines that such compliance or progress is not being achieved. Following such notice, the City may request modifications in the mix of operational programs and strategies under section 9905 to be implemented in order to remedy inadequate or nonperformance. If noncompliance or reasonable progress is not completed or remedied following requested modification by the City, the City may impose a performance penalty fee in an amount as determined by resolution of the City Council. 
3.  The facility standards under section 9904 and the trip reduction/TDM strategy plan under section 9905 can include provisions to guarantee perpetual compliance regardless of changes in property/ownership through recorded CC&Rs. 
(c)  For purposes of meeting its obligations under this chapter, the City may impose the following fees: 
(1)  A trip reduction/TDM strategy plan review fee at the time of initial project application. 
(2)  A subsequent annual compliance report fee at the time of each trip reduction/TDM strategy report is submitted. 
Fees shall be charged to all applicable developments for purposes of defraying the costs of processing and reviewing the trip reduction/TDM strategy plan and subsequent annual compliance reports as contained in section 9905. 
The review fee schedule shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(d)  A property owner(s) or designee(s) of any applicable development may request a variance from provisions in the facility standards contained in section 9904 upon submittal of a written request to the City Community Development Department and accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The matter shall be set for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
Written notice to the appellant of the time, date and location set for consideration of the appeal shall be provided ten (10) days prior to the hearing date upon the hearing of such appeal. The City Planning Commission may affirm, reject or modify facility standards required by this chapter. 
The property owner may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council. 
(e)  Appeal of other actions. Any decision made by the City Traffic Engineer or his/her designee regarding the provisions contained in sections 9904, 9905 and 9906(b)(1) and (b)(2) may be appealed to the planning commission upon submittal of a written request to the City of Tustin Community Development Department and accompanied by a fee in an amount to be established by resolution of City Council. The matter shall be set for consideration by the Planning Commission. 
The property owner may appeal any decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council. (Ord. No. 1062, Sec. 1, 4-15-91)  
CHAPTER 9A - HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES 
 
A9901 - PURPOSE AND FINDINGS 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards in order to control the location, design, and maintenance of hazardous waste facilities and to protect the public health, safety, general welfare, quality of life, and environment of residents. The City finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  Assembly Bill 2948, the "Tanner Bill," adopted by the California State Legislature in 1986 and modified in 1989 by Assembly Bill 19201 requires local jurisdictions to develop plans and policies for regulating hazardous waste including the management, siting and planning for future handling, disposal and treatment of hazardous waste; and 
(2)  Should the City not have developed a plan and had appropriate policies, regulations, ordinances and procedures, the City would have lost the ability to regulate the siting of hazardous waste facilities within Tustin and the State of California would have retained the right to make hazardous waste facility siting decisions and regulations for the City of Tustin; and 
(3)  The Tustin City Council has adopted resolutions approving the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and its amendment. It is important that provisions of the "Plan" are adopted into the City's General Plan so as to make siting criteria and standards consistent with the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan; and 
(4)  The provisions of this chapter incorporate State mandated criteria and recognize that hazardous waste and hazardous waste facilities are of significant regional and environmental importance requiring local cooperative efforts, specified siting criteria, environmental review and public input. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9902 - SCOPE 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the siting and development of off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage, transfer, and disposal facilities as defined in section A9903, "Definitions." 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(a)  Transportable treatment units (TTU), which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time; 
(b)  Permanent on-site hazardous waste facilities at locations where hazardous waste is produced, and which is owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste; and 
(c)  Motor waste oil reclamation on service station sites. 
This exemption shall not preclude applicable City codes which may require conditional use permits for the above identified uses. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9903 - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
"Applicant" means any person, persons, or business entities applying for a conditional use permit or other discretionary land use request concerning a hazardous waste facility. 
"Hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, toxicity, corrosiveness, mutagenicity, flammability, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
"Hazardous waste facility" means any structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land serving more than one (1) producer of hazardous waste and used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste including but not limited to: 
(1)  Incineration facility; 
(2)  Residual repository; 
(3)  Stabilization/solidification facilities; 
(4)  Recycling facilities; 
(5)  Transfer/storage facilities; 
(6)  Treatment facilities. 
"Hazardous waste incineration facility" means a facility where organic liquids and solids are burned in incinerators. The facility generally consists of primary and secondary burners, a tall smokestack, storage tanks and support buildings. 
"Hazardous waste recycling facility" means a facility for recovery of liquid organics, solvent distillation, and oil refining which is similar to a small refinery or petrochemical plant comprised of storage tanks, pipelines and distillation towers. 
"Hazardous waste stabilization/solidification facility" means a facility where liquid wastes and sludges are solidified by the use of special additives and where other wastes are encapsulated in asphalt or plastic for lengthy storage or disposal. A solidification facility resembles a large industrial building with several tall silos. 
"Hazardous waste transfer/storage facilities" means a facility which serves as a collection station for small quantities of hazardous waste which arrive by rail, automobile, and by vacuum truck, flatbed or tank trucks then combined like wastes are shipped to a treatment or recycling facility. Transfer and storage facilities are comprised of storage tanks with large open areas for truck transport. 
"Hazardous waste treatment facilities" means a facility where various heavy metals, reactive ions and organic matter are removed and the effluent is either discharged into the sewer, ponded, incinerated, converted or stabilized. A treatment facility resembles a typical municipal sewage treatment plant. 
"Health and safety assessment" means a technical and environmental evaluation of a proposed facility, site and surrounding area prior to approval of a conditional use permit. The assessment will consider the qualities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled. The assessment will include a hydraulic evaluation as well as risks due to flooding, earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. It is not intended that the health and safety assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, State or Federal regulations. 
"Immobile populations" means schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons, facilities for the mentally ill, and other similar facilities. 
"Land use decision" means a discretionary decision of the City concerning a hazardous waste facility including but not limited to a general plan amendment and/or zone change, conditional use permit, variance, tract map, parcel map, lot line adjustment, or design review. 
"Local assessment committee (LAC)" means a State required committee of locally appointed representatives, designed to negotiate with the applicants of a proposed hazardous waste facility. The membership, duties, and mission of the committee are defined by the State Health and Safety Code. 
"Notice of intent" means a pre-application submitted to both the State and the City informing the agency of the intent to apply to locate, construct or operate a hazardous waste facility within the boundaries of the City. 
"Office of permit assistance (OPA)" means the State of California Office of Permit Assistance. 
"Office of planning and research (OPR)" means the State of California Office of Planning and Research. 
"Residual repository" means a hazardous waste disposal facility specifically restricted to receiving solid materials resulting from hazardous waste treatment facilities. Such a facility may be only sited in an area meeting the geologic and other requirements of the State Water Resources Control Board. 
"Tension-saturated zone" means the zone above the groundwater interface where water completely fills the pore space, and is held there by the interaction of the size of the pore space and the surface tension of water. The thickness of the zone ranges from a few centimeters in sands to as much as thirty (30) meters in certain clays. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9904 - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
The following permits and procedures shall apply to all applications for hazardous waste facilities projects: 
a 
Permits Required 
(1)  Hazardous waste facilities shall only be permitted in the Industrial District (M) and the Planned Community Industrial District (PC-IND) subject to a conditional use permit and compliance with all requirements contained in this chapter. 
(2)  Application for hazardous waste facility shall be processed pursuant to conditional use permit procedures contained in the Tustin City Code, except as superseded by more restrictive procedures or standards contained herein. 
(3)  Any other land use decisions necessary for the project shall be processed pursuant to the Tustin City Code except as superseded by the restrictive procedures or standards contained herein. 
b 
Application Procedures 
(1)  At least ninety (90) days before filing an application for a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility project with the City of Tustin, the applicant shall file a notice of intent to file an application with the Office of Permit Assistance in the State of California Office of Planning and Research and with the City of Tustin Community Development Department. The notice of intent shall specify the location to which the notice of intent is applicable and shall contain a complete description of the nature, function, and scope of the project. The notice of intent filed with the Community Development Department shall be accompanied by a processing fee which shall be established by City Council Resolution. In addition, the applicant shall supply the City two (2) sets of mailing labels and location maps identifying all property owners within a two-thousand-foot radius of the project site. The Office of Planning and Research shall immediately notify affected State agencies of the notice of intent. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of intent, the City of Tustin shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Tustin, shall post notices at the proposed project location, and shall notify by direct mailing the owners of property within a two-thousand-foot radius of the proposed site as shown in the latest Orange County equalized assessment roll. The notification required for the notice of intent shall not eliminate the required conditional use permit public hearing notification procedures. 
(2)  An applicant may not file an application for a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility project with the City of Tustin unless the applicant has first complied with the provisions of subsection b(1) of this section. 
(3)  The City Council shall appoint a seven-member local assessment committee to advise it in considering an application for a conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility project. The members of the Local Assessment Committee may be appointed at any time after the notice of intent is filed with the City. 
The City shall charge the applicant a fee to cover the costs of establishing and convening the local assessment committee. The fee shall accompany the application for a conditional use permit. 
The Local Assessment Committee shall provide comments on the draft environmental impact report or proposed negative declaration, as appropriate. 
The City of Tustin Community Development Department shall act as contract administrator for the preparation of documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(4)  The Community Development Department shall have thirty (30) working days to determine and notify the applicant that the conditional use permit application is complete or not complete. The application shall be deemed complete when all information required in section A9905 of this chapter is submitted, when the Director of Community Development has determined that the application complies with all applicable requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, and has determined that the site conforms to the general standards and locational criteria required in section A9906 of this chapter, and when all necessary State and Federal permits regulating the facility have been obtained. 
(5)  Within ninety (90) days after a conditional use permit application is deemed complete, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a hazardous waste facility. 
(6)  Unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission's action, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be final.  
A9905 - CONTENTS OF APPLICATION 
All conditional use permit applications for a hazardous waste facility shall include the following information: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and property owner. 
(b)  Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the property involved or that the applicant has written permission of the owner to make such application. 
(c)  Three (3) sets of mailing labels and location maps identifying all property owners of record as shown on the latest County of Orange equalized assessment roll that lie within a two-thousand-foot radius of the boundary of the project site and three (3) sets of mailing labels indicating all residents, tenants, and businesses within a two-thousand-foot radius of the project site. 
(d)  All necessary information required in the City's design/zoning review application packet, including the following additional information: 
(1)  Proximity of the project to the 100-year flood-prone areas. 
(2)  Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones. 
(3)  The relationship of the proposed project to all aboveground water supplies and all known underground aquifers that might be threatened with contamination. 
(4)  A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area which provides a sufficiently deep soils analysis in order to identify known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers. 
(5)  Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be required to service the facility. 
(6)  Vicinity map which indicates, at a minimum, proximity of the project to schools, parks and other community facilities within the City of Tustin or a jurisdiction immediately adjacent to the project site. 
(7)  Identification of wastewater, treated and untreated, to be generated by the proposed facility and the method, volume, and place of final discharge. 
(8)  An analysis of visual, noise, and any odor impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures. 
(9)  An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation measure to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area. 
(10)  Identification of any rare or endangered species of plant or animals within the project site and recommended impact mitigation measures. 
(11)  Identification of the amounts (in tons), sources, and types of hazardous wastes to be treated, stored, or disposed of at the proposed facility (by a rate measurement, i.e. in days, months, etc.); the ultimate disposition of the wastes; and anticipated life of the facility including its capacity and rate of use. This information shall be based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility. 
(12)  A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program of air, soil, and groundwater. This plan shall include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the California Environmental Protection Agency (which includes the South Coast Air Quality Management District and the Regional Water Quality Control Board), the Department of Health Services, and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(13)  All applications shall contain a designation of at least two (2) reasonable alternative sites which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(14)  All applications shall be subject to environmental review (initial study) which may require that a draft environmental impact report or negative declaration be prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(15)  An emergency response plan approved by the Community Development Department that indicates at a minimum: 
a  That the proposed plan is consistent with any and all applicable County and regional emergency response plans and all City, County, State and Federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedure. 
b.  Detailed procedures to be employed at the time of emergency for each and every type of chemical substance and emergency, including contingency procedures. 
c.  Anticipated impacts on local fire, police, and medical services. 
d.  Names, home and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers of all management personnel at the facility, if known, and a detailed description of uncontrolled release and emergency situation reporting procedures. 
(16)  A risk assessment must be performed which details the maximum credible accident from the facility operations and its impact on all immobile populations in the City of Tustin or a jurisdiction immediately adjacent to the project site including as a result of prevailing wind patterns and any other probabilities requested by either the Director of Community Development, the Planning Commission or the City Council. The extent of the study must appropriately address the quantity and types of wastes that could be received at the facility. It must also include consideration of the design features and planned operational practices at the facility. Additionally, the study must provide an estimate of the distance over which the effects of a spill or emergency situation would carry, a variety of options for reducing the risks (relating to short and long term effects, ) and procedures for dealing with such spills or emergency situations. Analysis should also identify mitigation measures to reduce identified risks. Further, the risk assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility. 
(17)  All applications for a specified hazardous waste facility project shall contain a proposed public education/participation program to be employed during or prior to Planning Commission and/or City Council consideration of the application. Such plan shall be mutually agreeable to the project applicant and the Community Development Department. 
(18)  The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility project shall submit to the Community Development Department a written closure plan approved by the California Environmental Protection Agency and, if appropriate, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. All revisions to such closure plans shall also be submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval by the appropriate agencies. 
(19)  The project applicant shall fund an independent study on the facility's fiscal and socioeconomic impacts to the City including anticipated changes in employment if the facility is sited. The project applicant and the City shall agree beforehand on the scope of the study and who will conduct it. Based upon the reviewed and approved impacts, the City may impose appropriate taxes, user fees or other revenue or compensation options. The City is entitled to receive as annual revenue an amount not to exceed ten (10) percent of the annual gross revenues of the facility. 
(20)  Additional plans, drawings, calculations and environmental information and other reports that may be required by the Community Development Department as needed to fully understand the project and its anticipated impacts. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9906 - GENERAL STANDARDS AND LOCATIONAL CRITERIA 
(a)  All hazardous waste facility projects in the City of Tustin shall comply with the following general standards and criteria. Minimum standards and locational criteria described herein may be increased as necessary to protect the public health and safety pursuant to evidence established during a proposed project's environmental review. 
(1)  Proximity to populations. For a residual repository, the minimum distance from the facility to any residences or other sensitive land uses such as schools, hospitals, prisons and convalescent homes shall be two thousand (2,000) feet. 
All other hazardous waste facilities shall comply with Building Code and Fire Code setback requirements and zoning setback requirements for the zoning district in which the proposed use will be located unless a greater distance is justified pursuant to a risk assessment. 
(2)  Capability of emergency services. All facilities shall locate in areas where the Fire Department will be able to immediately respond to hazardous materials accidents, where mutual aid and immediate aid agreements are well established, and where demonstrated emergency response times are the same or better than those recommended by the Fire Department. A copy of the emergency response plan shall be transmitted to the Community Development Department for review by the Fire Department who shall determine the adequacy of the plan and the emergency response time. 
(3)  Flood hazard areas. Residual repositories are prohibited in areas within the 100-year floodplain identified on Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps, which includes areas subject to flash floods and debris flows. 
All other facilities are prohibited from locating in FEMA-identified 100-year floodplains including areas subject to flash floods and debris flows unless they are designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to prevent leakage of hazardous wastes in the event of inundation. 
(4)  Slope stability. Residuals repositories are prohibited in areas of potential rapid geologic change, as identified in the health and safety assessment. 
All other facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change unless containment structures are designed, constructed, and maintained to preclude failure as a result of such changes. 
(5)  Subsidence/liquefaction. Residuals repositories are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, as identified in the health and safety assessment. 
All other facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change unless containment structures are designed, constructed, and maintained to preclude failure as a result of such changes. 
(6)  Dam failure inundation areas. All hazardous waste management facilities shall locate outside a dam failure inundation area as indicated on Federal Emergency Management Agency maps. 
(7)  Discharge of treated effluent. Facilities generating wastewaters shall be located in areas with adequate sewer capacity to accommodate the expected wastewater discharge as determined by the City of Tustin and the County Sanitation District. If sewers are not available, the site should be evaluated for ease of connecting to a sewer or for the feasibility of treated effluent discharge directly into a stream or the ocean. Further, the facility must obtain a valid industrial wastewater discharge permit from the State Water Resources Control Board. 
(8)  Proximity to supply wells and well fields. A facility shall locate away from the cone of depression created by pumping a well or well field for ninety (90) days as determined by the Regional Water Quality Control Board and certified by a California registered civil engineering geologist. Location is preferred where the saturated zone predominantly discharges to nonpotable water without any intermediate withdrawals for public water supply. 
(9)  Depth to groundwater. Residuals repositories and facilities with subsurface storage and/or treatment must be sited, designed, and operated to ensure that hazardous materials will always be above the tension-saturated zone. At all facilities, the foundation of all containment structures at the facility must be capable of withstanding hydraulic pressure gradients to prevent failure due to settlement, compression, or uplift as certified by a California registered civil engineering geologist. 
Facilities which handle liquids shall be located where groundwater flow is in one direction with no vertical transfer of water. 
(10)  Groundwater monitoring. Residuals repositories and facilities with subsurface storage and or treatment must develop a program that successfully satisfies the California Environmental Protection Agency's Regional Water Quality Control Board permit requirements for groundwater monitoring. 
(11)  Soil permeability. Soil permeability requirements for disposal, subsurface treatment and storage facilities shall conform to those required by the California Environmental Protection Agency (specifically, the Regional Water Resources Control Board.) All other aboveground facilities shall have engineered structural design features common to similar types of industrial facilities. These features shall include spill containment and monitoring devices. 
All other facilities may be located in areas where surface materials are highly permeable (such as sand or gravel) as identified in the health and safety assessment, if approved spill containment and inspection measures are employed. 
(12)  Existing groundwater quality. Residuals repositories are allowed only where the uppermost water-bearing zone or aquifer is presently mineralized or petrified (by natural or human induced conditions) to the extent that it could not reasonably be considered for beneficial use. 
(13)  Nonattainment areas. All facilities with air emissions locating in nonattainment areas and emitting air contaminants in excess of established limits will require pre-construction review under new source review requirements, and the obtaining of a permit to construct and a permit to operate from the South Coast Air Quality Management District. 
(14)  Prevention of significant deterioration (psd) area. All facilities with air emissions locating in the region which are classified under the prevention of significant deterioration regulations as major stationary sources will be required to submit for pre-construction review and apply best available control technology as determined by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. 
(15)  Proximity to habitats of threatened and endangered species. Facilities are prohibited in habitats of threatened or endangered species, as defined in local, regional, state or federal plans or policies, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the City's satisfaction that the habitat will not be disturbed and the survival of the species will not be threatened. 
(16)  Recreation, cultural, or aesthetic areas. All facilities shall be prohibited in areas of recreation, cultural, or aesthetic value as defined by local, regional, state, and national plans or such policies as may be determined by the Tustin City Council. 
(17)  Consistency with the general plan. The proposed facility shall be consistent with all general plan requirements, zoning ordinances, and other planning actions or policies. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9907 - CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY 
a 
General 
(1)  The City may impose, as necessary, conditions and standards other than those presented in section A9906 to achieve the purposes of this chapter and to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the community. 
(2)  No hazardous waste facility shall be sited if such facility, by itself or in combination with other such facilities, will manage a volume or type of hazardous waste in excess of that generated within the City of Tustin and not currently being managed by a facility located in Tustin unless a joint powers agreement provides otherwise. 
(3)  Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous waste to be managed at the facility which were not included in the approved application for the proposed use shall be reviewed and approved by the City as an amendment to the approved conditional use permit before such modifications occur at the facility. Any amendments or requested modifications are subject to the conditional use permit approval process and notice of intent process specified herein. 
(4)  Every hazardous waste facility project must have a contingency operation plan approved by the State Department of Health Services. A copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility and sent to the local police department, fire department, hospitals, and the County Environmental Health Agency. 
(5)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall show proof that it has met all of the financial responsibility requirements imposed by any Federal, State, or local agency. 
(6)  The applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and render harmless the City of Tustin and its City Council, Commissions, Committees and all officers, employees and agents of the City against and from all claims, actions, or liabilities relating to approval of the conditional use arising out of its operations on the site. 
(7)  Owners/operators of all facilities shall prepare and submit an annual emergency response preparedness report to the Community Development Department. The applicant shall provide in such report a certification indicating said report has been reviewed, and the certification shall be initialed by each person at the facility who has emergency response responsibilities. The required contents of the report will be specified by the Community Development Department, reviewed by the local Fire Department and Hazardous Materials Response Team Units, and are subject to requested modifications. 
(8)  Owners/operators of all facilities shall submit an annual air, soil and groundwater monitoring report to the Community Development Department. The required contents of the report will be specified by the Community Development Department, the Southern California Hazardous Waste Management Authority, the State Office of Emergency Services and the State Department of Health Services. Monitoring shall be performed by other permitting agencies such as the California Environmental Protection Agency (which includes the Southern California Air Quality Management District, Air Resources Board, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, and the Department of Toxic Substances Control) and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
(9)  The facility owner/operator shall be responsible for all costs of emergency agency response to a release of hazardous wastes. If City or Regional Law Enforcement or Fire Department respond, the facility owner/operator will be billed and said bill shall be paid within thirty (30) days. 
(10)  Any storage, treatment, disposal or transportation of "extremely hazardous waste," as defined in the State Health and Safety Code, by the facility owner/operator shall be reported prior to action to the Community Development Department, Orange County Fire Department and Tustin Police Department. 
b 
Safety and Security Conditions of Approval 
(1)  The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons, livestock, or wild animals onto any portion of the facility. 
(2)  The operator shall provide a twenty-four-hour surveillance system which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility. 
(3)  Perimeter fencing shall be constructed of a material and at a height specified by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  Signs with the legend "DANGER HAZARDOUS WASTE AREA—UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL KEEP OUT", shall be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at other appropriate locations. The legend shall be written in English and Spanish and shall be legible from a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
c 
Monitoring Conditions of Approval 
(1)  Upon reasonable notice, and for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions, and other requirements which the City of Tustin is authorized to enforce under its police power, City officials or their designated representatives may enter the premises on which a hazardous waste facility permit has been granted. 
(2)  The owner or operator of a facility shall report quarterly to the Community Development Department the amount, type, and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. Included in the report will be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous wastes and include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and elevation) of quantities and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on-site. The report is to be developed by the owner or operator of a facility and approved by the Community Development Department. 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of any complaint pertaining to facility operations, the owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility shall immediately send copies of the complaints received and copies of all inspection reports made by other local, State or Federal agencies to the Director of Community Development. 
(4)  The emergency response plan shall be reviewed and updated as required annually, signed by all management personnel at the facility, and distributed to all local emergency response agencies and the Director of Community Development. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9908 - LAND USE DECISION 
a 
Authority 
Applications for a conditional use permit to allow the siting of a hazardous waste facility within the City shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission after a public hearing. The City Council has the authority to appeal any decision of the Planning Commission and to revoke, uphold, or amend the decision of the Planning Commission in the event of appeal pursuant to section A9909. Lacking such an appeal, the Planning Commission's decision is final. 
b 
Findings 
(1)  In addition to these general findings necessary for granting a conditional use permit contained in the City Code, the following findings shall be made by the Planning Commission prior to granting a conditional use permit to allow the siting of a hazardous waste facility project. 
(a)  The project shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(b)  The project site is or will be served by roads and other public or private service facilities. 
(c)  The project has met or exceeded each requirement of this chapter. 
(d)  The environmental impacts identified in the environmental impact report or negative declaration have been adequately mitigated. 
c 
Length of Conditional Use Permit 
(1)  Any conditional use permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void if the project applicant does not commence substantial construction of the facility within one (1) year from the date of the approval of said facility. 
(2)  The Planning Commission or City Council shall place a maximum time limit on any conditional use permit for a hazardous waste facility which in any event shall not exceed ten (10) years. In order to continue to operate the hazardous waste facility after the time limit has expired, the applicant shall reapply for a conditional use permit and shall be subject to the same process as the original application. 
(3)  Applications for any time extensions of the time limit contained in section A9908c(1) shall be filed prior to the expiration date and shall be subject to the same public hearing process as the original application. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
A9909 - APPEAL OF DECISION 
(a)  Any action of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  The final land use decision made by the City Council may be appealed to the Governor's Appeals Board within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code. Procedures for filing an appeal are outlined in the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. No. 1086, Sec. 4, 6-1-92)  
CHAPTER 9B - VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM  
PART 1 - GENERAL 
 
B9911 - PURPOSE. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to enhance the public welfare by establishing policies which require the development of housing affordable to households of extremely low, very low, low, and moderate incomes, help meet the needs of the City's local workforce, help meet the City's regional share of housing needs, and implement the goals and objectives of the Tustin General Plan Housing Element, through the development of voluntary workforce housing incentive program units within new residential developments when a developer makes the voluntary election to request the benefit of Residential Allocation Reservations (RARs) pursuant to a Specific Plan. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9912 - DEFINITIONS. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this Chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this Section: 
"Affordable housing cost" means the housing cost for dwelling units as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 for owner-occupied housing and the affordable rent for rental units as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50053, as applicable. 
"Applicant" or "developer" means a person, persons, or entity that applies for a residential project and also includes the owner or owners of the property if the applicant does not own the property on which development is proposed. 
"Base units" means the total number of units in a residential project obtained via a Residential Allocation Reservation pursuant to a Specific Plan, excluding any density bonus units. 
"Density bonus units" means dwelling units approved in a residential development calculated by applying the formulas set forth in California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. and Tustin City Code Section 9111 et seq. to the base units as permitted pursuant to any existing or future-adopted Specific Plan, that are in excess of the base units and maximum residential density otherwise permitted by the applicable Specific Plan, the City of Tustin General Plan, and Tustin City Code. 
"Development approval" means a tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, development agreement, or any other discretionary permit. 
"Extremely low-income household" shall have the definition given in California Health and Safety Code Section 50106. 
"For-sale" means and refers to any dwelling unit, including a condominium, stock cooperative, community apartment, or attached or detached single family home, for which a parcel or tentative and final map is required for the lawful subdivision of the parcel upon which the dwelling unit is located or for the creation of the unit in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), or any residential development including such for-sale dwelling units. 
"Low income household" shall have the definition given in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5. 
"Market rate unit" means a new dwelling unit in a residential project that is not a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit as defined by Section B9912 of this Chapter. 
"Mixed use residential development" means any development that combines residential land uses with office, commercial, light industrial, or business park land uses. 
"Moderate income household" shall have the definition given in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093(b). 
"Residential area" means the area of base units within a residential project made available for occupancy and use as a dwelling unit, including private open space and excluding common open space. 
"Rental" means and refers to a dwelling unit that is not a for-sale dwelling unit, and does not include any dwelling unit, whether offered for rental or sale, that may be sold as a result of the lawful subdivision of the parcel upon which the dwelling unit is located or creation of the unit in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (California Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), or any residential development including such rental dwelling units. 
"Residential project" means any residential development, including any mixed use residential development, requiring a development approval for which an application has been submitted to the City for a project that will utilize a Residential Allocation Reservation. 
"Residential Allocation Reservation" means the process described in any existing or future-adopted Specific Play by which residential units are allocated by the City to a residential project. 
"Very low-income household" means a household earning no more than the amount defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 50105. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement" means an agreement in conformance with Section B9932 of this Chapter between the City and an applicant, governing how the applicant shall comply with this Chapter. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund" means the fund created by the City in which all fees collected in compliance with this Chapter shall be deposited pursuant to Section B9929 of this Chapter. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines" means the requirements for implementation and administration of this Chapter as may be promulgated by the City Manager pursuant to Section B9942 of this Chapter. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee" means a fee payable per base unit or per square foot of residential area, as may be established by resolution of the City Council, and as specified by this Chapter, payable to the City prior to the issuance of a building permit for the residential project, unless the timing of payment is otherwise specified in an approved voluntary workforce housing incentive agreement pursuant to Section B9932 of this Chapter, or the conditions of approval for the residential project. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan" means a plan containing all of the information specified in and submitted in conformance with Section B9932 of this Chapter specifying the manner in which workforce housing units will be provided in conformance with this Chapter and the workforce housing incentive guidelines, and consistent with the City of Tustin General Plan and Article 9 of the Tustin City Code. 
"Voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit" means a dwelling unit required by this Chapter to be affordable to very low, low, or moderate-income households. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
PART 2 - APPLICABILITY AND VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM UNIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
B9921 - APPLICABILITY. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all residential projects, as defined in Section B9912 of this Chapter, except for any residential project exempt under Section B9922 of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9922 - EXEMPTIONS. 
This Chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  Applications for a development approval that include a residential project for which an application has been deemed complete prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(b)  A residential project that is the subject of a development agreement under applicable provisions of the California Government Code that expressly provide for an exclusion to this Chapter or provide for a different amount of voluntary workforce housing incentive program units from that specified by this Chapter, provided the development agreement was executed by the City prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(c)  A residential project for which a housing incentive agreement has been approved pursuant to Section 9142 of Article 9, Chapter 1, Part 4 of this Code, provided that the housing incentive agreement is effective prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, and there is no uncured breach of the housing incentive agreement before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project. 
(d)  A residential project for which a development approval has been approved by the City by no later than the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. Upon expiration of any development approval, and unless otherwise exempted, the residential project shall be subject to the requirements of this Chapter, and shall not proceed until such time as a voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan is approved in conjunction with any other required development approval or amendment thereto. The exemption set forth in this Subsection shall not apply to any discretionary extension of a development approval or land use approval beyond its initial term granted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9923 - VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM UNIT REQUIREMENTS. 
All new residential projects, as defined in Section B9912 and as specified in Section B9921, shall include voluntary workforce housing incentive program units. Calculations of the number of voluntary workforce housing incentive program units required by this Section shall be based on the number of base units in the residential project. 
(a)  On-site voluntary workforce housing requirement. Except as provided in Subsection (a)(3) below or when otherwise exempted from this Chapter, residential projects shall include voluntary workforce housing incentive program units upon the same site as the residential project. The number and type of voluntary workforce housing incentive program units required for the residential project shall be either: 
(1)  Fifteen percent (15%) of the base units in the residential project made available at an affordable housing cost. Of these affordable housing units, six percent (6%) shall be made available to very low-income households, four and a half percent (4.5%) shall be made available to low-income households, and four and a half percent (4.5%) shall be made available to moderate-income households; or 
(2)  Twelve and one-half percent (12.5%) of the base units in the residential project made available at an affordable housing cost. Of these affordable housing units, seven and one-half percent (7.5%) shall be made available to very low-income households, and five percent (5%) shall be made available to moderate-income households; or 
(3)  One of the following: 
a.  Five percent (5%) of base units in the residential project provided on-site or off-site, and made available to very low income households; or 
b.  Ten percent (10%) of the base units in the residential project provided on-site or off-site, and made available to low income households. 
(b)  Any residential project providing voluntary workforce housing incentive units pursuant to Subsection (a)(3) above must also pay to City a voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee calculated by either: 
(1)  Multiplying the voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee by one-half (½) the number of base units provided on-site, or one-half (½) the residential project's total square feet of residential area (as established by resolution of the City Council); or 
(2)  For residential projects where an application was received but not deemed complete on or before April 17, 2018, multiplying the voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee by one-half (½) the residential project's total square feet of residential area (as established by resolution of the City Council). 
(c)  For residential projects providing a mix of on-site voluntary workforce housing program units and paying a voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee calculated pursuant to Subsection (b) of this Section, the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit requirements of Section B9923 may be satisfied in part by payment to the City of a voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee calculated pursuant to that Subsection, provided that such fee is received by the City prior to the issuance of a building permit for the residential project, unless the timing of payment is otherwise specified in an approved voluntary workforce housing incentive agreement pursuant to Section B9932 of this Chapter, or the conditions of approval for the residential project. 
(d)  Any off-site units provided pursuant to Subsection (a)(3) above shall comply with the requirements for off-site units set forth in Section B9925(b)(1) through (b)(7). (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9924 - FRACTIONAL UNITS. 
In computing the total number of voluntary workforce housing incentive program units required in a residential project, fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9925 - OPTIONS FOR PROJECTS OF FEWER THAN 20 UNITS TO SATISFY VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS. 
Subsections (a) through (d) of this Section B9925 shall apply only to residential projects of fewer than twenty (20) units. 
(a)  On-site units. The primary means of complying with the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit requirements of this Chapter shall be the provision of on-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program units in accordance with Section B9923. A developer of a residential project of fewer than twenty (20) units may only satisfy the requirements of this Chapter by means of an alternative to on-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program units in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this Section. 
(b)  Off-site units. For residential projects of fewer than twenty (20) units, the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit requirements of Section B9923 may be satisfied, in whole or in part, by the construction of new voluntary workforce housing incentive program units, or the conversion of existing market rate units to voluntary workforce housing incentive program units, offsite within the City's jurisdictional boundary. All workforce housing incentive program units developed off-site of the residential project in accordance with this Subsection shall comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The off-site location has a general plan designation that authorizes residential uses and is zoned for residential development at a density to accommodate at least the number of otherwise required workforce housing incentive program units within the residential project; 
(2)  The off-site location is suitable for development of the workforce housing incentive program units in terms of configuration, physical characteristics, location, access, adjacent uses, and other relevant planning and development criteria; 
(3)  Environmental review for the off-site location has been completed for the presence of hazardous materials and geological review for the presence of geological hazards and all such hazards are or shall be mitigated to the satisfaction of the City prior to acceptance of the site by the City; 
(4)  The construction schedule for the off-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall be included in the voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan and the voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement; 
(5)  Any off-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall be constructed and made available for occupancy prior to or concurrently with the market rate residential project pursuant to Section B9927; 
(6)  Any off-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program housing units shall be substantially comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of quality of design, materials and finish; and 
(7)  Any off-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program housing units shall be substantially comparable to the market rate units included in the residential project in terms of gross floor area of habitable space and number of bedrooms per unit. 
(c)  In-lieu fee. For residential projects of fewer than twenty (20) units, the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit requirements of Section B9923 may be satisfied, in whole or in part, by payment to the City of a voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, provided that such fee is received by the City prior to the issuance of a building permit for the residential project, unless the timing of payment is otherwise specified in an approved voluntary workforce housing incentive agreement pursuant to Section B9932 of this Chapter, or the conditions of approval for the residential project. All voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fees collected under this Subsection shall be deposited in the voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund. 
(d)  Alternative option. For residential projects of fewer than twenty (20) units, the workforce housing incentive program unit requirements of Section B9923 may be satisfied, in whole or in part, by an alternative option acceptable to the City, which may include without limitation the dedication of land for affordable housing. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9926 - DENSITY BONUSES AND OTHER INCENTIVES. 
All residential projects as defined in Section B9912 and subject to the voluntary workforce housing incentive program established by this Chapter shall be eligible for the density bonuses and other incentives, and for the waivers and reductions in development standards identified by State law as set forth in Government Code Section 65915 et seq. and Tustin City Code Section 9111 et seq., so long as the residential project provides voluntary workforce housing incentive program units in accordance with this Chapter. All calculations with respect to density bonuses, other incentives, and waivers or reductions in development standards provided pursuant to this Section B9926 shall be calculated by applying the provisions of Government Code Section 65915 to the proposed base units of the residential project. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9927 - STANDARDS. 
(a)  Location within the residential project. All voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall be: 
(1)  Reasonably dispersed throughout the residential project; 
(2)  Proportional, in number of bedrooms, gross floor area of habitable space, and location, to the market rate units; 
(3)  Comparable to the market rate units in terms of quality of design, materials, finish and appearance; 
(4)  Permitted the same access to community amenities and recreational facilities, as the market rate units; and 
(5)  Provided functionally equivalent parking when parking is offered to the market rate units. 
(b)  Timing of construction. All voluntary workforce housing incentive program units in a residential project shall be constructed and made available for occupancy prior to or concurrently with the market rate units. If the City approves a phased project, a proportional share of the required voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall be provided within each phase of the residential project. 
(c)  General Prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall sell or rent a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit at a price or rent in excess of the maximum amount allowed by any restriction placed on the unit in accordance with this Chapter. 
(2)  No person shall sell or rent a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit to a person or persons that do not meet the income restrictions placed on the unit in accordance with this Chapter. 
(3)  No person shall provide false or materially incomplete information to the City or to a seller or lessor of a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit to obtain occupancy of housing for which the person is not eligible. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9928 - VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM FUND. 
(a)  All monies collected pursuant to this Chapter, including all voluntary workforce housing incentive program in-lieu fees, shall be deposited into a separate account to be designated as the City of Tustin voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund. 
(b)  The monies in the voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund shall be expended exclusively to provide housing affordable to extremely low, very low, low, and moderate-income households in the City of Tustin, and administration and compliance monitoring of the voluntary workforce housing incentive program. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
PART 3 - CONTINUING AFFORDABILITY 
 
B9931 - CONTINUING AFFORDABILITY. 
(a)  Execution and recording of documents. The Director of Economic Development or designee may require execution and recording of documents necessary to ensure enforcement of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, promissory notes, deeds of trust, resale restrictions, rights of first refusal, options to purchase, and/or other documents, which shall be recorded against the residential project, all voluntary workforce housing incentive program units, and any site subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Affordability documents for for-sale owner-occupied voluntary workforce housing incentive program units may also include subordinate shared appreciation documents permitting the City to capture at resale the difference between the market rate value of the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit and the affordable housing cost, plus a share of appreciation realized from an unrestricted sale in such amounts as deemed necessary by the City to replace the voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit. 
(b)  Affordability periods. All voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall remain affordable to the targeted income groups for no less than the time periods set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 33413(c)(1) and (2), as may be amended. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required by law, all promissory note repayments, shared appreciation payments, or other payments collected under this Section shall be deposited in the voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund. 
(d)  Any household that occupies a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit must occupy that unit as its principal residence, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Director of Economic Development or his or her designee for rental to a third party for a limited period of time due to household hardship, as specified in the voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines. 
(e)  No household may begin occupancy of a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit until the household has been determined to be eligible to occupy that unit. Rental voluntary workforce housing incentive program units shall continue to be rented to income eligible households at an affordable housing cost for the entire term of the voluntary workforce housing incentive program restriction. The voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines shall establish standards for determining household income, maximum occupancy, affordable housing cost, provisions for continued monitoring of tenant eligibility, and other eligibility criteria. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9932 - VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM PLAN AND VOLUNTARY WORKFORCE HOUSING INCENTIVE PROGRAM AGREEMENT. 
(a)  Voluntary Workforce Housing Incentive Program Plan. The developer shall submit a voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan in a form specified by the Director of Community Development or designee and consistent with this Chapter, detailing how the provisions of this Chapter will be implemented for the proposed residential project. The voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan and its supportive documents, plans, and details shall be submitted at the same time as the development approval application materials for the residential project. Upon submittal, the Director shall determine if the voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan is complete and conforms to the provisions of this Chapter and, if applicable, the voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines. No project approval shall be issued for a residential project subject to this Chapter until a voluntary workforce housing incentive program plan has been approved as compliant with this Chapter. Any person may appeal any decision of the Director of Community Development in accordance with Section 9294 of this Code. 
(b)  Voluntary Workforce Housing Incentive Program Agreement. Where the workforce housing incentive program requirements of this Chapter will be satisfied through the provision of on-site or off-site voluntary workforce housing incentive program units, prior to the approval of any final or parcel map or issuance of any building permit for a residential project subject to this Chapter, the City and Developer shall execute and cause to be recorded a voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement containing those provisions necessary to ensure the requirements of this Chapter are satisfied. The voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement shall be recorded against the entire residential project property and any other property used for the purposes of providing voluntary workforce housing pursuant to this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
PART 4 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
B9941 - MONITORING OF COMPLIANCE. 
The voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines may, and each voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement shall, include provisions for the monitoring by the City of each residential project and each voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit for compliance with the terms of this Chapter, the voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines, and the applicable voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement. Such provisions shall require annual compliance reports to be submitted to the City by the owner and the City shall conduct periodic on-site audits to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, policies, and agreements. The developer and voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit owners or tenants are required to cooperate with the City in promptly providing all information requested by the City in monitoring compliance with program requirements. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9942 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES. 
The City Manager may promulgate and amend voluntary workforce housing incentive program guidelines for the implementation and administration of all aspects of this Chapter. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18)  
B9943 - ENFORCEMENT. 
(a)  Violation. Any violation of this Chapter, any development approval or entitlement issued pursuant to any provisions of this Code, or the terms of any voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement entered into pursuant to this Chapter constitutes a misdemeanor and is deemed a public nuisance. 
(b)  Forfeiture of funds. Any individual who sells a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit in violation of this Chapter shall be required to forfeit to the City any money and other consideration received for the unit in excess of the affordable housing cost at such time. Any individual who rents out a voluntary workforce housing incentive program unit in violation of this Chapter shall be required to forfeit to the City all money and other consideration received for the unit so obtained. Recovered funds shall be deposited into the voluntary workforce housing incentive program fund. 
(c)  Legal actions. The City may institute any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter, including actions: 
(1)  To disapprove, revoke, or suspend any permit, including a building permit, certificate of occupancy, development approval or discretionary approval; and 
(2)  To recover any funds or other consideration due under Section 9943(b); and 
(3)  To enforce this Chapter by means authorized by this Chapter, by the Tustin City Code, and/or by State or Federal law; and 
(4)  For injunctive relief or damages. 
(d)  Recovery of costs. In any action to enforce this Chapter, or a voluntary workforce housing incentive program agreement approved hereunder, the City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees and costs. (Ord. No. 1491, Sec. II, 9-4-18) 
