
Visalia, CA Municipal Code


CITY OF VISALIA,
CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE




Municipal Code contains 2019 S-42 Supplement, current through
Ordinance 2019-07, passed August 5, 2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapters:



1.01   CODE ADOPTION



1.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS



1.08   ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE



1.12   GENERAL PENALTY



1.13   ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES



Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION



Sections:




1.01.010   Adoption.





1.01.020   Title--Citation--Reference.





1.01.030   Reference applies to all amendments.





1.01.040   Title, chapter and section headings.





1.01.050   Reference to specific ordinances.





1.01.060   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.





1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.





1.01.080   Constitutionality.





1.01.090   References to prior code.




1.01.010   Adoption.



   There is adopted the Visalia Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and
published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 9618 § 1,
1996)



1.01.020   Title--Citation--Reference.



   This code shall be known as the Visalia Municipal Code and it shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as the Visalia Municipal Code in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding
at law or equity.  It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding
to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as
an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Visalia Municipal
Code.  References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the Visalia Municipal Code and such references shall apply to
those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code.
(Ord. 9618 § 2, 1996)



1.01.030   Reference applies to all amendments.



   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Visalia Municipal Code
or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Visalia,
California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments,
corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 9618 § 3,
1996)



1.01.040   Title, chapter and section headings.



   Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be
deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 9618
§ 4, 1996)



1.01.050   Reference to specific ordinances.



   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of
record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are
therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included
within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 9618 § 5, 1996)



1.01.060   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.



   The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 9605, passed May
6, 1996.  The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 9605, but
prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
code:  Ordinances 9604, 9607, 9608, 9609, 9610, 9611, 9612, 9613, 9614 and
9615. (Ord. 9618 § 6, 1996)



1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.



   The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance
violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive
any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and
does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or
deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 9618 § 7,
1996)



1.01.080   Constitutionality.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 9618 §
8, 1996)



1.01.090   References to prior code.



   References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and
sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 9618 § 9, 1996)



Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



1.04.010   Definitions.



1.04.020   Interpretation of language.



1.04.030   Grammatical interpretation.



1.04.040   Acts by agents.



1.04.050   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.



1.04.060   Computation of time.



1.04.070   Construction.



1.04.080   Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.



1.04.010   Definitions.



   The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the
city of Visalia, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from
the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is
specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words
or phrases:



   "City" means the city of Visalia, or the area within the territorial
limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city
has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory
provision.



   "Council" means the city council of the city of Visalia. "All its
members" or "all councilmembers" means the total number of councilmembers
holding office.



   "County" means the county of Tulare.



   "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of
the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate,
any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.



   "May" is permissive.



   "Month" means a calendar month.



   "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory.



   "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."



   "Owner" applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of such building or land.



   "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.



   "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.



   "Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after,
respectively.



   "Property" includes real and personal property.



   "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   "State" means the state of California.



   "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other
public property so designated in any law of this state.



   "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or
otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.



   "Year" means a calendar year. (Ord. 9605 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code
§ 105)



1.04.020   Interpretation of language.



   All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law
shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning.  (Ord. 9605 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 110)



1.04.030   Grammatical interpretation.



   The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the
city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:



   A.   Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.



   B.   Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural
and the plural includes the singular.



   C.   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and
the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 9605
§ 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 111)



1.04.040   Acts by agents.



   When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it
may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall
be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord.
9605 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 112)



1.04.050   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.



   Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting,
suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 9605 § 2
(part), 1996: prior code § 113)



1.04.060   Computation of time.



   Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is
required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which
case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 9605 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code §
114)



1.04.070   Construction.



   The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under
them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote
justice. (Ord. 9605 § 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 115)



1.04.080   Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.



   The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 9605
§ 2 (part), 1996: prior code § 116)



Chapter 1.08
ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE



Sections:



1.08.010   Procedure after arrest.



1.08.020   Violation of promise to appear a misdemeanor.



1.08.030   Failure to appear--Warrant for arrest--Delivery of papers to
magistrate.



1.08.040   Enforcing officers generally.



1.08.050   Citation officers.



1.08.060   Enforcing officers--Powers of deputy.



1.08.010   Procedure after arrest.



   A.   If any person is arrested for a violation of any provisions of
this code and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as is
more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state of California, the
arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in
court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged,
and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.



   B.   The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten
days after such arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be
either:



   1.   Before the judge of the justice or a municipal court judge
within the city of Visalia;



   2.   Before an officer authorized by the county of Tulare, city of
Visalia, or the city and county, to receive a deposit of bail.



   C.   The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to
the arrested person and the arrested person in order to secure release must
give his written promise to appear in the court by signing the duplicate
notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting
officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody.



   D.   1. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the
duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, the
magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his judgment, in accordance
with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code, will be reasonable and
sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the
notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815a of the
Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to
appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set.
Thereafter, at the time when the cases called for arraignment before the
magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by
counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his
discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case.



   2.   Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be
had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the County
Treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code.



   E.   No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a
person who has given such written promise to appear in court, unless and
until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear
for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and
provisions of the judgment, as required by law. (Ord. 9605 § 3, 1996: prior
code § 107)



1.08.020   Violation of promise to appear a misdemeanor.



   Any person, willfully violating his written promise to appear in court
is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which he was originally arrested. (prior code § 108)



1.08.030   Failure to appear--Warrant for arrest--Delivery of papers to
magistrate.



   A.   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and
place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as
provided in Section 853.1 of the Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and
have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days
after his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear
before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails
to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within
twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the
officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense.



   B.   When such person violates his promise to appear before an
officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall
immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense
charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the
arresting officer. (Prior code § 109)



1.08.040   Enforcing officers generally.



   The police chief and all peace officers employed by the police
department are empowered to enforce, and are charged with the duty of
enforcing, any and all provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of
the city, including the power to arrest for such violations in accordance
with the laws of the state of California, together with such other powers as
are conferred upon them by the city. The police chief may authorize employees
of the police department, excepting clerks, stenographers and others whose
duties do not fall within the scope of law enforcement services, to enforce
any and all provisions of the statutes of the state of California, of this
code, or of any other ordinance of the city where the violation of such
provision or provisions would constitute an infraction or misdemeanor,
including the power to cite for such violations in accordance with the laws
of the state of California. The chief of police may also authorize said
employees to regulate traffic at the scenes of accidents or disasters or at
such locations as may require traffic direction for orderly traffic flow, and
to remove vehicles from highways, public property, and private property, when
authorized by state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 2000-16 § 1 (part), 2000)



1.08.050   Citation officers.



   A.   Citation Officer. When in this code, or in any other ordinance
of the city, an officer or employee of the city is empowered to enforce, or
charged with the duty of enforcing, any particular provision or provisions of
this code or of any other ordinance of the city, the violation of which
provision or provisions would constitute a misdemeanor or infraction, the
officer or employee so empowered, or so charged with such duty, shall have
the authority to arrest without warrant and to issue criminal citations as
set forth in this section for the purpose of enforcing this code. Such public
officer shall be deemed a citation officer and shall have all the powers and
protection, as conferred pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5 on
public officers.



   B.   Training Requirements. Before any such officer or employee may
exercise criminal citation authority pursuant to this section, that officer
or employee must complete an enforcement training program established at the
direction of the chief of the Visalia police department. The training program
shall be designed to instruct officers and employees regarding:



   1.   The provisions of this code to be enforced;



   2.   The evidentiary prerequisites to proper prosecution for
violations thereof;



   3.   The procedural requirements of citations, including completion
of forms, processing and amendment of citation forms; and



   4.   The limitations attendant thereto.



   C.   Enforcement/Peace Officer. A peace officer is defined in Title
3, Chapter 4, Sections 830, et seq. of the California Penal Code. A peace
officer is not permitted to carry a firearm. Enforcement officers of the city
are not peace officers, other than those hired and trained by the Visalia
police department, but may exercise the powers of arrest of a peace officer
as specified in Penal Code Section 836 during the course and within the scope
of their employment if they receive a training course in the exercise of
those powers as prescribed by the Commission on Peace Officers Standards and
Training as outlined in Penal Code Section 832.



   D.   Citation Authority. Officers and employees who have completed
the prerequisite training prescribed by subsection B or C of this section
have the authority to issue administrative notice and orders, and criminal
citations for both misdemeanors and infractions, as authorized by the city
manager or his or her designee or the responsible department head or his or
her designee.



   E.   Delegation. An officer or employee designated in subsection D
of this section has the authority to appoint employees to assist in the
enforcement responsibilities. Such employees shall likewise have the
authority to issue criminal citations or administrative notice and orders
following the written confirmation by the city manager or his or her designee
or the responsible department head or his or her designee of the appointment
of such employees by the officers and employees designated in subsection D of
this section and upon completion of the training required by subsection B or
C of this section.



   F.   Notice to Appear. Citation officers vested with criminal
citation authority pursuant to this section, may, pursuant to Sections 836.5,
853.5 and 853.6 of the California Penal Code, issue a citation in the form of
a notice to appear to a person where any such citation officer has reasonable
cause to believe that the person to be issued the citation has violated a
provision of this code in the citation officer's presence, which the citation
officer had the discretionary duty to enforce, and therefore, has committed a
misdemeanor or infraction.



   G.   Release on Written Promise to Appear. A citation officer
exercising the authority pursuant to this section may release the person to
be issued a citation on his or her written promise to appear in court. The
citation officer shall under no circumstances take the person to be issued a
citation into custody.



   H.   Refusal to Sign. In the event that the person to be issued a
citation refuses to provide his or her written promise to appear in court, a
citation officer may summon a Visalia city police officer and request that
such police officer take the person into custody. If the person demands to be
taken before a magistrate, the citation officer may summon a Visalia city
police officer and request that such police officer take the person into
custody, or seek assistance of the city attorney and request that a complaint
be prepared and filed against that person.



   I.   Filing and Maintenance Files. Citation officers having a duty
to enforce the provisions of this code, and who exercise the authority to
issue a citation pursuant to this section, shall maintain a file of executed
citations issued under subsection F of this section and such citations shall
be forwarded to the city attorney's office for issuance of a complaint and
filing with the appropriate magistrate.



   J.   Issuance as Infraction. Notwithstanding that a violation of a
provision of this code which a citation officer has a duty to enforce is
declared to be a misdemeanor, the citation officer may, pursuant to Section
1.12.010(A) and (B), issue the citation as an infraction.



   K.   Additional Authority. Nothing in this section shall be
considered to limit any authority otherwise vested in the named officers and
employees, provided elsewhere in this code, or by state law. (Ord. 2000-16 §
1 (part), 2000)



1.08.060   Enforcing officers--Powers of deputy.



   Whenever a duty, right, power, privilege, or immunity is granted to, or
imposed upon a city officer or employee, the duty may be performed, or the
right, power, privilege, or immunity exercised by any subordinate or aide to
the officer or employee who has been so charged by the officer or employee,
or when the obligations of the position of the subordinate or aide charge him
with performing the duty or charge him with exercising or entitle him to
exercise the right, power, privilege, or immunity. (Ord. 2000-16 § 1 (part),
2000)



Chapter 1.12
GENERAL PENALTY



Sections:



1.12.010   General penalty.



1.12.010   General penalty.



   A.   No person shall violate any provision of this code or fail to
comply with the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city. Any
person violating any of the provisions of the code or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, unless:



   1.   Such code provision or ordinance expressly makes violation
thereof an infraction; or



   2.   The city attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an
infraction; or



   3.   The court, with the consent of the defendant, determines that
the offense is an infraction, in which event the case shall proceed as if the
defendant had been arraigned on an infraction complaint; or



   4.   The city, at its discretion, may issue an administrative notice
and order of administrative penalty in lieu of charging any violation of the
code or a city ordinance as a misdemeanor or infraction. The enforcement of
those administrative penalties shall be governed by Chapter 1.13 which
contains the administrative penalty procedure.



   B.   Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by
the code or a city ordinance, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for
violation of the code or an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the
County Jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   C.   Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of the code
or an ordinance of the city is punishable by:



   1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation;



   2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same ordinance within one year;



   3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.



   D.   In addition to criminal sanctions and other remedies set forth
above and in this code, the city may impose civil penalties pursuant to the
administrative penalty procedure outlined in Chapter 1.13, and other sections
of this code or city ordinance that permit civil penalties.



   E.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation is committed or is
permitted to be committed of any provision of the code or the ordinances of
the city. (Ord. 2000-16 § 2, 2000: Ord. 9605 §§ 4, 5, 1996: prior code §
106)



Chapter 1.13
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES



Sections:



   1.13.010   Declaration and Purpose.



   1.13.020   Adoption.



   1.13.030   Definitions.



   1.13.040   Judicial Review.



   1.13.050   Administrative Enforcement Authority.



   1.13.060   Commencement of Administrative Enforcement; Form of Order.



   1.13.070   Service of Administrative Enforcement Order.



   1.13.080   Appeal of Administrative Enforcement Order.



   1.13.090   Administrative Enforcement Order Appeal Hearing.



   1.13.100   Form and Content of Appeal Hearing Decision.



   1.13.110   Payment and Collection of the Administrative Penalty.



1.13.010   Declaration and Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter relating to administrative code enforcement
is to provide alternative remedies to address acts or omissions set forth in
Section 1.13.050.  Violations may be corrected, abated or addressed in a
number of ways.  It is the intent of this section to provide the city with
an administrative process for correcting violations, to penalize violators
for failure to comply with city codes and ordinances, and to empower the city
to abate violations that the responsible parties have failed to abate
themselves. (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 9925 § 1 (part), 2000)



1.13.020   Adoption.



   The city council of the city of Visalia hereby finds and determines
that enforcement of the Visalia Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by
the city, conditions on entitlements and terms of city agreements are matters
of local concern and serve important public purposes. The city council
further finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement
of violations of this code. The council further finds and declares that an
appropriate method for enforcement for violations of the code is an
administrative citation, civil penalty and abatement program. Consistent with
its powers as a charter city, the city of Visalia hereby adopts this
administrative enforcement procedure provision in order to achieve the
following goals:



   A.   To protect the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the
communities in the city of Visalia;



   B.   To provide for an administrative process that has objective
criteria for the imposition of penalties and abatement orders and provides
for a fair process to appeal the imposition of administrative enforcement
orders;



   C.   To provide a method to penalize responsible parties who fail or
refuse to comply with provisions of the city code, ordinances, agreements, or
conditions on entitlements in the city of Visalia;



   D.   To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to
pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system.  (Ord.
2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006; Ord. 9925 § 1 (part), 2000)



1.13.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   Administrative abatement orders. “Administrative abatement orders”
shall refer to that portion of an administrative enforcement order that
directs a responsible party to take various actions to abate a condition
created in violation of the City's Municipal Code or ordinances.



   Administrative enforcement order. “Administrative enforcement
order” shall refer to the order issued by an enforcement officer
determining that a violation of a municipal code section or other provision
as set forth in 1.13.050 has occurred, and establishing the administrative
penalty to be assessed, and setting forth the administrative abatement order,
if any, to be imposed.



   Administrative penalty guidelines.  “Administrative penalty
guidelines” are guidelines developed and maintained by each department of
city which contain sample levels of penalties for violation of the City's
Municipal Code or ordinances.



   Appeal hearing officer.  “Appeal hearing officer” means any person
appointed by the city manager to preside over the administrative hearings
provided for in this chapter.



   Calendar day.  “Calendar day” includes each and every consecutive
day of the calendar.



   City.  “City” means the city of Visalia.



   Code.  “Code” shall mean the Visalia Municipal Code.



   Enforcement officer.  “Enforcement officer” means any city
employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of
this code or any code adopted by the city.



   Final Administrative Enforcement Order. “Final Administrative
Enforcement Order” shall refer to any administrative enforcement order that
has become final either by virtue of the responsible party failing to request
an appeal hearing within the time period provided, or by virtue of a decision
by the appeal hearing officer to affirm the order.



   Penalty.  “Penalty” shall include, but not be limited to,
“civil/administrative penalty” and shall mean the amount assessed for
violation of this code pursuant to the administrative notice and order
procedure.



   Responsible party.  “Responsible party” shall refer to any natural
person, the parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years, trust, estate, receiver, cooperative, partnership, corporation,
association, business, joint venture, limited liability company, any
government agency that is not statutorily exempt, or any other entity, who
has done any act for which an administrative enforcement order may be imposed.



   Working days.  “Working days” are days which are neither Saturday,
Sunday, nor nationally observed holidays.  (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006;
Ord. 9925 § 1 (part), 2000)



1.13.040   Judicial Review.



   All final administrative enforcement orders made pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this chapter shall be subject to review only as
provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction determine that the city must
provide a judicial appeal to any final administrative order in a manner other
than set forth in Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, then it is the intent of the
city council that the administrative enforcement process remain as provided
herein and to provide that any appeal which is timely requested follow the
procedures set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4.  (Ord. 2006-15 § 2
(part), 2006; Ord. 9925 § 1 (part), 2000)



1.13.050   Administrative Enforcement Authority.



   A.   In addition to criminal sanctions, civil injunctions and other
remedies set forth in this code, the city may impose administrative penalties
and administrative abatement orders in a manner consistent with the
procedures set forth in this Chapter for any of the following acts or
omissions:



   1.   All violations of the Visalia Municipal Code;



   2.   All violations of the city charter and other codes or
ordinances adopted by the city of Visalia;



   3.   All violations of uniform codes adopted by the city of Visalia;



   4.   Failing to comply with any order issued by a commission, board,
hearing officer or examiner or other body appointed by the city council and
authorized to issue orders, including but not limited to the planning
commission and the historic preservation advisory committee;



   5.   Failing to comply with any condition imposed by any
entitlement, permit, contract or environmental document issued or approved by
the city of Visalia.



   B.   Alternative Remedy.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
city from using one or more other remedies to address violations.  When the
violation upon which the administrative enforcement order is based pertains
to building, plumbing, electrical, structural or zoning provisions, the
responsible party shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct
the violation prior to imposition of the administrative penalty, except in
those cases in which there is an immediate danger to health or safety.



   C.   Standard Administrative Penalty.  Unless a specific
administrative penalty is adopted by the City Council pursuant to the
provisions of subsection D below, the amount of the administrative penalty to
be imposed shall be:



   1.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;



   2.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same
ordinance provision within one year;



   3.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of
the same ordinance within one year.



   D.   Alternative Administrative Penalty.  In lieu of the standard
administrative penalty schedule, the department head or his/her designee
responsible for issuing an administrative penalty may establish an
administrative penalty schedule providing for an administrative penalty in
any amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation. In determining the
amount of the administrative penalty to be imposed, the department head shall
consider factors including but not limited to:



   1.   The seriousness of the violation;



   2.   The responsible party's efforts to correct the violation;



   3.   The injury/damage, if any, suffered by any member of the public;



   4.   Any instances in which the responsible party has been in
violation of the same or similar code provisions in the previous three years;



   5.   The amount of city staff time which was expended investigating
or addressing the violation;



   6.   The amount of administrative penalties which have been imposed
in similar situations;



   7.   Necessity to mitigate the damage to the community that is
caused by a particular violation; and



   8.   Any other factors which justice may require.



   The alternative administrative penalty schedule developed by the
Department Head shall be submitted to the City Council for approval by
resolution at a regularly noticed meeting. 



   Payment of any penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.



   E.   Additional Penalty Provided by Ordinance.  In addition to the
standard administrative penalty or alternative administrative penalty, an
administrative enforcement order may include an order to pay an additional
civil penalty where such additional civil penalty is provided for by
ordinance, or where an ordinance authorizes or directs a court of law to
impose such additional civil penalty, unless such additional civil penalty is
provided for within the alternative administrative penalty schedule as may be
adopted.



   F.   Establishment of Administrative Abatement Orders.  An
administrative enforcement order may direct a responsible party to abate a
public nuisance, or any other acts or omissions enumerated in Subsection A,
in accordance with any of the abatement methods set forth in the Municipal
Code or in other local, state or federal law.  If a responsible party fails
to abate a condition as specified in the administrative enforcement order,
after the order becomes final, the City may choose to abate the condition
through any of the abatement methods set forth in the Municipal Code or in
other local, state or federal law.  Nothing contained in this Section shall
be construed as limiting, prejudicing or adversely affecting the City's
ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of those proceedings as the
City deems applicable.  (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.060   Commencement of Administrative Enforcement; Form of Order.



   A.   Commencement of Administrative Enforcement.  Where the city
has determined that any responsible party has violated this code or other
provisions as set forth in Section 1.13.050, any designated enforcement
officer may commence an administrative proceeding to impose administrative
penalties or administrative abatement orders by issuing an administrative
enforcement order.



   B.   Form of Notice of Administrative Enforcement Order.  Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the enforcement officer shall
prepare a notice of administrative enforcement order in a manner in
conformance with the notice and order requirements that may be provided for
in the sections of this code that establish the violation at issue.  Unless
otherwise specified, the notice of administrative enforcement order shall
contain, at a minimum:



   1.   The name and address of the responsible party in violation. If
the administrative enforcement order results from events occurring on, or the
status or condition of, property, the order shall also contain the address of
the property;



   2.   A statement from the city official responsible for issuing the
order of the acts or conditions which violate the city code or other
provisions as set forth in Section 1.13.050 and the specific code or
provisions which have been violated;



   3.   A description of the action required to correct the violations,
if applicable;



   4.   A statement requiring the violator(s) to correct the
violation(s) within ten working days of issuance of the notice and order;



   5.   The amount of the administrative penalty the city imposes for
the violation and a statement that the penalty begins to accrue immediately
following receipt of notice of violation (either through separate prior
notice of violation or through service of the administrative enforcement
order), and will continue to accrue until the violation is corrected. The
order may provide that each day of violation following notice of violation
will be considered an additional violation for purposes of determining the
applicable fine pursuant to Section 1.13.030;



   6.   A statement that the responsible party in violation may appeal
the administrative enforcement order within ten (10) working days of the date
the notice and order is served, and a description of the method for filing
any such appeal;



   7.   A statement that at the time the appeal is filed, an appeal fee
is due and payable and a deposit of the penalty must be made, or evidence
provided that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed
with the finance division;



   8.   A statement that the appeal be made in writing, and in
compliance with the requirements of Section 1.13.080;



   9.   A statement that if the responsible party fails to request an
appeal of the imposition of the administrative order within ten (10) working
days or fails to pay the appeal fee and deposit or file a hardship waiver,
the order imposing the penalty shall be final and immediately payable or
enforceable;



   10.   A statement that any responsible party upon whom a final
administrative enforcement order has been imposed may seek review of the
order pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.4 and
1094.6. There are no appeals to city council.  (Ord. 2012-15 § 3, 2012:
Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.070   Service of Administrative Enforcement Order.



   A.   Persons Entitled to Service.  The notice of administrative
enforcement order shall be served upon the responsible party in violation. 
The failure of the city official issuing the order to serve any person
required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder
as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from any duty
or obligation imposed on him/her.



   B.   Lien/Notice.  If the violation is the result of a condition
existing on property in the city and the city proposes to impose a lien on
the property, one copy of the notice of administrative enforcement order
shall also be served on each of the following if known to the city official
issuing the order or disclosed from official public records: (a) the holder
of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; and
(b) the owner or holder of any lease of record.  The failure of the city
official issuing the order to serve any person required herein to be served
shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other persons duly
served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on
him/her.



   C.   Method of Service. Service of an administrative enforcement
order shall be effective if any one of the service methods provided for in
this Subsection C is satisfied.  Provided this section is satisfied, the
failure of any person to actually receive the notice of administrative
enforcement order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken
under this Chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided
shall be effective on the date of mailing.



   1.   Personal Service or Certified Mail.  Service of an
administrative enforcement order may be made upon all persons entitled
thereto either by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested.  Service on any owner in violation is deemed complete when it is
served at the address listed by the owner on the latest equalized assessment
roll of Tulare County, or as known to the city official issuing the order.



   2.   Service In Property-Related Offense Cases.  In the case of a
violation resulting from an event occurring on, or a condition existing on,
property, service may be accomplished either by personal service as provided
in subsection 1 above, or by either of the following alternative methods: 



      (i)   By posting the property with the administrative
enforcement order and mailing a copy of the order to the responsible party in
violation, at the address of the property on which the violation has occurred
or is occurring; or



      (ii)   Where the responsible party has a property manager or
rental agency overseeing the premises, by personally serving the notice upon
the property manager or rental agency in the manner set forth in subsection 1
above.



   3.   Substituted Service.  In the event that service cannot be
effected pursuant to subparagraphs 1 or 2 above, service may be made by
substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows:



      (i)   By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the
recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by
thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address
where the copy was left; or



      (ii)   By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual
place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and
thereafter mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address
where the copy was left.



   4.   Service on Parties Residing Out of State.  If the responsible
party resides or has his/her/its business address out of state and service
cannot be effected by certified return receipt mail, then service may be made
by first-class mail.



   5.   Service by Publication.  If the responsible party in violation
or other person entitled to service cannot be located or service cannot be
effected as otherwise set forth in this section, service may be made by
publication in a Visalia newspaper of general circulation which is most
likely to give actual notice to the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient
when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6063, i.e. once a
week for three successive weeks in a newspaper regularly published once a
week or oftener, with at least five calendar days intervening between the
respective publication dates not counting such publication dates.  (Ord.
2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.080   Appeal of Administrative Enforcement Order.



   A.   Request for Appeal.  Any responsible party against whom an
administrative enforcement order has been imposed may appeal the imposition
of the order by filing a written notice of request for appeal by the methods
set forth in the administrative enforcement order within ten (10) calendar
days of service of the notice of administrative enforcement order.  If no
request for appeal is filed with the office of community development within
ten (10) calendar days of service, appeal rights shall be deemed waived and
the administrative enforcement order shall become final.  The written appeal
request shall contain:



   1.   A brief statement setting forth the interest the appealing
party has in the matter relating to the imposition of the penalty;



   2.   A brief statement, in ordinary and concise language, of the
material facts which the appellant claims support his/her/its contention that
no administrative penalty should be imposed or that an administrative penalty
of a different amount is warranted; and



   3.   An address at which the appellant agrees notice of any
additional proceeding or an order relating to the imposition of the
administrative penalty may be received by first class mail.



   B.   Payment of Appeal Fee.  Any responsible party seeking to
appeal the imposition of an administrative penalty shall be required to pay
to the city clerk or designee, at the time the appeal is requested, a
nonrefundable appeal fee.  The amount of the appeal fee may be increased or
decreased by resolution of the City Council.  Absent such resolution, the
appeal fee shall be $100.  The appeal fee is intended to cover the costs,
expenses and city employees' time incurred by the city in processing,
preparation for, and hearing of the appeal.  No appeal request is valid
unless accompanied by the appeal fee, unless otherwise waived pursuant to
subsection D. below.  In the event an appeal fee is waived and the
administrative enforcement order is upheld, the appeal fee shall be added to
the penalty due.  In the event the appeal fee is paid and the administrative
enforcement order is not upheld, the appeal fee shall be returned together
with any fines that have been deposited in advance.



   C.   Advance Deposit of Fine.  Any responsible party seeking to
appeal the imposition of an administrative penalty shall be required to pay
the city clerk or designee, at the time the appeal is lodged, a deposit of
the fine assessed in the administrative penalty notice and order. If the
responsible party is unable to make the required deposit, the responsible
party shall provide evidence that a request for an advance deposit hardship
waiver has been filed pursuant to subsection D. below.



   D.   Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver.  Any responsible party who is
financially unable to pay the appeal fee or make the advance deposit of the
full amount of the fine as required in subsections B. and C. above, and who
intends to appeal the administrative enforcement order, may file a request
for an advance deposit hardship waiver to waive all or part of the advance
deposit and appeal fee.  A request for advance deposit hardship waiver must
be filed with the city clerk or designee on an advance deposit hardship
waiver application form available from the city clerk within ten working days
of the date of the administrative penalty notice and order and must include a
sworn declaration and any other supporting documents or materials showing the
responsible party's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of
the fine in advance of the hearing. The responsible party bears the burden of
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city clerk or designee the
responsible party's actual inability to deposit the full amount of the fine
in advance of the hearing.    If the city clerk or designee determines not
to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the responsible party shall
remit the advance deposit of the advance deposit amount and the appeal fee to
the city within ten working days. Failure to timely remit the advance deposit
and appeal fee shall terminate the request for an appeal and the amount of
the fine shall become immediately due and payable.  The requirement of
depositing the full amount of the fine and the appeal fee as required by
Section 1.13.062(C) shall be stayed while the city clerk or his or her
designee makes a determination whether to issue the advance deposit hardship
waiver. (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.090   Administrative Enforcement Order Appeal Hearing.



   A.   Hearing Officer.  All appeals of an administrative enforcement
order shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager or
his or her designee to hear administrative appeals. The hearing officer shall
not be a city employee.



   B.   Setting Administrative Enforcement Order Appeal Hearing. The
administrative enforcement order appeal hearing shall be set by the city
clerk or designee, and notice of the appeal hearing shall be sent to the
appellant by first class mail at the address provided with the written appeal
request.  The administrative penalty hearing shall be set for an appeal
hearing no sooner than twenty (20) working days following a request for an
appeal hearing. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be mailed at least fifteen
(15) working days before the date set for the hearing.



   C.   Failure to Attend Hearing.  Failure of the violator(s) and/or
any responsible party having a legal interest in the property to attend the
administrative enforcement order appeal hearing shall constitute a waiver of
rights to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order
or any portion thereof.



   D.   Rules Applicable to Conduct of the Administrative Enforcement
Order Appeal Hearing.  The following rules shall govern the conduct of the
administrative enforcement order appeal hearing.



   1.   Testimony at the Hearing. At the time set for the
administrative enforcement order appeal hearing the hearing officer shall
proceed to hear testimony from the representative of the city, the appellant
and any other competent persons with respect to imposition of an
administrative penalty.



   2.   Record of Oral Evidence at Hearing. The proceedings at the
hearing shall be reported by a tape recorder. Either party may provide a
certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings at the
requesting party's own expense.



   3.   Continuances. The hearing officer may, upon request of the
responsible party against whom a penalty is to be imposed, or upon request of
the city, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon
his/her own motion.



   4.   Oaths -- Certification. The hearing officer or certified
shorthand reporter shall administer the oath or affirmation.



   5.   Evidence Rules. Government Code Section 11513, subsections (a),
(b) and (c), as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance adopting
these provisions, or as hereafter amended, shall apply to all administrative
penalty hearings.



   6.   Rights of Parties.  Parties may represent themselves, or be
represented by an attorney licensed to practice in the State of California. 
A party may be represented by a non-attorney representative so long as the
party executes a notarized consent to said representation, and submits same
to the City prior to the administrative hearing.  If a party does not
proficiently speak or understand the English language, he/she may provide an
interpreter, at that party's own cost, to translate for the party.  An
interpreter shall not have had any personal involvement in the issues of the
case prior to the hearing.  The City may be represented by the City Attorney.



   7.   Official Notice.  In reaching a decision, official notice may
be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any
fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which may
appear in any of the official records of the city or county, or any of their
departments.



   8.   Subpoenas. The hearing officer shall have the authority to
issue subpoenas for orders to appear and produce testimony or subpoenas duces
tecum for orders to produce documents, or shall issue a subpoena upon a
showing of reasonable necessity by the requesting party, in accordance with
the requirements and conditions of Article 11 of Chapter 4.5 of Part of
Division 3 of the California Government Code.  Failure to comply with any
subpoena may be considered by the hearing officer in making his/her decision
regarding the imposition of administrative penalties.



   9.   Inspection of Premises.  In the case of a violation related to
property in the city, the hearing officer may inspect the building and
premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing,
provided that:



      (i)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties
before the inspection is made; and



      (ii)   The parties consent, and are given an opportunity to be
present during the inspection.  Upon completion of an inspection, the
hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a
written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, the
material facts observed and the conclusion drawn therefrom.  Each party
shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing
officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written
statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record. 
Inspections may be made without notice to the responsible parties if the
property can be inspected from areas to which the general public has
access.  (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.100   Form and Content of Appeal Hearing Decision.



   A.   Factors in Hearing Officer's Decision. The hearing officer may
affirm the administrative enforcement order imposed by the city, reduce the
penalty, amend the abatement order, or find that the imposition of the
penalty or abatement order is not warranted or is not in the interest of
justice and vacate the order. In making his/her decision regarding the
administrative enforcement order, the hearing officer shall consider evidence
presented by all witnesses, the seriousness of the violation, the responsible
party's efforts to correct the violation, the injury or damage, if any,
suffered by any member of the public, any instances in which the responsible
party has been in violation of the same or similar code provisions in the
previous three years, and the amount of city staff time which was expended
investigating and addressing the violation.



   B.   Format for Hearing Officer's Decision. A statement of decision
of the administrative enforcement order appeal hearing officer shall be
issued within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing. The statement of
decision shall be in writing, and shall contain a statement of the
determination as to whether the administrative enforcement order is affirmed,
amended or vacated, and the findings of fact supporting the determination. 
In addition, if the determination is to uphold or amend the administrative
enforcement order, the statement decision must contain the following items:



   1.   A statement indicating the administrative enforcement order is
now a final administrative enforcement order and that any appeal of the
hearing officer's decision must be filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5
and 1094.6.



   2.   If an advance deposit hardship waiver has been granted pursuant
to VMC 1.13.062(D), a statement advising the responsible party that if the
administrative penalty and appeal fee are not paid within the time specified,
they shall be made a personal obligation of the owner, may be made a lien
against the property owned by the responsible party against whom the penalty
was imposed, and may be collected by special assessment.



   3.   In the case of an administrative abatement order, a statement
that if the action identified is not taken within the time indicated, the
City may perform the abatement itself, and the costs of the City's abatement
shall be added to the penalty.



   C.   Service of the Hearing Officer's Decision.  Upon issuance of
the decision, the city shall serve a copy on the appellant by first class
mail to the address provided by appellant in the written notice of appeal.
The hearing officer's decision shall be deemed served two calendar days after
the date it is mailed to the address provided by the appellant.



   D.   Appeal of the Hearing Officer's Decision.  Any administrative
penalty imposed against a responsible party pursuant to this chapter must be
appealed in the manner and within the time provided in California Code of
Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.



   E.   Payment.  Any responsible party against whom an administrative
penalty has been imposed who was granted an Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver
pursuant to Section 1.13.060(D)(4) shall pay the administrative penalty to
the city within twenty-five (25) calendar days of a final order or decision
of the hearing officer. Any deposit made by responsible party pursuant to
Section 1.13.060(D)(3) shall be applied toward the payment of the
administrative penalty imposed by the hearing officer. Any deposit in excess
of the amount imposed by the hearing officer shall be refunded to responsible
party within a reasonable time. (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



1.13.110   Payment and Collection of the Administrative Penalty.



   A.   The city may take the actions set forth in this section to
collect any unpaid penalty. The failure of any person to pay any penalty
assessed by administrative order within the time specified on the
administrative order shall result in the assessment of an additional late fee
to be charged. The amount of the late fee shall be ten percent of the total
amount of the civil penalty due and owing. An administrative penalty shall
accrue interest at the same annual rate as any civil judgment. Interest shall
accrue commencing on the 26th day following service of the hearing officer's
decision.



   B.   Civil Action.  The City may commence a civil action or small
claims court action to collect the administrative penalty, and in such event,
the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees and all
costs associated with collection of the penalty. Costs include, but are not
limited to, staff time incurred in the collection of the penalty and those
set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5.



   C.   Lien.  The amount of the unpaid administrative penalty, plus
late charge, plus interest, plus any other costs as provided in this chapter,
may be declared a lien on any real property owned by the responsible party
within the city of Visalia against whom an administrative penalty has been
imposed.  Notice shall be given to the responsible party prior to the
recordation of the lien, and shall be served in the same manner as a summons
in a civil action pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of
Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  The lien
shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing
delinquent unpaid administrative penalties with the Tulare County Recorder's
Office. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of the code
violation(s), the date of the final administrative decision, the street
address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on
which the lien is imposed, and the name and  address of the record owner of
the parcel  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or
satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge
containing the information specified in this section shall be recorded by the
city clerk or designee.



   D.   Special Assessment.  The amount of the unpaid administrative
penalty, plus late charges, plus interest, plus any other costs as provided
in this chapter, may be declared a special assessment against any real
property owned by the responsible party within the city of Visalia against
whom an administrative penalty has been imposed.  The city council may
impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of
the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative
violation.  The city manager or his/her designee may present a resolution to
the city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and
adoption thereof shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the
Tulare County recorder's office. The assessment may then be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected,
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes or, after
recording, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner
and means provided by law.



   E.   Withholding Future Entitlements.  The city may withhold
issuance of licenses, permits and other future entitlements to a responsible
party or any project, property, or application of any kind whenever any
administrative penalty remains unpaid.



   F.   Other Enforcement Procedures. The city may take such other
actions as are allowed for enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for
pursuant to the enforcement of judgment law, Sections 680.010, et. seq. of
the California Code of Civil Procedure.  (Ord. 2006-15 § 2 (part), 2006)



Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL



Chapters:



2.04   CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY



2.08   CONFLICT OF INTEREST



2.10   VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURES LIMITS FOR CANDIDATES SEEKING ELECTIVE OFFICE



2.12   PARK, PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION COMMISSION



2.16   PLANNING COMMISSION



2.20   RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD



2.24   COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



2.28   CIVIL DEFENSE



2.32   TULARE OPERATION AREA EMERGENCY SERVICES



2.36   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY



2.40   EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



2.46   SALE AND TRANSFER OF VISALIA POLICE DEPARTMENT FIREARMS AND BADGES



Chapter 2.04
CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY



Sections:



2.04.010   Offices created.



2.04.020   Appointment of officers.



2.04.030   Assistant/deputy city manager.



2.04.040   Appointment by city manager.



2.04.050   Duties of officers.



2.04.060   Titles of officers.



2.04.070   Change in office title.



2.04.080   Compensation for council members.



2.04.010   Offices created.



   The following offices of the city are created:



   A.   Assistant/deputy city manager;



   B.   Public works director;



   C.   Fire chief;



   D.   Police chief;



   E.   Administrative services director;



   F.   Chief financial officer/treasurer;



   G.   Community and human services director. (Ord. 9605 § 6 (part),
1996:  prior code § 1000)



2.04.020   Appointment of officers.



   The officers provided for in Section 2.04.010 shall be appointed by the
city manager subject to the approval of the council. The duties of any of
these offices may be combined. (Prior code § 1001)



2.04.030   Assistant/deputy city manager.



   One or more such officers may be appointed assistant/deputy city
manager by the city manager, subject to the approval of the council. (Ord.
9605 § 6 (part), 1996: prior code § 1002)



2.04.040   Appointment by city manager.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the appointment
of any officer provided for herein; all such appointments shall be made at
the discretion of the city manager. (Prior code § 1003)



2.04.050   Duties of officers.



   The duties of the officers appointed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be as prescribed by council resolution and/or as assigned by
the city manager. (Prior code § 1004)



2.04.060   Titles of officers.



   The titles of the officers appointed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be as prescribed by council resolution and/or as assigned by
the city manager. (Ord. 9605 § 7 (part), 1996: prior code § 1005)



2.04.070   Change in office title.



   Each title of office appointed under the provisions of this chapter
shall include any succeeding position title whose function is primarily the
same. (Ord. 9605 § 7 (part), 1996: prior code § 1006)



2.04.080   Compensation for council members.



   A.   The compensation amount in effect at the commencement of a
council member's term shall be the maximum compensation amount received by
that council member for the duration of that term (except as provided below),
and no increase in monthly compensation shall be applied during a council
member's term.



   B.   Effective November 2007, the monthly compensation for council
members shall be determined at the commencement of each new term, according
to the following formula: $800 multiplied by a fraction equal to the CPI (as
defined below) for the month preceding the commencement of the council
member's term divided by the CPI for December 1, 2007.  The CPI shall be the
Consumer Price Index for Western Region - All Items, All Urban Consumers
(1982-84 = 100), as maintained by U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics.



   C.   Following the November, 2009, council elections, the effective
compensation rate for council members elected or reelected in that election
was calculated as provided in subsection B. above, but as a temporary cost
saving measure, compensation for all Council Members was be reduced by four
percent (4%). Such temporary reduction shall continue to be in effect until
July 1, 2011, at which time the compensation rate shall revert to the rate as
calculated pursuant to subsection A. and B.



(Prior code § 1412)  (Ord. 2010-04 § 1, 2009; Ord. 2009-04 § 1, 2009:
Ord. 2007-13 § 1, 2007)



Chapter 2.08
CONFLICT OF INTEREST



Sections:



2.08.010   Conflict of interest code adopted by reference.



2.08.010   Conflict of interest code adopted by reference.



   A.   The Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 8100, et
seq.) requires state and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate
conflict of interest codes. The Fair Political Practices Commission has
adopted a regulation (2 Cal. Code of Regs. 18730) which contains the terms of
a standard conflict of interest code. After public notice and hearing it may
be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission to conform to
amendments in the Political Reform Act. Therefore, the terms of 2 California
Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by
the Fair Political Practices Commission are incorporated by reference. This
regulation shall constitute the conflict of interest code of the city.
Designation of officials and employees shall be established and updated as
needed by resolution.



   B.   Designated employees shall file their statements with the city
which will make the statements available for public inspection and
reproduction. (Gov. Code Section 81008). Statements for all designated
employees will be retained by the city. (Ord. 9523 §§ 1, 2, 1995:  prior
code §§ 1400, 1401)



Chapter 2.10
VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURES LIMITS FOR CANDIDATES SEEKING ELECTIVE OFFICE



Sections:



2.10.010   Voluntary expenditure limit authority.



2.10.020   Setting of voluntary expenditure limit.



2.10.030   Terms and effects of candidate acceptance or rejection.



2.10.010   Voluntary expenditure limit authority.



   The provisions of this section are enacted pursuant to the provisions
of Government Code Section 85400 (c), effective January 1, 1997, allowing a
municipality to establish voluntary expenditure limits for candidates and
controlled committees of such candidates for elective City office for each
election in the city. (Ord. 9706 § 1 (part), 1997)



2.10.020   Setting of voluntary expenditure limit.



   The expenditure limit is established at one dollar per resident of the
city. All candidates and controlled committees of such candidates that seek
an elective office in the city must file the appropriate form as provided by
the fair political practices commission, designating either an acceptance or
rejection of the voluntary expenditure limit, with the city clerk or other
designated filing official. Acceptance or rejection of the voluntary limit
must occur before the candidate may accept any contributions. (Ord. 9706 § 1
(part), 1997)



2.10.030   Terms and effects of candidate acceptance or rejection.



   Candidates complying with voluntary expenditure limits are allowed to
accept higher contribution amounts as provided by Proposition 208 and
established in Government Code Sections 85301 and 85402.



   Complying candidates are provided a statement in the ballot pamphlet
sent to voters, and a designation on the ballot indicating the candidate has
agreed to the expenditure limit.



   Should a noncomplying candidate raise or spend seventy-five (75)
percent of the expenditure limit, the voluntary expenditure limit triples for
other candidates in the same race and complying candidates may receive
unlimited contributions from a political party. (Ord. 9706 § 1 (part), 1997)



Chapter 2.12
PARK, PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION COMMISSION



Sections:



2.12.010   Appointment of members.



2.12.020   Organization and meetings.



2.12.030   Absenteeism.



2.12.040   Powers and duties.



2.12.050   Cooperation with commission.



2.12.060   Annual report.



2.12.070   Appropriation of funds.



2.12.010   Appointment of members.



   The park and recreation commission shall consist of five members who
shall be appointed by the city council to serve without compensation. Each
member shall be a qualified elector of the city at the time of his
appointment and during his incumbency, and the term of office shall be two
years and/or until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. The
council has the option of appointing up to two park and recreation commission
alternates should a mid-term vacancy occur. At the time of the alternate
appointment, the council has the option of designating either to consider
appointing an alternate if and when a mid-term vacancy occurs, or designating
that the alternate may automatically become a commissioner if and when a
mid-term vacancy occurs. The term of an alternate cannot exceed two years,
and may be less. Vacancies from any cause whatever on the parks and
recreation commission shall be filled by the council, and all such vacancies
shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Whenever, in the discretion of
the city council, the best interests of the city shall be subserved thereby,
any member of the commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of
the council. Each commissioner shall qualify by taking the oath of office
before taking the office of park and recreation commissioner. (Ord. 2008-13
§ 1, 2008; prior code § 2301)



2.12.020   Organization and meetings.



   A.   Within ten days after their appointment, the members of the
commission shall meet in regular session and organize, by electing from their
members a president and secretary, who shall hold office for one year.
Thereafter, the commission shall hold such regular or special meetings of its
members as it may determine to be necessary. It shall be the duty of the
president to preside over all meetings of the commission and transmit its
recommendations to the city council.



   B.   Regular meetings shall be held at such stated times as may be
fixed by the commission by resolution. Special meetings of the commission may
be called by the president or by any three members. Written notice of each
special meeting must be given not less than three hours before such meeting
to all members not joining in the call.



   C.   Three members shall constitute a quorum, but a less number may
adjourn from time to time to a certain day. (Prior code § 2302)



2.12.030   Absenteeism.



   Absence from four consecutive regular meetings without the formal
consent of the commission for any reason thereof shall be deemed to
constitute a retirement of such member, and the vacancy thus created shall be
filled thereafter by the city council by an appointment of a successor to
fill the unexpired terms of office. (Prior code § 2303)



2.12.040   Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the commission shall be as follows:



   A.   To plan and recommend by regular reports to the city council
such action as may be necessary to create and develop an adequate and
complete system of parks, playgrounds, bathing facilities, and recreation
centers and facilities; to advise regarding management, organization,
director and supervision of various properties and facilities of public parks
and public recreation; to advise regarding parks and playgrounds and
activities thereon, recreation and social centers, play fields, natatoriums,
and similar facilities; to advise regarding supervision and provision for the
community of sports of all kinds, community singing, music, games, plays,
celebrations, and similar activities; to cooperate with individuals, firms or
organizations interested in public recreation; and it shall be the duty of
said commission to provide such clean and wholesome recreation and amusement
for the citizens of the city as it shall deem advisable;



   B.   To prepare and recommend to the city council plans for the
planting or removal of trees, plants and shrubbery along and upon public
streets, together with preparation and recommendations as to the cost
thereof; to recommend regarding the care of trees, plants and shrubbery in
parkings along public streets;



   C.   To cooperate with any other public authority and to aid and
assist in the coordinating of recreational activities;



   D.   The council may from time to time, either by resolution or
ordinance, require the parks and recreation commission to fulfill other tasks
as they may relate to parks, recreation, or community beautification. (Prior
code § 2304)



2.12.050   Cooperation with commission.



   All officers, departments and department heads of the city shall render
cooperation and all reasonable and necessary assistance to the park,
playground and recreation commission. Neither the commission nor any person
connected with said commission shall incur any financial liability in the
name of the city. (Prior code § 2306)



2.12.060   Annual report.



   The commission shall render annually a full report of its work to the
council. (Prior code § 2307)



2.12.070   Appropriation of funds.



   The city council of the city may, at its discretion, appropriate such
monies as it may deem necessary for the purpose of carrying on the activities
of said commission. (Prior code § 2308)



Chapter 2.16
PLANNING COMMISSION



Sections:



2.16.010   Planning commission created.



2.16.020   Term of office.



2.16.030   Qualifications.



2.16.040   Organization of commission.



2.16.050   Powers and duties.



2.16.060   Referring authority.



2.16.070   Reports.



2.16.080   Action following report.



2.16.090   Reports on own motion.



2.16.100   Study to be made.



2.16.110   Cooperation.



2.16.120   Invested powers and duties.



2.16.130   Secretary.



2.16.010   Planning commission created.



   There is created a city planning commission for the city, the same to
be known as the “planning commission,” composed of five members to be
appointed by the city council. The members of the planning commission shall
be known as commissioners.  (Prior code § 7000)



2.16.020   Term of office.



   The term of office of the commissioners shall be for two years.
Appointments shall be prior to the conclusion of each term, with the
appointees taking office at the first planning commission meeting in January
following their appointment. Each commissioner shall, nevertheless, continue
in office until the successor is duly appointed and qualified; provided that
any commissioner may be removed from office at any time by four-fifths (4/5)
vote of the members of the council. The council has the option of appointing
up to two planning commission alternates should a mid-term vacancy occur. At
the time of alternate appointment, the council has the option of designating
either to consider appointing an alternate if and when a vacancy occurs, or
designating that an alternate may automatically become a commissioner if and
when a mid-term vacancy occurs. The term of an alternate cannot exceed two
years, and may be less. Vacancies from any cause whatever on the planning
commission shall be filled by the council, and all such vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.



Each commissioner shall qualify by taking the oath of office before taking
the office of planning commissioner. (Ord. 2008-12 § 1, 2008; prior code §
7001)



2.16.030   Qualifications.



   No person shall be appointed a commissioner who shall not be a citizen
of the United States and a bona fide resident of the city. Not more than
two-fifths of the commissioners shall at the same time hold any other public
office in the city. (Prior code § 7002)



2.16.040   Organization of commission.



   The planning commission shall elect annually a chairman from its own
members. It shall have power and authority to employ experts, clerks and a
secretary, and all expenses incurred by it for such purposes, and all other
expenses necessarily and properly incurred by it in the discharge of its
duties and in the exercise of its proper functions, but not exceeding in all,
the aggregate amount of the annual appropriation and any special or
extraordinary appropriations made for its use and purpose, by the council,
shall be a charge against the city; and all demands against the city incurred
or created by the planning commission, shall before payment, be presented to
and approved by the planning commission, and thereafter payment thereof shall
be made as provided in Article IX of the Charter. The planning commission
shall be deemed to be one of the city departments of the city for all of the
purposes and within the meaning of said Article XIII of the Charter. The
commissioners will serve without compensation. The planning commission may
make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the Charter or
ordinances of the city, as it may deem necessary for its government in the
transaction of its business. (Prior code § 7003)



2.16.050   Powers and duties.



   The following matters, or any one or more thereof may be referred to
the planning commission for report thereon by the board, commission,
commissioner, or other public office officer, or officers of the city, having
final authority thereon or therein, before final action thereon or therein
shall be taken or had by such authority, to-wit; The adoption or approval of
any map, plat or plan of the city, or any addition to, or subdivision or part
of the city, or of any proposed addition to, subdivision of said city,
including any map, plat or plan of any drainage, sewer or water system of the
city; any change in any such map, plat or plan; the location or removal of
any public building or structure, bridge, statuary or monument, highway,
street, alley, park, parkway, square, playground or recreation ground or any
other public way or place in the city. (Prior code § 7004)



2.16.060   Referring authority.



   All references made at the instance or on behalf of the city council
shall be made by the city manager, who shall be deemed to be the referring
authority in all such cases for all the purposes and subject to all the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 7005)



2.16.070   Reports.



   A.   Extensions of time for the submission of any report of the
planning commission under any reference may be had by agreement between the
planning commission and the referring authority, and not otherwise.



   B.   The power of the referring authority to act upon any matter
herein required to be referred to the planning commission before final action
thereon by said authority, is suspended until the expiration of the time
within which the planning commission may submit its report thereon as the
same shall be fixed and determined pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter; and the perfecting of a reference thereof to the planning commission
as herein provided, shall be deemed a condition precedent to the exercise of
the power of the referring authority to take final action upon any of the
matters specified in Section 2.16.050 of this chapter. (Prior code § 7006)



2.16.080   Action following report.



   Upon the submission by the planning commission of its report, or if it
shall fail to submit its report, upon any matter or matters referred to it as
provided in this chapter, within the time fixed for the submission of such
report, or within the time as extended by agreement, as hereinbefore
provided, then, in either case, the referring authority shall be free to
exercise all its powers and authority over or concerning the matter or
matters so referred and may take such action thereon as may seem proper, and
it shall not be bound in such action by anything contained in the report
thereof, if any, by the planning commission. Provided further, that in any
case, where the referring authority shall reach a determination or decision
adverse or contrary to the report of the planning commission upon any matter
or matters referred to it as herein provided, such referring authority may,
if it so elect, waive its right to take such adverse or contrary action, and
may thereupon return the report with all its objections thereto to the
planning commission, whereupon the matter or matters contained in or covered
by the reference upon which such report was made, shall be restored to its
status as unreferred matters or matter, and no action thereon shall be
thereafter had or taken by the board, commission, commissioner, office,
officer or officers having final authority to act thereon until the same
shall again be referred to the planning commission for report thereon as
hereinbefore provided. (Prior code § 7007)



2.16.090   Reports on own motion.



   The planning commission may at any time, upon its own motion and
irrespective of reference, report upon any matter or matters mentioned in
Section 2.16.050 of this chapter, to the board, commission, commissioner,
office, officer or officers of the city having final authority thereon or
therein. It shall be the duty of the planning commission, so far as
practicable, to prepare and submit reports upon all matters referred to it as
provided herein. (Prior code § 7008)



2.16.100   Study to be made.



   The planning commission shall make an exhaustive and comprehensive
study of the city and of the territory contiguous thereto and shall as soon
as practicable file in the office of the city clerk, a complete proposed plan
of the city of Visalia with a report of its work in that behalf and its
findings and recommendations concerning such proposed plan. Such plan may
include, show or relate, not only to such matters as may be referred to the
planning commission as provided in this chapter, but also any and all matters
and things which in the opinion of the planning commission should be
considered or included in such plan. Such plan may include not only the
territory now included within the city of Visalia, but also any territory
outside the city limits that in the opinion of the planning commission should
for any reason be included in such plan. (Prior code § 7009)



2.16.110   Cooperation.



   It shall be the duty of all departments, boards, commissions,
commissioners, and officers of the city to cooperate with the planning
commission in the performance of its duties and in the final consummation of
its purpose. (Prior code § 7010)



2.16.120   Invested powers and duties.



   The planning commission shall have and it is invested with all the
powers and charged with all of the duties, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter or with the Charter of the city, now or hereafter
conferred or imposed upon planning commissions by general law of the state of
California. (Prior code § 7011)



2.16.130   Secretary.



   A.   The city planner of the city shall serve as secretary to the
planning commission and is authorized to sign necessary legal documents for
the commission upon authority of said commission in each instance.



   B.   The city engineer of the city shall serve as an ex-officio
member of said commission, having voice but no vote, and acting as a
technical advisor thereto. (Ord. 9605 § 29, 1996: prior code § 7012)



Chapter 2.20
RELOCATION APPEALS BOARD



Sections:



2.20.010   Relocation appeals board created.



2.20.020   Appointment of members.



2.20.030   Organization and meetings.



2.20.040   Absenteeism.



2.20.050   Powers and duties.



2.20.060   Cooperation with board.



2.20.070   Appropriation of funds.



2.20.010   Relocation appeals board created.



   There is created a relocation appeals board in and for the city. (Prior
code § 7900)



2.20.020   Appointment of members.



   The relocation appeals board shall consist of five members including
the chairman.  The members and chairman shall be appointed by the mayor,
subject to approval by the city council, to serve without compensation, but
each of the members shall be reimbursed for his necessary expenses incurred
in performance of his duties as determined by the city council. Each member
shall be a qualified elector of the city at the time of his appointment and
during his incumbency. The term of office shall be three years and/or until
his successor shall be appointed and qualified; except, that upon initial
establishment of the board, one member shall be appointed to a one-year term,
two members to two-year terms and two members to three-year terms. Should a
vacancy occur in the board for any reason, prior to the expiration of term,
such vacancy shall be filled for such unexpired term. Whenever, in the
discretion of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be
served thereby, any member of the board may be removed from office by the
majority vote of the council. (Prior code § 7901)



2.20.030   Organization and meetings.



   The board shall hold meetings of its members as may be necessary to
review all relocation appeals.  Meetings of the relocation appeals board
shall be called by the chairman within five days following notification of a
relocatee's request for an appeal.  Three members shall constitute a quorum.
(Prior code § 7902)



2.20.040   Absenteeism.



   Absence from two consecutive meetings without the formal consent of the
board for any reason thereof shall be deemed to constitute a retirement of
such member, and the vacancy thus created shall be filled thereafter by the
mayor, subject to council approval, by an appointment of a successor to fill
the unexpired term of office. (Prior code § 7903)



2.20.050   Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the board shall be as follows:



   A.   To promptly hear all appeals of displacees aggrieved by
determination, by the city or the Visalia Community Redevelopment Agency, as
to eligibility for or the amount of, relocation assistance to which they are
entitled to receive under the provisions of Section 33417.5 of the Health and
Safety Code, and where applicable, federal regulations;



   B.   To determine if the governmental body causing displacement has
complied with the above stated relocation requirements;



   C.   It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all
meetings of the board and transmit the board's findings and recommendations
to the proper legislative body. (Prior code § 7904)



2.20.060   Cooperation with board.



   All officers, departments and department heads of the city and the
Visalia Community Redevelopment Agency shall render cooperation and all
reasonable and necessary assistance to the relocation appeals board. Neither
the board nor any person connected with said board shall incur any financial
liability in the name of the city. (Prior code § 7905)



2.20.070   Appropriation of funds.



   The city council of the city may, at its discretion, appropriate such
monies as it may deem necessary for the purpose of carrying on the activities
of the board. (Prior code § 7906)



Chapter 2.24
COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



Sections:



2.24.010   Establishing redevelopment agency.



2.24.020   City council.



2.24.030   Filing with Secretary of State.



2.24.010   Establishing redevelopment agency.



   The city council finds and declares pursuant to Section 33101 of the
Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for a redevelopment agency
to function in the city and said agency is authorized to transact business
and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. The
redevelopment agency shall be known as “The Community Redevelopment Agency
of the City of Visalia.” (Prior code § 1530)



2.24.020   City council.



   That pursuant to Section 33101 and 33200 of the Community Redevelopment
Law, the agency shall consist of the legislative body of the city, namely the
city council, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities
vested in that agency pursuant to Division 24 Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Health
and Safety Code of the State of California, shall be vested in the
legislative body of the city. (Ord. 9605 § 8, 1996: prior code § 1531)



2.24.030   Filing with Secretary of State.



   The redevelopment agency authorized to function shall cause a certified
copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed in the office of
the Secretary of State. (Prior code § 1532)



Chapter 2.28
CIVIL DEFENSE



Sections:



2.28.010   Purposes.



2.28.020   Definitions.



2.28.030   Civil defense and disaster council membership.



2.28.040   Civil defense and disaster council--Powers and duties.



2.28.050   Powers and duties of director.



2.28.060   Civil defense and disaster organization.



2.28.070   Divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster
organization.



2.28.080   Determination of emergency.



2.28.090   Effective date.



2.28.100   Termination of emergency.



2.28.110   Violations--Penalties.



2.28.010   Purposes.



   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the
preparation and carrying out of plans for the civil defense of persons and
property within this city in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the
coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of this city with
all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and
organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such civil defense
and disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed
conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants
and property of the city. (Prior code § 1500)



2.28.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   “Civil defense” means the preparation for and the carrying out of
all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of
this ordinance apply to any condition relating to, a labor controversy.



   “Disasters” means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage,
extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar
public calamity. (Prior code § 1501)



2.28.030   Civil defense and disaster council membership.



   The Visalia Civil Defense and Disaster Council is created and shall
consist of the following:



   A.   The mayor, who shall be the chairman, and the four remaining
councilmen;



   B.   The director of civil defense and disaster, who shall be
vice-chairman;



   C.   The assistant director, appointed by the city manager with the
advice and consent of the city council who, under the supervision of the
director, shall develop civil defense and disaster plans and organize the
civil defense and disaster program of this city, and shall have such other
duties as may be assigned by the director;



   D.   Such deputy directors and chiefs of operating civil defense and
disaster departments, services or divisions as are provided for by resolution
pursuant to this chapter;



   E.   Such representatives of civil, business, labor, veterans,
professional or other organizations having an official group or organization
civil defense and disaster responsibility as may be appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the city council. (Prior code § 1502)



2.28.040   Civil defense and disaster council--Powers and duties.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the civil defense and disaster council,
and it is empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the city
council, civil defense and disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements and
such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to
implement such plans and agreements. The civil defense and disaster council
shall meet upon call of the chairman or in his absence from the city or
inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman.



   B.   The director is empowered:



   1.   To request the city council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a disaster and the termination thereof, if the city
council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is
not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest
practicable time;



   2.   To request the Governor to proclaim a state of extreme
emergency when in the opinion of the director the resources of the area or
region are inadequate to cope with the disaster;



   3.   To control and direct the effort of the civil defense and
disaster organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of
this chapter;



   4.   To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions,
services and staff of the civil defense and disaster organization of this
city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise
between them;



   5.   To represent the civil defense and disaster organization of the
city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil
defense and disaster. (Prior code § 1503)



2.28.050   Powers and duties of director.



   In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as provided, or the
proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the Governor or the state
director of civil defense, the director is empowered:



   A.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster;
provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the city council;



   B.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the
people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;



   C.   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of extreme emergency by the
Governor in the region in which this city is located, to command the aid of
as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary in the execution of
his duties; such persons shall be entitled to privileges, benefits, and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered civil defense and
disaster worker volunteers;



   D.   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency;



   E.   To execute all of his ordinary powers as city manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution
adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any statute,
agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and
in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code, to exercise complete
authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city
by the Constitution and general laws. (Prior code § 1504)



2.28.060   Civil defense and disaster organization.



   All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations
and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons
pressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.28.050(G), be charged
with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city
during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense and disaster
organization of the city. (Prior code § 1505)



2.28.070   Divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster
organization.



   A.   The functions and duties of the Visalia Civil Defense and
Disaster Organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and
special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution.



   B.   The city council shall concurrently with the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, adopt a resolution setting forth the form
of organization, establishment and designation of divisions and services, the
assignment of functions, duties and powers, the designation of officers and
employees. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government
and the civil defense agency of the state of California. (Prior code § 1506)



2.28.080   Determination of emergency.



   Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor or in the event of his absence,
or inability to act, the mayor pro-tem, determines that an emergency exists
as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience causing danger or
injury to or damages to persons or property, he shall have power to impose by
proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve
the peace and order of the city:



   A.   To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alley, parks or other public places;
provided, however, that physicians, nurses, and ambulance operators
performing medical services, firemen and city authorized or requested law
enforcement officers and personnel, may be exempted from such curfew;



   B.   To order the closing of any business establishment anywhere
within the city for the period of the emergency; such businesses to include
but not be limited to those selling intoxicating beverages, gasoline or
firearms;



   C.   To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking
areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic;



   D.   To call upon law enforcement agencies within or without the
city to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the city. (Prior
code § 1525)



2.28.090   Effective date.



   The proclamation of emergency shall become effective upon its issuance
and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media and/or through the
use of public address systems in the areas affected. (Prior code § 1526)



2.28.100   Termination of emergency.



   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall terminate after forty-eight (48) hours from the issuance
thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining any emergency no
longer exists; whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency
may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary
by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 1527)



2.28.110   Violations--Penalties.



   A.   Misdemeanor. Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with the orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers charged
with the responsibility of enforcing the proclamation of emergency authorized
here, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   B.   Punishment of Violations. It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment
not to exceed six months, or both, for any person during a disaster to:



   1.   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil
defense and disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty
imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;



   2.   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations
issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such nature as to give, or
be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or
property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the
defense or protection thereof;



   3.   To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the
state. (Prior code §§ 1507, 1528)



Chapter 2.32
TULARE OPERATION AREA EMERGENCY SERVICES



Sections:



2.32.010   Purposes.



2.32.020   Definitions.



2.32.030   Tulare operational area membership.



2.32.040   Chairman and officers.



2.32.050   Emergency council meeting.



2.32.060   Adoption of rules and regulations.



2.32.070   Duties and powers of the chairman.



2.32.080   Special drills and exercises.



2.32.090   Emergency services by director.



2.32.100   Emergency service coordinator.



2.32.110   Duties of coordinator.



2.32.120   Emergency services by coordinator.



2.32.130   Emergency service organization.



2.32.140   Duties of emergency service organization.



2.32.150   Violations--Penalties.



2.32.010   Purposes.



   The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans, for disaster and emergency services, the protection of
persons and property within the city in the event of disaster, and to provide
for the coordination of the disaster and emergency functions of the city with
all other affected persons and agencies, both public and private. Any
expenditures made in connection with such disaster or emergency services,
including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the
direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property in the city.
(Prior code § 1510)



2.32.020   Definitions.



   Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions
shall govern the construction of this chapter:



   “Disaster” means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage,
extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other public
calamity. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply
to, any condition relating to a labor controversy.



   “Emergency services” means the preparation for carrying out
disaster functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, and to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of
this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy.



   “Emergency services office” means the physical facilities
constituting the Tulare operational area's primary emergency operating
center, and the necessary staff and personnel to operate such facilities on a
day-to-day or disaster emergency basis.



   “Tulare operational area” means the unincorporated area of the
county, and the cities of Dinuba, Exeter, Farmersville, Lindsay, Porterville,
Tulare, Visalia and Woodlake. (Prior code § 1511)



2.32.030   Tulare operational area membership.



   The emergency council of the Tulare operational area is created and
shall consist of the following members:



   A.   The chairman of the board of supervisors of the county. Said
board of supervisors shall appoint an additional member of said board to
serve as an alternate member of the emergency council when the chairman is
absent from the county or is not immediately available to perform his duties;



   B.   The mayors of the cities of Dinuba, Exeter, Farmersville,
Lindsay, Porterville, Tulare, Visalia and Woodlake, or alternates appointed
by the respective city councils;



   C.   Two persons residing in the unincorporated area of the county
who shall be appointed by the other members of the emergency council;



   D.   The emergency services coordinator of the county, who shall be
an ex-officio member and who shall not be entitled to a vote at the meetings
of the emergency council. (Prior code § 1512)



2.32.040   Chairman and officers.



   The officers of the emergency council shall be a chairman, and such
other officers as the council may deem necessary. The chairman of the board
of supervisors shall serve as chairman of the council. When he is absent from
the county or is not immediately available to perform his duties, the other
member of the board of supervisors who is a member of the council shall serve
as chairman. (Prior code § 1513)



2.32.050   Emergency council meeting.



   The emergency council may hold regular meetings at a time and place
established by the council. Special meetings of the council shall be called
in accordance with Section 54950 et. seq. of the Government Code of the state
of California. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or alternate
chairman designated pursuant to Section 2.28.040. The council shall meet at
least four times each year. The council shall have the power to adopt rules
and regulations governing the conduct of its meetings. (Prior code § 1514)



2.32.060   Adoption of rules and regulations.



   It shall be the duty of the emergency council to review and recommend
for adoption by the board of supervisors and the respective city councils,
disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances,
resolutions, rules, regulations and budgets as are necessary to implement
such plans and agreements. (Prior code § 1515)



2.32.070   Duties and powers of the chairman.



   The chairman of the emergency council is empowered to perform the
following acts:



   A.   Serve as the emergency services director of the Tulare
operational area;



   B.   Request the city council of the city to proclaim the existence
or threatened existence of a local emergency and at the termination thereof,
if the city  council is in session, or to issue such a proclamation if the
city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council
at the earliest practicable time;



   C.   Request the mayor to request the Governor to proclaim a state
of disaster when in the opinion of the chairman the resources of the area are
inadequate to cope with the disaster on a local basis. (Prior code § 1516)



2.32.080   Special drills and exercises.



   The chairman of the emergency council shall order an exercise or drill
of the entire emergency services organization at least once each year, and a
minimum of two exercises or drills for selected portions of the emergency
operating center staff each year. Participation in required state or federal
exercises, special drills for communications, radiological, fire, law
enforcement or other specific services shall be in addition to the exercises
or drills required in this section. (Prior code § 1517)



2.32.090   Emergency services by director.



   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided or
the proclamation of a state of disaster by the Governor or the director of
the California Disaster Office, or in the event of a war-caused state of
extreme emergency, the chairman, as the emergency services director of the
Tulare operational area, is empowered to perform the following acts:



   A.   Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster;
provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the emergency council;



   B.   Subject to the approval of the city council, to obtain vital
supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for
the protection of life and property of the people, and to bind the city for
the fair value thereof and, if required, to commandeer the same immediately
for public use;



   C.   Require emergency services of any city officer or employee, and
in the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or extreme emergency
by the Governor in the region in which the city is located, to commandeer the
aid of as many citizens as he thinks necessary in the execution of his
duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and
immunities which are provided by state law for registered civil defense and
disaster volunteer workers;



   D.   Requisition any necessary equipment or materials from any city
department or agency;



   E.   Execute all of the special powers conferred upon him by this
chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon
him by any statute, by any  agreement approved by the city council, or by
any other lawful authority. (Prior code § 1518)



2.32.100   Emergency service coordinator.



   There is created the position of emergency services coordinator of the
Tulare operational area who may be referred to as the coordinator. He shall
serve as the executive officer of the Tulare operational area and his staff
shall serve as the staff of the emergency services office. The board of
supervisors of the county of Tulare shall consider the recommendations of the
emergency council in the appointment or dismissal of the coordinator. (Prior
code § 1519)



2.32.110   Duties of coordinator.



   The coordinator shall have the following general powers and duties:



   A.   Represent the emergency council and its chairman as their
executive officer for the purpose of coordinating all efforts within the
Tulare operational area for the accomplishment of the purposes of this
chapter;



   B.   Identify and define questions of authority and responsibility
that may arise between persons and agencies referred to in Section 2.32.130
and submit recommendations for resolving such matters to the chairman;



   C.   Represent the Tulare operational area in all dealings with
public or private agencies pertaining to disaster or civil defense, when
authorized by the chairman;



   D.   Prepare an operational plan with necessary service annexes and
standing operating procedures to provide administrative guides for the Tulare
operational area;



   E.   Plan and conduct exercises and drills, as ordered by the
chairman, for the emergency services organization or for the emergency
operating center staff. (Prior code § 1520)



2.32.120   Emergency services by coordinator.



   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided, or
the proclamation of a state of disaster by the Governor, or in the event of a
war-caused state of extreme emergency, the Coordinator is empowered to
perform the following acts:



   A.   Activate the emergency operating center including calling in,
as necessary, service chiefs, standby staff and service dispatchers;



   B.   Cause the dissemination of appropriate warning signals and
issue suitable advisory information to the emergency council, the emergency
services organization and to the public;



   C.   Advise the California Disaster Office of the local situation;



   D.   Request mutual aid through the California Disaster Office if
local deficiencies of personnel and/or equipment are indicated by the service
chiefs;



   E.   Order the provision of security for the emergency operating
center and communications staff. (Prior code § 1521)



2.32.130   Emergency service organization.



   All officers and employees of the county and the cities included in the
Tulare operational area, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid
them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons, including
persons commandeered under the provisions of Section 2.36.090(C), who by
operation of law or agreement may be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property in the city during such disaster, shall
constitute the emergency services organization of the Tulare operational
area. (Prior code § 1522)



2.32.140   Duties of emergency service organization.



   The functions and duties of the emergency services organization shall
be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the
emergency council shall prescribe by resolution, subject to the approval of
the board of supervisors of the county and the respective city councils.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the California
Disaster Office. (Prior code § 1523)



2.32.150   Violations--Penalties.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to perform any of the following
acts during a disaster:



   1.   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
services organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed
upon him by virtue of this chapter;



   2.   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations
issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give,
or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or
property of inhabitants of the city or to prevent or delay the defense or
protection thereof;



   3.   To carry, wear or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the
federal government or the state of California.



   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the Tulare County Jail
for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior
code § 1524)



Chapter 2.36
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY



Sections:



2.36.010   Purpose.



2.36.020   Unclaimed property.



2.36.030   Disposition of bicycles.



2.36.010   Purpose.



   The city council of the city declares that the ordinance codified in
this chapter is adopted to establish a method whereby unclaimed property can
be disposed of by the police department of the city. (Prior code § 1550)



2.36.020   Unclaimed property.



   Unclaimed property shall be held by the police department for a period
of at least three months; thereafter such property will be transferred to the
city purchasing division for sale to the public at public auction or disposed
of pursuant to the provisions indicated in Section 2.36.030. Unclaimed
property transferred to the city pursuant to this section shall not be
redeemable by the owner or other persons entitled to possession. If the
purchasing division determines that any such property transferred to it for
sale is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city
and need not be sold. (Ord. 9605 § 9 (part), 1996: prior code § 1551)



2.36.030   Disposition of bicycles.



   Any bicycles in the possession of the police department of this city
which have been unclaimed for a period of at least three months and
thereafter transferred to the city purchasing division, may annually, between
the 1st and 10th days of July, in each year, instead of being sold at public
auction to the highest bidder pursuant to the provisions of Section 2080.5 of
the Civil Code, be turned over to one or more charitable or nonprofit
organizations for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile
delinquency or assist disadvantaged youths. The city manager or the city
manager's designee is authorized, without provisions of this section upon the
city manager's or the city manager's designee's determination and finding
that the donee charitable or nonprofit organization is exempt from state or
federal income taxation, or both, and is authorized under its articles of
incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency. (Ord. 9605 § 9 (part), 1996: prior code § 1551.01)



Chapter 2.40
EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS



Sections:



2.40.010   Title.



2.40.020   Statement of purpose.



2.40.030   Definitions.



2.40.040   Employee rights.



2.40.050   City rights.



2.40.060   Meet and confer in good faith--Scope.



2.40.070   Consultation in good faith--Scope.



2.40.080   Advance notice.



2.40.090   Petition for recognition.



2.40.100   Appropriate unit.



2.40.110   Recognition of employee organizations as majority
representative--Formal recognition.



2.40.120   Designation of municipal employee relations officer.



2.40.130   Resolution of impasses.



2.40.140   Grievances.



2.40.150   Memorandum of understanding.



2.40.160   Rules and regulations.



2.40.170   Construction.



2.40.180   Separability.



2.40.010   Title.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Employer-Employee Relations
Ordinance of the City of Visalia.” (Prior code § 1301)



2.40.020   Statement of purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to implement Chapter 10, Division 4,
Title 1 of the Government Code of the State of California (Sections 3500 et.
seq.) captioned “Public Employee Organizations,” by providing orderly
procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations between the
city and its employee organizations and for resolving disputes regarding
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. (Prior code §
1302)



2.40.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   “Appropriate unit” means a unit established pursuant to Section
2.40.100.



   “City” means the city of Visalia, a municipal corporation and where
appropriate herein, “city” refers to the city council, the governing body
of said city, or any duly authorized management employee as defined herein.



   “Consult” or “consultation in good faith” means to communicate
orally or in writing for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or
advising of intended actions.



   “Employee” means any person regularly employed by the city, except
those persons elected by popular vote.



   “Employee, confidential” means an employee who is privy to
decisions of city management affecting employer-employee relations.



   “Employee, management” means:



   1.   Any employee having significant responsibilities for
formulating and administering city policies and programs, including but not
limited to the chief executive officer and departments heads; and



   2.   Any employee having authority to exercise independent judgment
to hire, transfer, suspend, lay-off, recall, promote, discharge, assign,
reward, or discipline other employees, or having the responsibility to
direct, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such
action if in connection with the foregoing, the exercise of such authority is
not of a merely routine judgment.



   “Employee, professional” means employees engaged in work requiring
specialized knowledge and skills attained through completion of a recognized
course of instruction, including, but not limited to attorneys, physicians,
registered nurses, engineers, architects, teachers and various types of
physical, chemical and biological scientists.



   “Employee organization” means any organization which includes
employees of the city and which has as one of its primary purposes
representing such employees in their employment relations with the city.



   “Employer-employee relations” means the relationship between the
city and its employees and their employee organization, or when used in a
general sense, the relationship between city management and employees or
employee organizations.



   “Grievance” as this term is defined in Section 2.40.140(A).



   “Impasse” means: (1) deadlock in the annual (or periodic)
discussions between a majority representative and the city over any matters
concerning which they are required to meet and confer in good faith, or over
the scope of such subject matter; or (2) any unresolved complaint by an
affected employee organization, advanced in good faith, concerning a decision
of the municipal employee relations officer made pursuant to Sections
2.40.090, 2.40.100 or 2.40.110.



   “Majority representative” means an employee organization, or its
duly authorized representative, that has been granted formal recognition by
the municipal employee relations officer as representing the majority of
employees in an appropriate unit.



   “Mediation” or “conciliation” means the efforts of an impartial
third person, or persons, functioning as intermediaries, to assist the
parties in reaching a voluntary resolution to an impasse, through
interpretation, suggestion and advice. Mediation and conciliation are
interchangeable terms.



   “Meet and confer in good faith” (sometimes referred to herein as
“meet and confer” or “meeting and conferring”) means performance by
duly authorized city representatives and duly authorized representatives of
an employee organization recognized as the majority representative of their
mutual obligation to meet at reasonable times and to confer in good faith
regarding other terms and conditions of employment, in an effort to: (1)
reach agreement on those matters within the authority of such representatives
and (2) reach agreement on what will be recommended to the city council on
those matters within the decision making authority of the city council. This
does not require either party to agree to a proposal or to make a concession.



   “Municipal employee relations officer” means the city's principal
representative to all matters of employer-employee relations designated
pursuant to Section 2.40.120, or his duly authorized representative.



   “Peace officer” means the same as this term is defined in Section
830, California Penal Code.



   “Recognized employee organizations” means an employee organization
which has been acknowledged by the Municipal employee relations officer as an
employee organization that represents employees of the city. The rights
accompanying recognition are either:



   1.   Formal recognition, which is the right to meet and confer in
good faith as the majority representative in an appropriate unit; or



   2.   Informal recognition, which is the right to consultation in
good faith by all recognized employee organizations.



   “Resolution” means, unless the context indicates otherwise, the
employer-employee relations resolution of the city of Visalia.



   “Scope of representation” means all matters relating to employment
conditions and conditions of employment. City rights (Section 2.40.050) are
excluded from the scope of representation. (Prior code § 1303)



2.40.040   Employee rights.



   Employees of the city shall have the right to form, join and
participate in the activities of employee organizations of their own choosing
for the purpose of representation on all matters of employer-employee
relations including but not limited to wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment. Employees of the city also shall have the right to
refuse to join or participate in activities of employee organizations and
shall have the right to represent themselves individually in their employment
relations with the city. No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated,
restrained, coerced, or discriminated against by the city or by any employee
organization because of his exercise of these rights. (Prior code § 1304)



2.40.050   City rights.



   The rights of the city include, but are not limited to, the exclusive
right to determine the mission of its constituent departments, commission and
boards; set standards of service; determine the procedures and standards of
selection for employment and promotion; direct its employees; take
disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work
or for other legitimate reasons; maintain the efficiency of governmental
operations; determine the methods, means and personnel by which government
operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job classifications;
take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and
exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and the
technology of performing its work. (Prior code § 1305)



2.40.060   Meet and confer in good faith--Scope.



   A.   The city, through its representatives, shall meet and confer in
good faith with representatives of formally recognized employee organizations
with majority representation rights regarding matters within the scope of
representation including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment within the appropriate unit.



   B.   The city shall not be required to meet and confer in good faith
on any subject preempted by federal or state law or by the City Charter, or
city rights as defined in Sections 2.40.040 and 2.40.050. Proposed amendments
to this resolution are excluded from the scope of meeting and conferring.
(Prior code § 1306)



2.40.070   Consultation in good faith--Scope.



   All matters affecting employer-employee relations, including those that
are not subject to meeting and conferring, are subject to consultation. The
city, through its representatives, shall consult in good faith with
representatives of all recognized employee organizations on employer-employee
relations matters which affect them. Advance notice on matters subject to
consultation, but outside the scope of representation, is desirable but not
mandatory. (Prior code § 1307)



2.40.080   Advance notice.



   A.   Reasonable written notice shall be given to each recognized
employee organization affected by any ordinance, rule, resolution or
regulation directly relating to matters within the scope or representation
proposed to be adopted by the city council or by any board or commission of
the city, and each shall be given the opportunity to meet with such body
prior to adoption.



   B.   In cases of emergency when the city or any board or commission
of the City determines that an ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation
must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meeting with a recognized
employee organization, the city or the board or commission of the city shall
provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time
following the adoption of such ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation.
(Prior code § 1308)



2.40.090   Petition for recognition.



   There are two levels of employee organization recognition: formal and
informal. The recognition requirements of each are set forth below:



   A.   Formal Recognition--The Right to Meet and Confer in Good Faith
as Majority Representative. An employee organization that seeks formal
recognition for purposes of meeting and conferring in good faith as the
majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit shall file a
petition with the municipal employee relations officer containing the
following information and documentation:



   1.   Name and address of the employee organization;



   2.   Names and titles of its officers;



   3.   Names of employee organization representatives who are
authorized to speak on behalf of its members;



   4.   A statement that the employee organization has, as one of its
primary purposes, representing employees in their employment relations with
the city;



   5.   A statement whether the employee organization is a chapter or
local of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner with a regional
or state, or national or international organization, and, if so, the name and
address of each such regional, state or international organization;



   6.   Certified copies of the employee organization's constitution
and by-laws;



   7.   A designation of those persons, not exceeding two in number,
and their addresses, to whom notice sent by regular United States mail will
be deemed sufficient notice on the employee organization for any purpose;



   8.   A statement that the employee organization recognizes that the
provisions of Section 923 of the Labor Code are not applicable to city
employees;



   9.   A statement that the employee organization has no restriction
on membership based on race, color, creed, sex or national origin;



   10.   The job classifications or titles of employees in the unit
claimed to be appropriate and the approximate number of member employees
therein;



   11.   A statement that the employee organization has in its
possession written proof, dated within six months of the date upon which the
petition is filed, to establish that employees in the unit claimed to be
appropriate have designated the employee organization to represent them in
their employment relations with the city. Such written proof shall be
submitted for confirmation to the municipal employee relations officer or to
a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party;



   12.   A request that the municipal employee relations officer
recognize the employee organization as the majority representative of the
employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting
and conferring in good faith on all matters within the scope of
representation.



   B.   Informal Recognition--The Right to Consult in Good Faith. An
employee organization that seeks recognition for purposes of consultation in
good faith shall file a petition with the municipal employee relations
officer containing the following information and documentation:



   1.   All of the information enumerated in subsections (A)(1) through
(A)(9) of this section inclusive;



   2.   A statement that the employee organization has in its
possession written proof, dated within six months of the date upon which the
petition is filed, to establish that employees have designated the employee
organization to represent them in their employment relations with the city.
Such written proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the municipal
employee relations officer or to a mutually agreed upon disinterested third
party;



   3.   A request that the municipal employee relations officer
recognize the employee organization for the purpose of consultation in good
faith.



   C.   The petition, including all accompanying documents, shall be
verified, under oath, by the executive officer and secretary of the
organization that the statements are true. All changes in such information
shall be filed forthwith in like manner.



   D.   The municipal employee relations officer shall grant
recognition, in writing, to all employee organizations who have complied with
either Section 2.40.090(A) or (B) and, in addition Section 2.40.090(C), for
purposes of consultation in good faith for its members. Employee
organizations seeking formal recognition as majority representative must, in
addition, establish to the satisfaction of the municipal employee relations
officer that it represents a majority of the employees in the manner
prescribed in Section 2.40.110(A). No employee may be represented by more
than one recognized employee organization for the purposes of this
resolution. (Prior code § 1309)



2.40.100   Appropriate unit.



   A.   The municipal employee relations officer, after reviewing the
petition filed by an employee organization seeking formal recognition as
majority representative, shall determine whether the proposed unit is an
appropriate unit. The principal criterion in making this determination is
whether there is a community of interest among such employees. The following
factors, among others, are to be considered in making such determination:



   1.   Which unit will assure employees the fullest freedom in the
rights set forth under this chapter;



   2.   The history of employee relations: (a) in the unit; (b) among
other employees of the city; and (c) in similar public employment;



   3.   The effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the city
and sound employer-employee relations;



   4.   The extent to which employees have common skills, working
conditions, job duties or similar educational requirements;



   5.   The effect on the existing classification structure of dividing
a single classification among two or more units.



   B.   In the establishment of appropriate units: (1) professional
employees shall not be denied the right to be represented separately from
nonprofessional employees; and (2) management and confidential employees who
are included in the same unit with nonmanagement or nonconfidential employees
may not represent such employees on matters within the scope of
representation. (Prior code § 1310)



2.40.110   Recognition of employee organizations as majority
representative--Formal recognition.



   A.   The municipal employee relations officer shall:



   1.   Determine the majority representative of the city employees in
an appropriate unit by arranging for a secret ballot election or by an other
reasonable method which is based upon written proof, and is designed to
ascertain the free choice of a majority of such employees. The employee
organization found to represent a majority of the employees in an appropriate
unit shall be granted formal recognition and is the only employee
organization entitled to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the
scope of representation for employees in such unit. This shall not preclude
other recognized employee organizations, or individual employees, from
consulting with management representatives on employer-employee relations
matters of concern to them;



   2.   Revoke the recognition rights of a majority representative,
which has been found by secret ballot election no longer to be the majority
representative.



   B.   The recognition rights of the majority representative
designated in accordance with this section shall not be subject to challenge
for a period of not less than twelve (12) months following the date of such
recognition. (Prior code § 1311)



2.40.120   Designation of municipal employee relations officer.



   A.   The city council shall designate, by resolution, a municipal
employee relations officer who shall be the city's principal representative
in all matters of employer-employee relations, with authority to meet and
confer in good faith on matters within the scope of representation including
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment.



   B.   The municipal employee relations officer so designated is
authorized to delegate these duties and responsibilities. (Prior code § 1312)



2.40.130   Resolution of impasses.



   A.   Impasse procedures may be invoked only after the possibility of
settlement by direct discussion has been exhausted.



   B.   The impasse procedures are as follows:



   1.   Mediation or conciliation. All mediation proceedings shall be
private. The mediator shall make no public recommendations nor take any
public position concerning the issue;



   2.   A determination by the city council after a hearing on the
merits of the dispute;



   3.   Any other disputes resolving procedures to which the parties
mutually agree or which the city council may order.



   C.   Any party may initiate the impasse procedure by filing with the
other party (or parties) affected a written request for an impasse meeting
together with a statement of its position on all disputed issues. An impasse
meeting may then be scheduled by the municipal employee relations officer
forthwith after the date of filing of the written request for such meeting,
with written notice to all parties affected. The purpose of such impasse
meeting is twofold: (1) to permit a review of the position of all parties in
a final effort to reach agreement on the disputed issues, and (2) if
agreement is not concluded, to mutually select the specific impasse procedure
to which the dispute may be submitted; in the absence of agreement between
the parties on this point, the matter may be referred to the city council.



   D.   The fees and expenses, if any, of mediators or of any other
impasse procedure, shall be payable one-half by the employee organization or
employee organizations. (Prior code § 1313)



2.40.140   Grievances.



   A.   A grievance is any dispute concerning the interpretation or
application of this chapter, or of rules or regulations governing personnel
practices or working conditions, or of the  practical consequences of the
city rights decision on wages, hours and other terms and conditions of
employment.



   B.   Grievances shall be processed in accordance with procedures
established by the city. (Prior code § 1314)



2.40.150   Memorandum of understanding.



   A.   When the meeting and conferring process is concluded between
the city and a formally recognized employee organization representing a
majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, all agreed upon matter
shall be incorporated in a written memorandum of understanding signed by the
duly authorized city and majority representatives.



   B.   As to those matters within the authority of the city council,
the memorandum of understanding shall be submitted to the city council for
determination. (Prior code § 1315)



2.40.160   Rules and regulations.



   The city council may adopt such rules and regulations necessary or
convenient to implement the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 10,
Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code of the State of California
(Sections 3500, et. seq.) (Prior code § 1316)



2.40.170   Construction.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny any person
or employee the rights granted by federal and state laws and City Charter
provisions.



   B.   The rights, powers and authority of the city council in all
matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be
modified or restricted by this chapter.



   C.   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to conflict
with the provisions of Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code
of the State of California (Sections 3500, et. seq.) as amended in 1978.
(Prior code § 1317)



2.40.180   Separability.



   If any provisions of this chapter, or the application of such provision
to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
chapter or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances
other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected
thereby. (Prior code § 1318)



Chapter 2.46
SALE AND TRANSFER OF VISALIA POLICE DEPARTMENT FIREARMS AND BADGES



Sections:



2.46.010   Purpose.



2.46.020   Definitions.



2.46.030   Sale and transfer of service handguns.



2.46.040   Severability.



2.46.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing the
sale and transfer of Visalia police department service handguns  to retiring
or resigning officers.



(Ord. 2014-12 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 9922 § 1 (part), 1999)



2.46.020   Definitions.



   For purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:



   “Badge” means the badge issued to officers that identify them as
peace officers.



   “Fair market value” means the resale value of the handgun in its
current condition at the time of sale or transfer as established by the
city's purchasing agent.



   “Firearm” means the handgun issued to officers to carry during the
course and scope of their employment as peace officers.



   “Non-adverse circumstances” means leaving the department in good
standing with no pending or recent disciplinary action. “Recent
disciplinary action” means any disciplinary action having been imposed
within one year prior to leaving the department.



   “Police association” means the Visalia Police Association, Group
“A” or Group “B.” (Ord. 9922 § 1 (part), 1999)



2.46.030   Sale and transfer of service handguns.



   The chief of police, or designee, may sell or transfer to an officer
his or her service handgun under the following circumstances:



   A.   The sale and transfer must not violate current state and
federal laws that govern ownership sales, transfers or possession of service
handguns.



   B.   Service handguns must be sold to the officer for a fair market
value as established by the city's purchasing agent.



   C.   The Visalia Police Association or other acceptable, recognized
group or organization may fund the purchase of the service handgun, but the
title transfer must reflect the transfer of the service handgun from the
Visalia police department to the officer.



   D.   Service handguns will only be sold or transferred to full time
officers with twenty (20) or more years of accumulated service as a sworn
police officer and who retire or resign under non-adverse circumstances.



(Ord. 2014-12 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 9922 § 1 (part), 1999)



2.46.040   Severability.



   It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are
distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs,
clauses, and/or phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid, or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses, or phrases of this chapter.
(Ord. 9922 § 1 (part), 1999)



Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE



Chapters:



3.04   TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY



3.08   DEMANDS AND CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



3.12   CIGARETTE TAX



3.16   PROPERTY TAXES



3.20   REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



3.24   SALES AND USE TAX



3.28   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



3.32   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BONDS



3.36   SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND



3.37   CONTRACTS FOR MUNICIPAL WORKS



3.40   SALES AND USE TAX ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES



Chapter 3.04
TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY



Sections:



3.04.010   Definitions.



3.04.020   Transfer of duties.



3.04.030   Filing of certified copy.



3.04.010   Definitions.



   The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall for
the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
as follows:



   (a)   City. The word "city" as used in this chapter shall mean the
city of Visalia, a municipal corporation, situated in the county of Tulare,
state of California.



   (b)   County. The word "county" as used in this chapter shall mean
the county of Tulare, a political subdivision of the state of California.
(Prior code § 1562)



3.04.020   Transfer of duties.



   The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of
assessments levied for municipal improvements now performed by the assessor
and tax collector of the city, are transferred to the assessor and the tax
collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and
for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, and the collection of assessments for
municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1967,
pursuant to the provisions of Sections 51540 through 51562 and Sections 51800
and 43072 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code §
1563)



3.04.030   Filing of certified copy.



   The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified
in this chapter to be filed with the auditor of the county on or before the
first Monday of February, 1967, and immediately thereafter shall notify the
State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 1564)



Chapter 3.08
DEMANDS AND CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



Sections:



3.08.010   General.



3.08.020   Special claims procedure.



3.08.030   Authorization to approve claims.



3.08.040   Facsimile signature.



3.08.050   Signatures required.



3.08.060   Reimbursement authorized.



3.08.070   Procedure for payment.



3.08.080   Advance payment.



3.08.010   General.



   The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim
procedure against local public agencies, including the city, is governed by
the provisions of Chapter 1, of Division 3.6 of the California Government
Code commencing with Section 900 and following. (Prior code § 1350)



3.08.020   Special claims procedure.



   Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government
Code of the state of California, the city establishes the following claims
procedure for those claims against the city for money or damages not now
governed by state or local law.



   A.   Notwithstanding the exception contained in Section 905 (c) of
the Government Code of the state of California, all claims by public officers
or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, and other expenses or
allowances claimed due from the city, shall be presented within the time
limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 9.10 through 915.2 of
the Government Code of the state of California, and said claims shall further
be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of said Government Code.



   B.   In addition to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section, and notwithstanding the exemption set forth in Section 905 of the
Government Code of the state of California, all claims against the city for
damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claim is not otherwise
provided by state or local law, shall be presented within the time
limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 9165.2 of
the Government Code of the State of California, and said claims shall further
be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of said Government Code. (Prior
code § 1351)



3.08.030   Authorization to approve claims.



   The city manager and/or acting city manager of the city is authorized
to approve payment of all claims against the city except those required by
law to be approved by the council. (Prior code § 1352)



3.08.040   Facsimile signature.



   Facsimile signatures on checks, drafts or warrants of the city in lieu
of personal signatures are authorized, except where personal signature is
required as part of the claims approval procedure outline in Section
3.08.030. (Prior code § 1353)



3.08.050   Signatures required.



   At least two signatures shall be required on all checks, drafts, or
warrants for and on behalf of the city; provided, however, that payroll
checks may be issued in accordance with the terms of a contract which may be
entered into with an outside agency for payroll services. (Prior code § 1354)



3.08.060   Reimbursement authorized.



   All officers and employees for the city shall be entitled to
reimbursement for expenses incurred for transportation, meals, lodging and
incidentals necessarily incurred in the performance of their official duties
in addition to such compensation as is otherwise provided. In case of any
doubt as to the necessity for the incurring of any expense, the city manager
shall determine whether such necessity existed and may allow, reject or
modify any claim or item or items thereof. (Prior code § 1355)



3.08.070   Procedure for payment.



   All expenses shall be audited and paid in accordance with the procedure
established by the city manager. The city manager may prescribe and provide
forms to be used in making such claims, and may require in any case receipts
or other evidence of payment of the amounts claimed by the party entitled
thereto. (Prior code § 1356)



3.08.080   Advance payment.



   The city manager shall have the authority to authorize the advance of
budgeted funds to city officers and employees to cover estimated official
expenses to be incurred in the performance of authorized travel. The payee
shall account for the expenditures of said funds within ten days after the
completion of said authorized travel and reimburse the city for any
unexpended portion of the advance. (Prior code § 1357)



Chapter 3.12
CIGARETTE TAX



Sections:



3.12.010   State cigarette tax.



3.12.010   State cigarette tax.



   In order to comply with the requirements of those provisions of Chapter
963 of the Statutes of 1967 which provide that state cigarette tax revenues
may not be allocated to any city imposing a selective local tax on, or with
respect to, the sale, distribution, use, consumption or holding of cigarettes
or any other tobacco product, after October 1, 1967, the provisions of
Sections 1900 through 1912 of the Ordinance Code relating to the imposition,
collection and enforcement of a cigarette tax shall be suspended on and after
October 1, 1967, and shall remain suspended and thereafter be of no force and
effect so long as the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
State of California as modified by said Chapter 963 and pursuant to which the
city is entitled to receive the allocation specified therein of the state
cigarette tax revenues, are effective; provided, however, that in the event
said Revenue and Taxation Code shall be further amended so that the city is
not entitled to receive the allocation of the state cigarette tax revenues
specified in said Chapter 963, then the said provisions of Sections 1900
through 1912 of the Ordinance Code shall upon the effective date of such
amendment become operative and effective; and further, provided, that in the
event the provisions of said revenue and taxation code, as added by said
Chapter 963, and pursuant to which the city is entitled to receive the
allocation specified therein of the state cigarette tax revenues, are for any
reason declared invalid, then and in that event the said provisions of
Sections 1900 through 1912 of the Ordinance Code shall not be deemed to have
been suspended but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect
continuously from and after October 1, 1967. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay the city any
cigarette tax accrued and owing by reason of said provisions of Sections 1900
through 1912 of the Ordinance Code in force and effect prior to and including
September 30, 1967. (Prior code § 1900)



Chapter 3.16
PROPERTY TAXES



Sections:



3.16.010   Property subject to taxation.



3.16.020   Definitions.



3.16.010   Property subject to taxation.



   All property within the city, not exempt under the laws of the United
States or the state of California, except property used exclusively for
public schools, free public libraries, free museums and such as may belong to
the United States, the State of California, the county of Tulare, or the
city, and except such property as is subject to taxation pursuant to
provisions of the Constitution and which taxes are declared by the
Constitution to be in lieu of all other taxes, is subject to taxation as in
this chapter provided, but nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require or permit double taxation. (Prior code § 1559)



3.16.020   Definitions.



   Whenever the terms metioned in this section are employed in this
chapter, they are employed in the sense hereafter affixed to them, to-wit:



   Credit and Solvent Credits. The terms "credits" and "solvent credits"
means those solvent debts, including contracts for the sale of personal
property, where title is vested in the vendor until the payment of the
purchase price specified in the contract, not secured by mortgage or trust
deed owing to the person, firm, corporation or association assessed.



   Debt. The term "debt" means those unsecured liabilities owning by the
person, firm, corporation, or association assessed to a bona fide resident of
the city, or firms, association, or corporations doing business therein; but
credits, claims, debts, demands due, owing or accruing for or on account of
money deposited with a savings and loan corporation or with a building and
loan association, the principal place of business of which is located in the
city, shall, for the purpose of taxation, be deemed, and treated as an
interest in the property of such corporation and shall not be assessed to the
creditor or owner thereof.



   Improvements. The term "improvements" includes:



   1.   All buildings, structures, fixtures, fences and improvements
erected upon or affixed to the land, except telephone and telegraph lines;



   2.   All fruit, nut bearing or ornamental trees and vines not of
natural growth, except fruit trees, nut bearing trees and vines exempted from
taxation under any law of the state of California.



   Personal Property. The term "personal property" includes everything
which is  subject to ownership not included within the meaning of the terms
"real estate" or "improvements."



   Property. The term "property" includes money, notes, debentures, shares
of capital stock, bonds, solvent credits, deeds of trust, mortgages and any
legal or equitable interest therein, dues, franchises, and all other matters
and things, real, personal and mixed, capable of private ownership.



   Real Estate. The term "real estate" includes:



   1.   The possession of, claim to, ownership of, or right to the
possession of land;



   2.   A mortgage, deed of trust, contract, or other obligation by
which a debt is secured, when land in this state is pledged as security for
the same and the discharge thereof, shall for the purpose of assessment and
taxation, be deemed and treated as an interest in the land so pledged, and
shall not be considered as property subject to taxation.



   Situs. The term "situs" for notes, debentures, shares of capital stock,
bonds and any legal or equitable interest therein, for the purpose of
taxation under the provisions of this chapter, shall be the domicile of the
owner or claimant thereof, regardless of the physical presence of instruments
evidencing the same.



   Value and Full Cash Value. The terms "value" and "full cash value" mean
the amount of which the property would be taken in payment of a just debt
from a solvent debtor. In determining "actual value" of notes, debentures,
shares of capital stock, bonds, and any legal or equitable interest therein,
the city assessor shall not take into account the existence of any custom or
common method, if any, of assessing any other class or classes of property,
at less than the full cash value thereof. (Prior code § 1561)



Chapter 3.20
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



Sections:



3.20.010   Title.



3.20.020   Tax rate.



3.20.030   Payment of tax.



3.20.040   Written instruments not taxed.



3.20.050   Agencies not taxed.



3.20.060   Reorganizations excepted.



3.20.070   Order of Securities and Exchange Commission excepted.



3.20.080   Partnership transactions excepted.



3.20.090   Beneficiary or mortgagee transactions excepted.



3.20.100   Spousal transactions excepted.



3.20.110   Purchaser agreement to reconvey transactions excepted.



3.20.120   Nonprofit corporation transactions excepted.



3.20.130   Administration.



3.20.140   Claims for refund.



3.20.150   Effective date.



3.20.010   Title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax
Ordinance of the City of Visalia." It is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 1950)



3.20.020   Tax rate.



   Except as otherwise provided, there is imposed on each deed, instrument
or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the
city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or
vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by
his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or
property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances
remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00),
a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 9605 § 10
(part), 1996: prior code § 1951)



3.20.030   Payment of tax.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid by any person
who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or
for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code §
1952)



3.20.040   Written instruments not taxed.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any
instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 1953)



3.20.050   Agencies not taxed.



   Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political
subdivision thereof, is party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant
to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 9605 § 10
(part), 1996: prior code § 1954)



3.20.060   Reorganizations excepted.



   A.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:



   1.   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;



   2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section
205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;



   3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court
involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of
Title 11 of the United States Code as amended; or



   4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of
organization is effected.



   B.   Subsections (1) to (4), inclusive, of this section shall only
apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or
conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation,
approval or change. (Prior code § 1955)



3.20.070   Order of Securities and Exchange Commission excepted.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making
or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:



   A.   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in
obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title
15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company
Act of 1935;



   B.   Such order specified the property which is ordered to be
conveyed;



   C.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code
§ 1956)



3.20.080   Partnership transactions excepted.



   A.   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall
be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest
in a partnership or otherwise; if:



   1.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; and



   2.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty
concerned.



   B.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning
of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this
chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination.



   C.   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter
by reason of a termination described in subsection (B) of this section and
any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such
partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 1957)



3.20.090   Beneficiary or mortgagee transactions excepted.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is
taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure;
provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration
exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure.
Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as
beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on said deed, instrument or writing
or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax
purposes. (Ord. 9605 § 11 (part), 1996: prior code § 1958)



3.20.100   Spousal transactions excepted.



   A.   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with
respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer,
divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property
assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community,
quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment
decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of
nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family
Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in
contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written
agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders.



   B.   In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection
(A) of this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a
written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument,
or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 9605 § 11 (part), 1996:
prior code § 1959)



3.20.110   Purchaser agreement to reconvey transactions excepted.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the
state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or
instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the
purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency.
(Ord. 9605 § 11 (part), 1996; prior code § 1960)



3.20.120   Nonprofit corporation transactions excepted.



   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect
to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state of California,
any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either
thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition,
construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by
obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental
unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of
Federal Regulations. (Ord. 9605 § 11 (part), 1996: prior code § 1961)



3.20.130   Administration.



   The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with
the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and
the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 9605
§ 12 (part), 1996: prior code § 1962)



3.20.140   Claims for refund.



   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of
Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of
California. (Ord. 9605 § 12 (part), 1996: prior code § 1963)



3.20.150   Effective date.



   This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any
ordinance adopted by the county of Tulare, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing
with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the
state of California, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, whichever is the later. (Ord. 9605 § 12 (part), 1996: prior
code § 1964)



Chapter 3.24
SALES AND USE TAX



Sections:



3.24.010   Short title.



3.24.020   Purpose.



3.24.030   Operative date--Contract with state.



3.24.040   Sales tax.



3.24.050   Use tax.



3.24.060   Amendments.



3.24.070   Enjoining collection forbidden.



3.24.010   Short title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Sales and Use Tax Ordinance
of the City of Visalia." (Prior code § 1750)



3.24.020   Purpose.



   The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter
is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that
the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:



   A.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California;



   B.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code;



   C.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a
ninety-five one hundredths of one percent (95/100) tax and provides a measure
therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner that adapts itself, is fully practical to, and
required the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;



   D.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be
administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with
the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under
the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 1751)



3.24.030   Operative date--Contract with state.



   This chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto
this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use
tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the
said State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956,
this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the
State Board of Equalization; provided, further that this chapter shall not
become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and
tax ordinance of the county of Tulare. (Prior code § 1752)



3.24.040   Sales tax.



   A.   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of
ninety-five one hundredths of one percent (95/100) of the gross receipts of
the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail
in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter.



   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are
consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible
personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an
out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an
out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include
delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use
tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a
retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one
place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are
consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed
and adopted by the board of equalization.



   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as
amended and in force and effective on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales
taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set
forth herein.



   D.   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California is named or referred
to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in
this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of
the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of
the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the
State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the
Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in
those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring
to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of
that substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect
to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the
provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to
impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be
subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in
addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state
in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715.
6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.



   E.   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under
Section 6068 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit
shall not be required by reason of this section.



   F.   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the
tax is measured:



   1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer;



   2.   Receipts from sales to operators of common carrier and
waterborne vessels of property to be used or consumed in the operation of
such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside of the city.
(Prior code § 1753)



3.24.050   Use tax.



   A.   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this ordinance, for storage, use
or other consumption in the city at the rate of ninety-five one hundredths of
one percent (95/100) of the sales price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales
or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.



   B.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code as
amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are
adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.



   C.   Whenever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California is named or referred
to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted
therefore. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the
substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when the word is
used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the
State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization or the name of the
State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the
name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against
the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of
Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to
have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to,
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California,
where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from
this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the
state under the provisions of Part 1, of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in addition, the
name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections
6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and
6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city
shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged
in business in this state" in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that
phrase in Section 6203.



   D.   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:



   1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of
California upon a retailer or consumer;



   2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5
of Division  2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county,
county, or city in this state.;



   3.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of the
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the
laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government;



   4.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and
6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other
consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft
and used or consumed by the operators directly and exclusively in the use of
the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government is exempt from the use tax. (Ord. 9605 §§ 13, 14, 1996: prior
code § 1754)



3.24.060   Amendments.



   All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter which relate to the sales and use tax and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code
§ 1755)



3.24.070   Enjoining collection forbidden.



   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state
or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or
enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected. (Prior code § 1756)



Chapter 3.28
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



Sections:



3.28.010   Definitions.



3.28.020   Tax imposed.



3.28.030   Exemptions.



3.28.040   Operator's duties.



3.28.050   Registration.



3.28.060   Reporting and remitting.



3.28.070   Penalties and interest.



3.28.080   Failure to collect and report tax--Determination of tax by tax
collector.



3.28.090   Appeal.



3.28.100   Records.



3.28.110   Refunds.



3.28.120   Actions to collect.



3.28.130   Deficiency determinations.



3.28.140   Violations--Misdemeanor.



3.28.010   Definitions.



   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in
this section govern the construction of this chapter:



   "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure, which is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house
trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof.
Hotel does not include a hospital room, medical clinic, convalescent home or
home for the aged. Also, hotel does not include a private home, vacation
cabin or  similar facility which is rented by a person who is not regularly
engaged in the business of renting such facilities and does so only
occasionally and incidentally to his own use thereof.



   "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.



   "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee,
or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a
managing agent or any type of character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with
the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.



   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or
any other group or combination action as a unit.



   "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.



   "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying
space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty
(30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In
determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may
be considered. (Prior code § 1800)



3.28.020   Tax imposed.



   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by
the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city
which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel, at the time the
rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of
the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon
the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the
tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax collector may
require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax collector. (Prior
code § 1801)



3.28.030   Exemptions.



   No tax shall be imposed upon:



   A.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is
beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;



   B.   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore
made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form
prescribed by the tax collector. (Prior code § 1802)



3.28.040   Operator's duties.



   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient.
The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent
charged, and each transient shall receive for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly
or indirectly that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by
the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added,
any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior
code § 1803)



3.28.050   Registration.



   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, or
within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each
operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said
hotel with the tax collector and obtain from him a transient occupancy
registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises. Said certificate shall among other things, state the following:



   A.   The name of the operator;



   B.   The address of the hotel;



   C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;



   D.   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies
that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of
the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax
Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient
Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Collector. This certificate
does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct
any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited
to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office
of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." (Prior code §
1804)



3.28.060   Reporting and remitting.



   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following
the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting
period which may be established by the tax collector, make a return to the
tax collector, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the
time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be
remitted to the tax collector. The tax collector may establish shorter
reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in
order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information
in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this
chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment
thereof is made to the tax collector. (Prior code § 1805)



3.28.070   Penalties and interest.



   A.   Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax
imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten
percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.



   B.   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the
date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second
delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to
the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.



   C.   Fraud. If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of
any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of
twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in
addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.



   D.   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance shall pay interest at
the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the
amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.



   E.   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such
interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part
of the tax herein required to be paid. (Prior code § 1806)



3.28.080   Failure to collect and report tax--Determination of tax by tax
collector.



   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect tax and to make, within
the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or
any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax collector shall proceed
in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which
to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax collector shall
procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base
the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator
who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator
the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such
determination is made, the tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so
assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last
known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving
or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax collector
for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a
hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and
penalties, if any, determined by the tax collector shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the
tax collector shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner
prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in
said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such
tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and
offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be
so fixed. After such hearing, the tax collector shall determine the proper
tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice and the amount of
such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be
payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in
Section 3.28.090. (Prior code § 1807)



3.28.090   Appeal.



   Any operator aggrieved by a decision of the tax collector with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15)
days of their serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator at his last known address. The
findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served
upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.28.080 for service
of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 1808)



3.28.100   Records.



   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve,
for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and
payment to the city, which records the tax collector shall have the right to
inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 1809)



3.28.110   Refunds.



   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as
provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section; provided, a claim in
writing therefore, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon
which the claim is founded, is filed with the collector within three years of
the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax
collector.



   B.   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed by the tax collector that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently
payable by the transient to the operator.



   C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by
filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but
only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax collector or
when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the
satisfaction of the tax collector that the transient has been unable to
obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.



   D.   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 1810)



3.28.120   Actions to collect.



   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any
such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall
be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to
the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code
§ 1811)



3.28.130   Deficiency determinations.



   If the tax collector is not satisfied with a return filed by an
operator or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city pursuant to
a return, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon
the basis of the facts contained in the return or upon the basis of any
information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One
or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any
period. The tax collector shall give to the operator written notice of his
determination in the same manner as provided in Section 3.28.070. The
operator shall be entitled to apply for a hearing on the amount assessed to
him pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 3.28.080 and shall
thereafter be entitled to appeal to the city council in accordance with the
provisions of Section 3.28.090. The penalties and interest provided by
Section 3.28.070 shall be applicable to the amount of deficiency established
pursuant to this section. (Prior code § 1812)



3.28.140   Violations--Misdemeanor.



   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   B.   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register
as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who
fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by
the tax collector, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is
guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify
any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by
this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 1813)



Chapter 3.32
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT REVENUE BONDS



Sections:



3.32.010   Title.



3.32.020   Purpose.



3.32.030   Definitions.



3.32.040   No limitation on appropriations.



3.32.050   Loans for facilities.



3.32.060   Acquisition, construction, leasing and selling of facilities.



3.32.070   Applications for approval.



3.32.080   Fees.



3.32.090   Insurance.



3.32.100   Rents and charges.



3.32.110   Security for loans.



3.32.120   Professional services.



3.32.130   Public works requirements inapplicable.



3.32.140   Additional powers.



3.32.150   Issuance of bonds.



3.32.160   Bonds not debt of city.



3.32.170   Bond terms.



3.32.180   Bond provisions.



3.32.190   Pledge of revenues, money or property--Lien.



3.32.200   No personal liability.



3.32.210   Purchase of bonds by city.



3.32.220   Actions by bondholders.



3.32.230   Refunding bonds.



3.32.240   Bond anticipation notes.



3.32.250   Validity of bonds.



3.32.260   Liberal construction.



3.32.270   Omissions not to affect validity of bonds.



3.32.280   Full authority.



3.32.290   Additional authority.



3.32.300   Chapter controlling.



3.32.310   Severability.



3.32.010   Title.



   This chapter may be cited as the "City of Visalia Economic Development
Revenue Bond Law." (Prior code § 8100)



3.32.020   Purpose.



   A.   The Council finds and declares that it is necessary and
essential to the well-being of the city that it provide financial assistance
to promote the economic development of the city. Such economic development
will serve the following public purposes and municipal affairs of the city:



   1.   The full and gainful employment of residents of the city;



   2.   The full and efficient utilization and modernization of
existing industrial, commercial and business facilities;



   3.   The development of new industrial, commercial and business
facilities;



   4.   The growth of the city's tax base through increased property
values and consumer purchasing;



   5.   The reduction of the need for the costs of welfare and other
remedial programs;



   6.   The reduction of urban ills, such as crime, attributable in
part to inadequate economic opportunities;



   7.   The stability and diversification of the city's economy;



   8.   The lowering of the cost to city consumers of necessary goods
and services;



   9.   The environmentally optimum disposition of waste materials of
the city; and



   10.   The enhancement of the general economic prosperity, health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city.



   B.   The availability of the financial assistance authorized by this
chapter will serve those purposes and the general plan of the city by
providing private enterprises with new methods of financing capital outlays
in the city and by ensuring that economic development within the city will
reflect the local community's needs and objectives and will be
environmentally optimum with respect to both the physical and social
environment of the city. The city shall promote such public interests
pursuant to this chapter without adversely affecting areas outside the city
and without conflicting with efforts by the state of California to solve
problems of statewide concern. (Prior code § 8105)



3.32.030   Definitions.



   Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms defined in this
chapter shall have the following meanings:



   "Bonds" means the bonds, notes, certificates, debentures and other
obligations, authorized to be issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and
payable as provided in this chapter.



   "City" means the city of Visalia.



   "Cost" means the total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a
participating party to carry out all works and undertakings and to obtain all
rights and powers necessary or incident to the acquisition, construction,
installation, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a facility.
"Cost" may include all costs of issuance of bonds for such purposes, costs
for construction undertaken by a participating party as its own contractor,
capitalized bond interest, reserves for debt service and for repairs,
replacements, additions and improvements to a facility, and other working
capital incident to the operation of a facility.



   "Council" means the city council of the city.



   "Facility" means any of the facilities, places or buildings within the
city which are, or will be, maintained and operated for industrial,
commercial or business purposes, conform to the general plan of the city and
are approved by the city for the financing authorized by this chapter, such
approval being given only when the city finds and determines that such
financing: (1) will substantially promote one or more of the public purposes
listed in Section 3.32.020; and (2) will not have the proximate effect of the
relocation of any substantial operations of the participating party from one
area of the state to another or the abandonment of any substantial operations
of such participating party within other areas of the state; or, if such
financing will have either of such effects, then such financing is reasonably
necessary to prevent the relocation of any substantial operations of the
participating party from an area within the state to an area outside the
state.



   A facility may be an activity which may otherwise be financed pursuant
to the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Government Code §§
91500 et seq.) to the extent said Act permits the financing of such activity
under alternative authority and shall include visitor serving commercial
facilities or transient visitor accommodation facilities. For purposes of
this definition, "visitor serving accommodation facilities" shall include,
but shall not be limited to, hotels, motels, restaurants, and recreational
and shopping facilities, the primary  purpose of which is serving visitors.
Facility includes, without limitation, real and personal property, land,
buildings, structures, fixtures, machinery and/or equipment and all such
property related to or required or useful for the operation of a facility.
Facility does not include any facility, place or building used or to be used
primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place for devotional
activities or religious worship.



   "Participating party" means any individual, association, corporation,
partnership, local agency (including but not limited to the city's
redevelopment agency) or other entity which is approved by the city to
undertake the financing of the costs of a facility for which this chapter
authorizes the issuance of the bonds.



   "Revenues" means amounts received by the city as payments of principal,
interest, and all other charges with respect to a loan authorized by this
chapter, as payments under a lease, sublease or sale agreement with respect
to a facility, as proceeds received by the city from mortgage, hazard or
other insurance on or with respect to such a loan (or any property securing
such loan), lease, sublease or sale agreement, all other rents, charges,
fees, income and receipts derived by the city from the financing of a
facility authorized by this chapter, any amounts received by the city as
investment earnings on moneys deposited in any fund securing the bonds, and
such other legally available moneys as the council may, in its discretion,
lawfully designate as revenues. (Prior code § 8110)



3.32.040   No limitation on appropriations.



   Revenues, as defined by this chapter, and the expenditure of such
revenues shall not be taken into account in any manner in determining the
city's compliance with Article XIIIB of the California Constitution. (Prior
code § 8115)



3.32.050   Loans for facilities.



   The city is authorized to make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the
making of, a mortgage or other secured or unsecured loan, with the proceeds
of bonds and upon such terms and conditions as the city shall deem proper, to
any participating party for the costs of the facility. (Prior code § 8200)



3.32.060   Acquisition, construction, leasing and selling of facilities.



   A.   The city is authorized to acquire, construct, enlarge, remodel,
renovate, alter, improve, furnish, equip and lease as lessee, with the
proceeds of bonds, a facility solely for the purpose of selling or leasing as
lessor such facility to such participating party, and is further authorized
to make any contracts for such purposes. The city is also authorized to
contract with such participating party to undertake on behalf of the city to
construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve, furnish and equip such
facility.



   B.   The city is authorized to sell or lease, upon such terms and
conditions as the city shall deem proper, to a participating party any
facility owned by the city under this chapter, including a facility conveyed
to the city in connection with a financing authorized by this chapter but not
being financed hereunder. (Prior code § 8205)



3.32.070   Applications for approval.



   Any person may apply to the city for approval as a participating party
and for approval of a facility for financing under this chapter. Applications
shall set forth such information as the city may require in order to enable
the city to evaluate the applicant, the facility and its proposed costs.
(Prior code § 8210)



3.32.080   Fees.



   The city is authorized to charge participating parties application,
commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative
and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and
duties conferred by this chapter. The council shall direct the city clerk to
transmit a letter agreement or contract to a participating party which will
obligate such party to pay such fees and expenses as the council may charge
or incur hereunder. (Prior code § 8215)



3.32.090   Insurance.



   The city is authorized to obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any
department or agency of the United States or of the state of California or
any private company, any insurance or guarantee as to, or of, or for the
payment or repayment of, interest or principal, or both, rents, fees or other
charges, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation or any
instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into as
authorized by this chapter; and is authorized to accept payment in such
manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a
participating party, and to assign any such insurance or guarantee as
security for bonds. (Prior code § 8220)



3.32.100   Rents and charges.



   The city is authorized to fix rents, payments, fees, charges and
interest rates for a financing authorized by this chapter and to agree to
revise from time to time such rents, payments, fees, charges and interest
rates to reflect changes in interest rates on bonds, losses due to defaults
or changes in other expenses related to this chapter, including city
administrative expenses. (Prior code § 8225)



3.32.110   Security for loans.



   The city is authorized to hold deeds of trust or mortgages or security
interests in personal property as security for loans and other obligations
authorized by this chapter and to pledge or assign the same as security
repayment of bonds. Such deeds of trust, mortgages or security interests, or
any other interest of the city in any facility, may be assigned to, and held
on behalf of the city by, any bank or trust company appointed to act as
trustee by the city in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of
bonds. (Prior code § 8230)



3.32.120   Professional services.



   The city is authorized to contract for such engineering, architectural,
financial, accounting, legal or other services as may be necessary in the
judgment of the city for the purposes of this chapter. (Prior code § 8235)



3.32.130   Public works requirements inapplicable.



   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the acquisition,
construction, installation, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of
a facility financed under this chapter shall not be subject to any
requirements relating to buildings, works or improvements owned or operated
by the city, and any requirement for public competitive bidding or other
procedural restriction imposed on the award of contracts for acquisition or
construction of the city building, work or improvement or to the lease,
sublease, sale or other disposition of city property shall not be applicable
to any action taken under this chapter. (Prior code § 8240)



3.32.140   Additional powers.



   In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this chapter,
the city is authorized to contract for and do all things necessary or
convenient to carry out the purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that
the city shall not have the power to operate a facility financed under this
chapter as a business, except temporarily in the case of a default by a
participating party. (Prior code § 8245)



3.32.150   Issuance of bonds.



   The city is authorized to issue bonds in an aggregate principal amount
not to exceed one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000.00) and to issue such
bonds, from time to time, in such series and amounts as are determined by the
council to be necessary or appropriate to provide for the costs of facilities
approved by the council. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all
purposes, subject only to the provisions of such bonds for registration.
(Prior code § 8300)



3.32.160   Bonds not debt of city.



   A.   All of the bonds authorized to be issued shall be limited
obligations of the city payable from all or any specified part of the
revenues and moneys and assets authorized in this chapter to be pledged or
assigned to secure payment of bonds. Such revenues, moneys or assets shall be
the sole source of repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued as
authorized by this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or
liability of the city or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city but
shall be payable solely from specified revenues, moneys and assets. The
issuance of bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate
the city to levy or pledge any form of taxation or to make any appropriation
for their payment.



   B.   All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the
following effect:



         Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the
City of Visalia is pledged to the payment of the principal of or premium, if
any, or interest on this bond.



(Prior code § 8305)



3.32.170   Bond terms.



   A.   Bonds shall be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment
bonds or pass-through certificates or any combination thereof. The mayor or
city manager shall determine the terms and timing of the issuance of
particular bonds in accord with the resolution of the council approving the
particular facility to be financed thereby. Bonds shall bear such date or
dates, mature at such time or times not to exceed forty (40) years, bear
interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates approved by the
participating party whose facility is being financed but not to exceed the
maximum rate permitted by law, be payable at such time or times, be in such
denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such
registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful
money of the United States of America at such place or places, be subject to
such terms of redemption and have such other terms and conditions as such
resolution, or any indenture to be entered into by the city pursuant to such
resolution, shall provide. Bonds shall be sold at either public or private
sale and for such prices as the city shall determine. (Prior code § 8310)



3.32.180   Bond provisions.



   Any resolution relating to the issuance of any bonds, or any indenture
to be entered into by the city pursuant to such resolution, may contain
provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall
be a part of the contract with the holders of such bonds:



   A.   The terms, conditions and form of such bonds and the interest
and principal to be paid thereon;



   B.   Limitation on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of
sale of such bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such
proceeds to secure the payment of such bonds;



   C.   Limitations on the issuance of additional parity bonds, the
terms upon which additional parity bonds may be issued and secured, and the
refunding of outstanding bonds;



   D.   The setting aside of reserves, sinking funds and other funds
and the regulation and disposition thereof;



   E.   The pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and
of any other moneys or assets legally available therefore (including loans,
deeds of trust, mortgages, leases, subleases, sales agreements and other
contracts and security interests) and the use and disposition of such
revenues, moneys and assets, subject to such agreements with the holders of
bonds as may then be outstanding;



   F.   Limitation on the use of revenues for operating, administration
or other expenses of the city;



   G.   Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall
constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of such bonds, and
providing the rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default,
including any limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders;



   H.   The appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the
city and the holders of its bonds, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds
of trust, mortgages, leases, subleases, sale contracts and any other
contracts to such trustee, and the rights of such trustee;



   I.   The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such bonds the holders
of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be
given;



   J.   Any other provisions which the council may deem reasonable and
proper for the purposes of this chapter and the security of the bondholders;
and



   K.   The investment, deposit and reinvestment of funds under the
control of the city and bond proceeds in the types of securities or
obligations authorized in the resolution, or any indenture, to be entered
into by the city pursuant to the resolution, relating to the issuance of any
bonds. (Prior code § 8315)



3.32.190   Pledge of revenues, money or property--Lien.



   Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets as authorized by this
chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made.
Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the city
shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical
delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be
valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort,
contract, or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties
have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a
pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the records of the
city. (Prior code § 8320)



3.32.200   No personal liability.



   Neither the members of the council, the officers or employees of the
city, nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the
bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of
the issuance thereof. (Prior code § 8325)



3.32.210   Purchase of bonds by city.



   The city shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to
purchase its bonds. The city may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such bonds,
subject to and in accordance with agreements with the bondholders. (Prior
code § 8330)



3.32.220   Actions by bondholders.



   Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter or any
of the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to
any resolution relating to the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the
rights thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture
authorized thereby to be entered into by the city, may, either at law or in
equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect or enforce
any and all rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and
may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this chapter
or by such resolution or indenture to be performed by the city or by any
officer, employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging and
collecting of rates, fees, interest, and charges authorized and required by
the provisions of such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged and
collected. (Prior code § 8335)



3.32.230   Refunding bonds.



   The city is authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any
bonds then outstanding. (Prior code § 8340)



3.32.240   Bond anticipation notes.



   In anticipation of the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter, the
city is authorized to issue bond anticipation notes, and to renew the same
from time to time, in such series and amounts as are determined by the
council to be necessary or appropriate for the costs of facilities approved
by the council. Such notes shall be payable from revenues or other moneys or
assets authorized by this chapter to be pledged to secure payment of bonds,
and which are not otherwise pledged, or from the proceeds of sale of the
particular bonds in anticipation of which they are issued. Such notes shall
be issued in the same manner as bonds. The mayor or city manager shall
determine the terms and timing of the issuance of particular bond
anticipation notes in accord with the provisions of Section 3.32.170 and the
resolution of the council approving the particular facility to be financed
thereby. Such notes, any resolution relating to the issuance of such notes
and any indenture to be entered into by the city pursuant to such resolution
may contain any provisions, conditions or limitations permitted under Section
3.32.180. (Prior code § 8345)



3.32.250   Validity of bonds.



   The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not
dependent on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by
the city for the approval of any financing or the entering into of any
agreement, or by the failure to provide financing or enter into any
agreement, for which bonds are authorized to be issued under this chapter.
(Prior code § 8350)



3.32.260   Liberal construction.



   This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. (Prior code
§ 8400)



3.32.270   Omissions not to affect validity of bonds.



   Any omission of any officer or the city in proceedings under this
chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such
proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 8405)



3.32.280   Full authority.



   This chapter is full authority for the issuance of bonds by the city
for any of the purposes specified herein. (Prior code § 8410)



3.32.290   Additional authority.



   This chapter shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and
alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, and shall be
regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other
laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this chapter need not
comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to the issuance of
bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and bonds are
authorized to be issued for any such purposes under this chapter
notwithstanding that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the
issuance of bonds for like purposes and without regard to the requirements,
restrictions, limitations or other provisions contained in any other law.
(Prior code § 8415)



3.32.300   Chapter controlling.



   To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with
the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling. (Prior code § 8420)



3.32.310   Severability.



   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any
other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions
of this chapter are declared to be severable. The council declares that it
would have adopted and passed this chapter and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase and word hereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more of the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases
or words hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 8425)



Chapter 3.36
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND



Sections:



3.36.010   General provisions.



3.36.020   Money received.



3.36.030   Money expended.



3.36.010   General provisions.



   To comply with the provisions of Section 196, Article 5 of Chapter 1 of
Division of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city
treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street
Improvement Fund." (Prior code § 3275)



3.36.020   Money received.



   All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the
provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real
property or interest therein for, or for engineering, or for the
construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways by the city
shall be paid into said fund. (Prior code § 3276)



3.36.030   Money expended.



   All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to the provisions of Section 194-202 of Article 5,
Chapter 1, Division 1, and Chapter 3, Division 3  of the Streets and
Highways Code. (Ord. 9605 § 15, 1996: prior code § 3277)



Chapter 3.37
CONTRACTS FOR MUNICIPAL WORKS



Section:



3.37.100   City Labor Code compliance.



3.37.200   Compliance with S.B. 7.



3.37.100   City Labor Code compliance.



   A.   Payment of prevailing wages. Except as provided in Section
3.37.200, no city contract shall require payment of the prevailing wage
schedule unless:



   1.   The prevailing wage is legally required, and constitutionally
permitted to be imposed, by federal or state grants pursuant to federal or
state law; or



   2.   The project is considered by the city council not to be a
municipal affair of the city; or



   3.   Payment of the prevailing wage schedule is authorized by
resolution of the city council.



   4.   Payment of the prevailing wage schedule, if authorized
hereunder, shall use the pertinent rates published by the State of California.



   B.   California Labor Code Compliance. Except as provided in Section
3.37.200, and unless otherwise required by law or the provisions of this
code, the city is not subject to the provisions of Articles 1, 1.5, or 2 of
Chapter 1, Part 7, Division 2 of the California Labor Code, or with any
provisions of the California Administrative Code enacted pursuant to those
Articles.



   C.   Volunteer Services. The provisions of Section 1720.4 of the
California Labor Code, excluding Subsection 1720.4(1)(C), shall be applicable
in the city.  (Ord. 2014-13 § 1, 2014; Ord. 2013-02 § 1, 2013)



3.37.200   Compliance with S.B. 7.



   A.   Purpose and Findings. The purpose of this Section 3.37.200 is
to ensure that the City of Visalia remains eligible to receive funding for
various projects from the State of California while preserving the city's
ability to control the manner in which it contracts for municipal projects.
The city council of the City of Visalia finds that S.B. 7, adopted by the
Legislature of the State of California in 2013, unconstitutionally conditions
the ability of the City of Visalia to receive funding from the State of
California on the city's compliance with the state prevailing wage law for
all local projects, even those that do not utilize state funding. The city
council finds that such requirement will cause local projects, which do not
involve any state funding and must therefore be paid for entirely from local
funds, to increase in cost significantly, thereby constituting a detriment to
the residents of the City of Visalia whose tax dollars are utilized for local
projects. The city council further finds that S.B. 7 has been challenged by
other cities on constitutional grounds, and such litigation is still pending
as of the adoption of this Ordinance. The city council finds that, as long as
S.B. 7 (Section 1782 of the California Labor Code) remains valid law, the
city intends to comply with S.B. 7's conditions regarding local projects in
order to continue to receive state funding on non-local projects, but if S.B.
7 (Section 1782 of the California Labor Code) is held to be invalid and
inapplicable to Charter Cities, then the City of Visalia should no longer
apply the state prevailing wage law to local projects. In furtherance of
these findings, it is intended that the provisions of this Section 3.37.200
cease to be applicable in the event that S.B. 7 (Section 1782 of the
California Labor Code) is found by a court of law in the State of California
to be invalid or its enforcement and effect is staid pending appellate review.



   B.   Compliance with State Prevailing Wage Laws. Subject to
subparagraph C. below, all city contracts for public works advertised for bid
after December 31, 2014, shall require payment of the prevailing wage
schedule and shall comply with Article 2 of Chapter 1, Part 7, Division 2 of
the California Labor Code, and with California Administrative Code provisions
enacted pursuant to those Articles.



   C.   Repeal or Suspension of Section in Event of Invalidity of State
Law or Stay of Enforcement.



   1.   This section shall no longer be of any force or effect upon the
entry into the official records of the City of Visalia of a final judgment
invalidating Labor Code Section 1782 (Senate Bill Number 7 (2013)) entered in
the matter of City of El Centra et. al. v. Lanier et. al. (San Diego Superior
Court Case Number 37-2014-00003824-CU-WM-CTL, filed February 20, 2014) or any
other action challenging said section. A statutory invalidation, for the
purposes of this ordinance, includes a judgment finding that Senate Bill
Number 7 (2013) (California Labor Code Section 1782), and any amendments
thereto, is not a matter of statewide concern and/or does not apply to the
municipal affairs of any Charter City.



   2.   This section shall not be given effect during the period of
time that a judicial order staying the enforcement of S.B. 7 (2013)
(California Labor Code Section 1782) pending judicial review remains in
effect, provided the order implementing such a stay is entered into the
official records of the City of Visalia.  (Ord. 2014-13 § 2, 2014)



Chapter 3.40
SALES AND USE TAX ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES



Sections:



   3.40.010   Title.



   3.40.020   Applicability.



   3.40.030   Initial and subsequent expenditure plans.



   3.40.040   Sales Tax Oversight Board.



   3.40.050   Annual audit.



3.40.010   Title.



   This chapter shall be known as the City of Visalia Sales Tax
Accountability Ordinance.



(Ord. 2016-21 § 1 (part), 2016)



3.40.020   Applicability.



   The provisions of this Chapter 3.40 shall apply to the proceeds of any
sales and use tax that is made specifically subject to this chapter by the
ordinance that enacts such sales and use tax.



(Ord. 2016-21 § 1 (part), 2016)



3.40.030   Initial and subsequent expenditure plans.



   A.   The City Council shall, prior to the imposition of a sales and
use tax that is subject to the provisions of this chapter, adopt, by
resolution approved by a majority of the Council, an initial spending plan
specifying the uses of the proceeds of the sales or use tax. The initial
expenditure plan shall cover the period between implementation of the sales
and use tax and the end of the subsequent fiscal year.



   B.   Prior to expiration of the initial expenditure plan and as part
of adoption of an annual city general fund budget, the City Council shall
adopt, by resolution approved by a majority of the Council, an annual
expenditure plan specifying the uses of the proceeds of the sales or use tax
that is subject to the provisions of this chapter, applicable to the coming
fiscal year.



   C.   The initial expenditure plan and any subsequent annual
expenditure plan may be amended at any time by resolution adopted by a
majority of the Council, following 1) submission for comment and
recommendation to the Sales Tax



Oversight Board as established pursuant to Section 3.040.040, and 2) public
hearing during at least two regularly scheduled and appropriately noticed
meetings of the City Council.



   D.   Following adoption, the city shall make the initial expenditure
plan, any subsequent annual expenditure plan, and any amended expenditure
plan publicly accessible at all times.



   E.   The initial expenditure plan shall dedicate 10% of budgeted
revenues for the initial year of the plan to establish an economic
uncertainty fund, which may only be accessed in times of fiscal emergencies,
defined as a deficit in expected revenues such that the other features of the
plan are not able to be funded as planned. The Council may direct that the
economic uncertainty fund be accessed in order to fund the remainder of the
plan in the case of a fiscal emergency, as determined by 4/5ths vote of the
City Council. Annual expenditure plans shall provide for the dedication of
such budgeted funds as are necessary to maintain the economic uncertainty
fund at 10% of budgeted revenues and to replenish any amounts used in the
event of a fiscal emergency in the prior year.



   F.   Each expenditure plan shall fund 10% of the budgeted revenues
in a maintenance and emerging needs fund to be used by Council for
maintenance and emerging needs of the city, as determined from time to time
by the City Council. Twenty percent  (20%) of the ten percent (10%) (a total
of two percent (2%) of all annual budgeted revenues) shall be dedicated
within this fund to youth programs.



   G.   In no case shall any expenditure plan provide for the use of
funds to pay debt service payments.



(Ord. 2016-21 § 1 (part), 2016)



3.40.040   Sales Tax Oversight Board.



   The Council will appoint an eleven member standing oversight committee
to constitute the Sales Tax Oversight Board (the “Board”). Each member of
the Board shall be a Visalia resident. The members of the Board shall serve
two year terms, and may be reappointed for up to two additional two-year
terms for a total of three consecutive terms. The members of the Sales Tax
Oversight Board shall be selected in the following manner:



   A.   Each City Council member shall select one (1) member for the
Board;



   B.   The Citizens' Advisory Committee shall select two (2) of its
members to serve as a member of the Board;



   C.   Four (4) members of the Board shall be appointed by the
following:



   1.   One (1) member selected by the Visalia Economic Development
Corporation.



   2.   One (1) member selected by the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce of
Tulare/Kings County or the Visalia Chamber of Commerce. The two organizations
may either jointly chose a representative or alternate service for 6 year
periods. If the organizations choose alternate selections, the beginning
selection shall occur by random selection.



   3.   One (1) member selected by the Downtown Alliance that
represents the Property Based Improvement District owners or the Downtown
Merchants.



   4.   One (1) member selected by the Home Builders Association or the
Board of Realtors. The two organizations may either jointly chose a
representative or alternate service for 6 year periods. If the organizations
choose alternate selections, the beginning selection shall occur by random
selection.



   In the event any of the entities described in sections B. and C. above
no longer exist, the Council shall identify replacement entities to select
members, or the Council may appoint individuals directly as necessary to
maintain a total of eleven (11) members for the Board.



(Ord. 2016-21 § 1 (part), 2016)



3.40.050   Annual audit.



   The city shall provide for an annual independent audit to account for
the tax revenues received and expenditures made in relation to the tax that
is subject to this chapter, and to ensure consistency with the advisory
expenditure plan required by Section 3.40.030. Such audits will be provided
to the Sales Tax Oversight Board as established by Section 3.40.040.



(Ord. 2016-21 § 1 (part), 2016)



 



Title 4
RESERVED



Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapters:



5.04   Business Licenses Generally



5.08   Auction Sales



5.12   Bingo



5.16   Close-out, Fire and Bankruptcy Sales



5.20   Fortunetellers



5.24   Garage Sales and Artist and Craft Person Sales



5.28   Hotels and Lodging Houses



5.32   Peddlers and Solicitors



5.36   Private Patrol Services



5.40   Public Dances



5.44   Self-service Car Washes



5.48   Taxicabs



5.52   Town Center Business Improvement Area



5.56   Waste Tire Haulers



5.60   Cable Television



5.64   Adult-oriented Business Regulations



5.68   Massage Establishments



5.72  Sidewalk Vendor Regulations



Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY



Sections:



Article 1. General Prov\isions



5.04.010   Definitions.



5.04.020   Revenue measure.



5.04.030   Effect of other ordinances and city laws.



5.04.040   Tax payment required.



5.04.050   Tax a debt.



5.04.060   Remedies cumulative.



5.04.070   Branch establishments.



5.04.080   Evidence of doing business.



5.04.090   Interstate commerce.



5.04.100   Rules, regulations and other fees.



5.04.110   Exemptions.



5.04.120   Application.



5.04.130   Types of documents.



5.04.140   Certificate not an authorization for a business.



5.04.150   Statement and records.



5.04.160   Information confidential.



5.04.170   Failure to file statement or corrected statement.



5.04.180   Appeal.



5.04.190   Close or change of ownership.



5.04.200   Business tax certificate nontransferable.



5.04.210   Duplicate certificate.



5.04.220   Posting/keeping business tax certificates.



5.04.230   Tax--How and when payable.



5.04.240   Proration.



5.04.250   Refunds.



5.04.260   Annual adjustment of fixed tax for inflation.



5.04.270   Business tax--Gross receipts.



5.04.280   Business tax fees.



5.04.290   Enforcement.



5.04.300   Effect of title on past actions--Unexpired business tax
certificate.



5.04.310   Discretionary duties.



5.04.320   Environmental findings of fact.



Article 2. Exemption from Business Tax Payment



5.04.330   United States Constitution or state of California Constitution.



5.04.340   Part-time, over sixty-five or under eighteen years of age.



5.04.350   Artists and art exhibits.



5.04.360   Artists and craft persons sale.



5.04.370   Garage sales.



5.04.380   Certain teachers.



5.04.390   Exemptions--Revocation of.



Article 3. Violation and Penalty



5.04.400   Violation--Penalty provision.



5.04.410   Misdemeanor.



5.04.420   Infraction.



5.04.430   Suspension/revocation of permit.



Article 1. General Provisions



5.04.010   Definitions.



   Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is
intended, the following words and/or phrases, when used in this title, shall
have the meaning respectively ascribed to them and shall be interpreted and
construed accordingly. As used in this title, the following words or phrases
shall mean:



   Administrative and Corporate Headquarters. "Administrative and
corporate headquarters," as defined by the collector, shall pay a minimum
annual business tax. This is an office that is located within the city limits
that provide administrative or management related services such as, but not
limited to, record keeping, data processing, research, personnel
administration, and corporate headquarters services to other locations where
the operations of the same business are conducted which lead more directly to
the production of gross receipts.



   Annual Gross Receipts. "Annual gross receipts", means the total "gross
receipts" (as defined in this section) for the calendar year.



   Business. "Business" includes professions, trades, and occupations and
all and every kind of calling carried on with or without the intent of making
a profit.



   Business District. "Business district" means any area zoned for
business purposes by the zoning regulations of the city.



   Business Tax Certificate. "Business tax certificate" shall mean the
physical documentation verifying payment of tax issued by the collector,
indicating the tax period covered.



   Calendar Year. "Calendar year" means January 1st, of any given year,
through and including December 31st of such year.



   City. "City" means the city of Visalia, a certified California
chartered city.



   City Council. "City council" means any city council of the city.



   Chief of Police. "Chief of police" means any chief of police of the
police department of the city, or his/her duly authorized deputies, or
assistants who may be charged with the responsibility of enforcing this title.



   Collector. "Collector" means the director of the finance department, or
his/her duly authorized deputies, or assistants who may be charged with the
collection of business taxes and the issuance of business tax certificates.



   Contractor. "Contractor" means any contractor, who is required to be
licensed as a contractor by the state of California, or any entity that
undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity of
undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself/herself or by or through
others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move,
wreck, or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or
other structure, project, development, or improvement, or to do any part
thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works
in connection therewith.  The term contractor includes specialty contractor,
and further includes an entity that contracts to hire out personnel and
trucks, tractors, excavating or other equipment in connection with a
construction project, whether at rates by the hour or day or for a contract
amount. Contractors shall include general contractors, specialty contractors,
developers, engineering contractors, and all subcontractors doing work within
the city.



   Director of Finance. "Director of finance" means any director of the
finance department of the city, or his/her duly authorized deputies, or
assistants who may be charged with the collection of business taxes and the
issuance of business tax certificates.



   Employee. "Employee" means any individual engaged in the operation or
conduct of any business, whether as a member of the owner's family, agent,
manager, solicitor or any other individual employed or working in said
business.



   Entity. "Entity" includes all domestic and foreign corporations,
associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every
kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies, persons
and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other
than as an employee.



   Fixed Place of Business. "Fixed place of business" shall mean the
premises within the city where a specific business is continuously conducted
from day to day and regularly kept open for the purposes of such business.



   Gross Payroll. "Gross payroll" includes the total gross amount of all
salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, or other money payment of any kind
which an individual received from or is entitled to receive from or be given
credit for by his/her employer for any work done or personal service rendered
in any trade as reported on federal, quarterly or annual payroll forms 941 or
940; provided, however, that where employees working in the city were
reported as having worked elsewhere than in the city, the part of their wages
paid or due for work performed in the city shall be included as gross payroll
in the city.



   Gross Receipts. "Gross receipts" includes the annual total amounts
actually received or receivable for any sale or for the performance of any
act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which charge is made or
credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in
connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; and gains
realized from trading in stocks or bonds, interest income, carrying charges,
rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, or other emoluments, however
designated. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits
and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor
or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses
whatsoever. Excluded from gross receipts, shall be the following:



   1.   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;



   2.   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the
purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser (example sales
tax or excise tax);



   3.   Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers
upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by
credit;



   4.   Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as
trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected;
provided, the trustee has furnished the collector with the names and
addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;



   5.   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable
deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be
excluded;



   6.   As to a real estate broker, the sales price of real estate sold
for the account of others, except that portion which represents commission or
other income to the broker;



   7.   As to alcohol, alcoholic beverages, bars, restaurants, liquor
stores, and like businesses dispensing and/or selling alcoholic beverages,
only that portion of the gross receipts related to the manufacture,
transportation or sale of alcohol shall be exempt;



   8.   Amounts received or receivable by an entity having a fixed
place of business within the city for acts or services performed outside the
city, but only to the extent a business tax has been paid to the city or
cities in which the acts or services were performed for gross receipts, up to
a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total gross receipts;



   9.   Renting, letting, or subletting of property owned by an entity
to himself/herself or to an entity wholly owned by him/her.



   Individual. "Individual" shall mean one separate being; natural
individual. Such individual shall not represent any group of individuals.



   Itinerant Vendor. "Itinerant vendor" includes all entities, both
principal and agent, who engage in a transient business in the city selling
materials, goods, wares and/or merchandise and for the purpose of carrying on
such business hire, lease or occupy any room, booth, building or structure
for the exhibition or sale of such materials, goods, wares and/or
merchandise, or who from any such room, booth, building or structure makes
sales.  The entities so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of
this title by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in
connection with, or as a part of, or in the name of, any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer. Additionally, the business shall be
classified as an itinerant vendor if such business conducts business in the
city for less than ninety-one (91) calendar days; further, such business may
be classified by the collector as an itinerant vendor if such business
conducts business continuously for less than three hundred sixty-five (365)
calendar days.



   Lodging House Business. "Lodging house business" includes any entity
conducting, carrying on or managing any building  in which sleeping rooms or
apartments are or may be let or hired to six or more individuals for one or
more nights, whether compensation therefore be paid in money, labor,
merchandise or otherwise; and includes hotels and apartment houses where
cooking is not done in any room or apartment except in the general kitchen
used and operated in connection with the business of such lodging house,
hotel or apartment house.



   Musical performances. "Musical performances" includes any concert,
minstrel show, band concert, musical performance or exhibition, or
entertainment, or other public exhibition, where a charge may be made for
admission or seats; provided, that "musical performances" shall not include
public dances or circuses.



   Outdoor Advertising Business. "Outdoor advertising business" includes
any entity carrying on or engaged in the business or occupation of providing
outdoor advertising for others.



   Peddle. "Peddle" means to sell and make immediate delivery, or offer
for sale and immediate delivery, any materials, goods, wares, or merchandise
in possession of the seller, at any place within the City other than from a
fixed place of business.



   Peddler. "Peddler" includes any hawker, vendor, or other individual who
goes from house to house, from place to place, or in or along the streets
within the city selling and making immediate delivery or offering for sale
and immediate delivery any materials, goods, wares, merchandise or anything
of value in his/her possession to entities other than manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, or retailers in such commodities.



   Police Department. "Police department" means police department (also
known as the department of public safety) of the city.



   Public Utility. "Public utility" means any entity which furnishes the
public with communication, water, light, gas, heat, power, waste
treatment/collection/removal, or other public utility or service subject to
regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or a
franchise agreement with the city.



   Real Estate Developer/Real Estate Subdivider. This type of business
will pay on gross receipts from the commissions per the lots/houses/ offices
of the development. The business tax application shall be remitted at the
beginning of the development  project.



   Rental of Commercial Property Business. An entity shall be considered
to be in the business of renting commercial property if they rent for
consideration one or more units. A commercial landlord is someone who
rents/subleases the property for consideration.



   Rental of Residential Property Business. An entity shall be considered
to be in the business of renting residential property if they rent for
consideration two or more units, be they single-family dwellings, trailers,
mobile homes or other units in multiple family residences, within the city
limits.



   Sale. "Sale" includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, of title to real or personal property for a consideration; the
serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a
transaction whereby the possession of the property is transferred and the
seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall
likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall be deemed to
include any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale
within the contemplation of law.



   Solicit. "Solicit" means to sell or take orders or offer for sale or
offer to take orders for materials, goods, wares, or merchandise, for future
delivery, or for service to be performed, at any place within the city other
than a fixed place of business.



   Solicitor. "Solicitor" means any individual engaged in soliciting,
canvassing, or taking orders from house to house or from place to place, by
telephone or by any other means of communication for any materials, goods,
wares or merchandise, for any article to be delivered in the future or for
services to be performed in the future, for making, manufacturing or
repairing any article whosoever for future delivery, or for subscriptions to
periodicals or tickets of admission to entertainment, or memberships in any
clubs.



   Sworn Statement. "Sworn statement" means any affidavit sworn to before
an individual authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification
made under penalty of perjury in accordance with California law.



   Transient Business. "Transient business" means every business not
conducted at a fixed place of business, whether the individual(s) conducting
such transient business is or is not a resident of the city.



   Vehicle. "Vehicle" means any and every device, in, upon, or by which
any individual(s) or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway or roadway. (Ord. 6905 § 33 (part), 1996:  Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995:  prior code § 6001)



5.04.020   Revenue measure.



   This title is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is
intended for regulations, as outlined in Chapters 5.08 through 5.48, both
inclusive. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6002)



5.04.030   Effect of other ordinances and city laws.



   Entities required to pay a tax for transacting and carrying on any
business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any
license tax, permit, charge, assessment, or fee for the privilege of doing
such business required under other laws or regulations of the city, and shall
remain subject to the provisions of such other laws and regulations. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6003)



5.04.040   Tax payment required.



   There is imposed upon any business conducted within the city a business
tax in the amounts hereinafter prescribed in this title. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6004)



5.04.050   Tax a debt.



   The amount of any tax, penalty, and interest imposed by the provisions
of this title shall be deemed to be a debt owed to the city. An action may be
commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for
the amount of any delinquent tax and penalties and interest thereon.  The
time for commencement of any action shall be within three years from the date
the tax became due and payable as in the case of any liability created by
statute. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6005)



5.04.060   Remedies cumulative.



   All remedies prescribed under this title shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6006)



5.04.070   Branch establishments.



   A.   A separate business tax must be paid for each branch
establishment or location of the business, and each tax certificate shall be
for only the business at the location so specified and conducted in the
manner designated; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business under the provisions of this
title shall not be deemed to be a separate place of business or branch
establishment.  Temporary location(s) established by an entity otherwise
taxed pursuant to the provisions of this title for the same type of business
and under the same business name for a cumulative period of forty-five (45)
days or less per calendar year shall not be subject to a separate business
tax.



   B.   If a business uses two or more names at the same location, then
an additional license would be needed for each additional name. If a business
has a state contractor's license and does both the sales and installation,
only one license would be needed.  Example, a carpet store sells and
installs; the gross receipts would be reported for both.



   C.   An entity which provides goods, services, music, or amusement
by vending machines or coin-operated services shall be subject to one
business tax certificate for all such machines or devices within the city and
shall combine total gross receipts for all machines or devices located within
the city.



   D.   An entity with billboard(s) shall be subject to one business
tax certificate for all such billboard(s) within the city and shall combine
total gross receipts for all billboard(s) located within the city.



   E.   An entity engaged in rental of residential property or
commercial property shall be subject to one business tax certificate for all
such properties and shall combine total gross receipts for all properties
located within the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6007)



5.04.080   Evidence of doing business.



   The collector shall consider it prima facie evidence that business is
being conducted in the city if the entity:



   A.   Advertises, holds out, or represents that they are in business
in the city, by use of sign(s), circular(s), card(s), telephone book(s), or
newspaper(s); or



   B.   Holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental
agency  or files for a fictitious name  indicating that such entity is in
business in the City; or



   C.   Makes a sale, takes an order, barters, renders a service or
performs any other similar act within the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6008)



5.04.090   Interstate commerce.



   A.   None of the taxes provided for by this title shall be applied
so as to cause an undue burden upon interstate commerce or violate the equal
protection and due process clauses of the constitution of the United States
of America and the state of California.



   B.   A business whose address of record is outside of the city and
who does not have a fixed place of business in Visalia and who delivers
merchandise to Visalia from outside the state of California is exempt from
the Visalia Business Tax by the Interstate Commerce Clause of the United
States Constitution.  However, if any money is exchanged within the city,
the sale is considered consummated in the city, and the business does not
qualify for this exemption. In any case where this business tax is believed
by an applicant to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be in
violation of such constitutional clauses, he/she may apply to the collector
for an adjustment of the tax. Such application shall be made within six
months after payment of the prescribed tax. The applicant shall, by sworn
statement and supporting testimony disclose:



   1.   The interstate or other character of his/her business entitling
such exemption;



   2.   The name and location of the business for which the orders are
to be solicited or secured;



   3.   The name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and
his/her address;



   4.   The kind of goods, wares, or merchandise to be delivered;



   5.   The place from which the goods, wares or merchandise are to be
shipped or forwarded;



   6.   The method of solicitation or taking orders;



   7.   The location of any warehouse, factory, or plant within the
State of California;



   8.   The method of delivery;



   9.   The name and location of the residence of the applicant;



   10.   The gross receipts or estimated gross receipts of business; and



   11.   Other such information as the collector may deem necessary in
order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation.



   C.   Additionally, a copy of the order blank, contract form, or
other papers used by such individual in taking orders shall be attached to
the sworn statement for the information of the collector.



   D.   The collector shall then conduct an investigation, and shall
fix as the tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and
nondiscriminatory, or if the tax has already been paid, shall order a refund
of the amount over and above the tax so fixed.  In fixing the tax to be
charged, the collector shall have the power to base the tax upon a percentage
of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the tax
assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so
long as the amount assessed does not exceed the tax as prescribed by this
title. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of tax to be
the proper basis, he/she may require the applicant to submit a sworn
statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of tax therefore;
provided, that no additional tax due any one calendar year shall be required
after the business shall have paid an amount equal to the annual tax as
prescribed in this title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6009)



5.04.100   Rules, regulations and other fees.



   The collector may adopt rules, regulations, and other fees not
inconsistent with the provisions of this title as may be necessary or
desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this title. A copy
of any such rules, regulations, and other fees shall be available for public
inspection in the collector's office. Other fees may be established by the
finance director or his/her designate. Such fees shall be based on the
administrative cost to provide such service. A business may be required to
furnish names and addresses of independent workers, contractors, sales
persons, agents, service workers, persons who receive commissions, etc., that
are not employed as an employee of that company. If a business does not
submit the information requested, an audit may be done. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6010)



5.04.110   Exemptions.



   Business taxes and surcharge taxes shall be assessed as defined in
Chapters 5.04 and 5.52 of this title, unless specifically enumerated as
exempt from tax payment in this title. Entities requesting and exemption must
make application on such forms as prescribed by the collector. (Ord. 9517 §
1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6011)



5.04.120   Application.



   Every entity required to pay a tax under the provisions of this title
shall make application to the collector in such form as the collector may
prescribe. Such entity shall provide the required information to determine
the nature of the proposed business in order to determine the proper business
classification(s). A nonreturnable application fee for processing the
business tax application will be charged at the time the application is
submitted.



   Such fee shall be set annually by council. Upon payment of the
prescribed tax, the collector shall issue a document as described in Section
5.04.130.



   A.   Initial Application. Such entity making application for the
first business tax certificate for a newly established or acquired business
or business activity, such entity shall furnish to the collector a sworn
statement, upon a form prescribed by the collector setting forth the
following information:



   1.   The exact nature or kind of business;



   2.   The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the
same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places
of residence of the owners of same;



   3.   When the amount of tax to be paid is measured by gross
receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be
necessary to determine the amount of the tax to be paid by the applicant;



   4.   Any further information which the collector may deem necessary
to determine the proper business tax or supply information to other
governmental agencies.



   B.   Renewal Application. Such entity making application for the
renewal for a business tax certificate shall furnish to the collector a sworn
statement, upon a form prescribed by the collector setting forth:



   1.   Information concerning the applicant's business during the
preceding year, as required by the collector to ascertain the amount, of the
tax to be paid by such entity pursuant to the provisions of this title;



   2.   In cases where the amount of the tax to be paid is measured by
gross receipts, the application shall set forth such information as may be
necessary to determine the amount of the tax to be paid by the applicant;



   3.   Any further information which the collector may deem necessary
to determine the proper business tax or supply the required information to
other governmental agencies. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6012)



5.04.130   Types of documents.



   Every entity required to pay a tax under the provisions of this title
shall make application to the collector and upon the payment of the
prescribed tax, the collector shall issue one of the following:



   A.   Certificate of Compliance. Such certificate will be issued to
an entity that appears to be in compliance with all city ordinances and other
regulatory agencies.



   B.   Statement of Noncompliance. Such certificate will be issued to
an entity that does not appear to be in compliance with another city
ordinance and/or other regulatory agency. Such entity shall also be subject
to the provisions of Section 5.04.400.



   C.   Other Certificate as Prescribed.



   1.   Such certificate as prescribed by the collector will be issued
to an entity as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of
the provisions of this title.



   2.   In addition, the following documents may be issued by the
collector when an entity fails to submit an application for a business tax
certificate and/or fails to pay the prescribed tax:



   D.   Warning Notice. A warning notice may be issued to an otherwise
legally operating entity which has failed to make application for a business
tax certificate and/or pay the prescribed tax.



   E.   Cease and Desist Order. A "cease and desist order" shall be
issued to any entity which:



   1.   Is in noncompliance with any other city ordinance or regulatory
agency, or



   2.   Maintains all business offices outside of the city, and employs
peddlers and/or solicitors within the city and does not have a current
business tax certificate.



   F.   Citation. A citation may be issued to an entity which violates
the business tax ordinance. The citation shall be subject to the provisions
of Article 3, Sections 5.04.400 through 5.04.430. (Ord. 9605 § 33 (part),
1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6013)



5.04.140   Certificate not an authorization for a business.



   No business tax certificate issued under the provision of this title is
an authorization for, nor shall it be construed as authorizing, the conduct
or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. Nor shall such issuance
be construed to imply compliance with any or all requirements of this code,
and/or compliance with any or all other applicable laws. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6014)



5.04.150   Statement and records.



   A.   No sworn statement shall be conclusive to the city as to the
matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city
from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable
hereunder. Such sworn statements and each of the several items therein
contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector,
his/her deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby
authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any
taxable business, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or
ascertain the amount of tax due.



   B.   All entities subject to the provisions of the title shall keep
complete records of business transactions, including sales receipts,
purchases, and other expenditures, and shall retain all such records for
examination by the collector. Such records shall be maintained for a period
of at least the current calendar year plus three prior years. No entity
required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized
representatives of the collector to examine said records at reasonable times
and places. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6015)



5.04.160   Information confidential.



   It is unlawful for the collector or any individual having an
administrative duty under the provisions of this title to make known in any
manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by
an investigation of records and equipment of any entity required to submit
such information to the collector, or any other entity examined or visited in
the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits,
losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement
or application, to be seen or examined by any individual. Provided, that
nothing in this section shall be constructed to prevent:



   A.   Disclosure to, or examination of records and equipment by,
another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the
sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this title, or
collecting taxes imposed thereunder;



   B.   Disclosure of information to, or examination of records by,
federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county,
or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; or to a grand jury or
court of law, upon subpoena;



   C.   Disclosure of information and/or the results of an examination
of records of a particular taxpayer, or relating to a particular taxpayer, in
judicial proceedings brought to determine the existence and/or the amount of
any tax liability of the particular taxpayer to the city or to the city
attorney for the defense of the city or any employee or official thereof,
against a claim filed by the taxpayer against the city of any employee or
official thereof;



   D.   Disclosure after filing of a written request to that effect, to
the taxpayer himself, or to his/her successors, receivers, trustees,
executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested,
of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any
unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and
penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each
such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure
referred to in this paragraph when in his/her opinion the public interest
would suffer thereby;



   E.   Disclosure of nonfinancial information and account status,
including but not limited to balances due, business name(s) and address(es),
the name(s) and address(es) of officers of corporations and members of
partnerships to whom tax certificates have been issued, and the general type,
profession, and/or nature of such business;



   F.   Disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such
information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to
be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for a refund
of taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted
against him/her by the city for delinquent taxes, or when acting upon any
other matter;



   G.   Disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the city;



   H.   Disclosure of information and records as may be required under
state law applicable to chartered cities or required by subpoena served on
the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6016)



5.04.170   Failure to file statement or corrected statement.



   If any entity fails to file any required statement within the time
prescribed, or if, after demand therefore made by the collector, such entity
fails to file a corrected statement, the collector may determine the amount
of tax due from any such entity by means of any information as the collector
may be able to obtain. In case such determination is made, the collector
shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid,
addressed to the entity assessed at the last known address. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6017)



5.04.180   Appeal.



   Any individual aggrieved by any decision of the  collector with
respect to the business tax requirements or business tax due may file a
notice of appeal with the director of finance. The applicant shall by
affidavit and supporting testimony show such information as the director of
finance may deem necessary in order to determine the proper decision. The
director of finance may conduct his/her own investigation including but not
limited to an audit of the applicant's business records and shall have the
administrative duty of determining the proper decision. Any applicant
aggrieved by the decision of the director of finance shall have the right of
appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the
city council. Said appeal must be filed by the applicant in writing with the
clerk of the city council within thirty (30) days after payment in the case
of a claim for refund, or within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of
written notice to the applicant in the case of a waiver and shall state the
specific grounds upon which the appeal claim is founded. The city council
shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of
the city council shall give notice to such individual of the time and place
of the hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United
States Post Office in Visalia, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such
individual at his/her last known address. The city council shall have the
authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such
determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this title.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6018)



5.04.190   Close or change of ownership.



   In the event any business subject to a business tax closes or changes
ownership, said business shall file a closing return with the city, in such
form as the collector may prescribe, and shall pay the business tax due
thereon within thirty (30) days from the time of closing or changing
ownership of said business.  A closing return shall be considered delinquent
if not filed within the specified time. The processing fee for delinquent
filings shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per month delinquent after the initial
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6019)



5.04.200   Business tax certificate nontransferable.



   No certificate issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable;
provided, that where a certificate is issued to a certain business at a
specific address, such business may, upon application therefore, have the
certificate amended to indicate some other location to which the business is
or is to be moved; provided further, that a transfer, by sale or otherwise,
to another entity under such circumstances that the real or ultimate
ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership
existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section.  For
the purpose of this section stockholders, bondholders, partnerships or other
entities holding an interest in a corporation or other entity are regarded as
having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6020)



5.04.210   Duplicate certificate.



   A duplicate certificate may be issued by the collector to replace any
certificate previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the
certificate holder filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing
such statement paying to the collector a service charge, as set by the
director of finance. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6021)



5.04.220   Posting/keeping business tax certificates.



   A.   Any entity transacting and carrying on business at a fixed
place of business in the city shall keep the certificate posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.



   B.   Any individual transacting and carrying on business but not
operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the certificate
upon his/her person at all times while transacting and carrying on the
business for which it was issued.  If the business activity, of which
business tax has been paid, is conducted by more than one individual, each
individual shall keep a copy of the certificate upon his/her person at all
times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it was issued.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6022)



5.04.230   Tax--How and when payable.



   All business tax certificates issued pursuant to this title shall
expire, unless renewed on the date on which the tax is payable for the
succeeding certificate. In no case shall any mistake made by the collector in
stating the amount of the business tax fee prevent or prejudice the
collection of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on any trade,
calling, profession, or occupation subject to a tax under this title.



   A.   All business taxes due under the terms of this title, except
the first tax payment for businesses with a fixed place of business, shall be
payable in advance of the applicable tax period prescribed as follows:



   1.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual taxes under
the provisions of this title shall be due and payable in advance, on the
first day of July, and shall be considered delinquent if unpaid at five p.m.
on the last day of month in which the business tax was due and payable.



   2.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all semi-annual taxes
under the provisions of this title shall be due and payable in advance, on
the first day of January and July, and shall be considered delinquent if
unpaid at five p.m. on the last day of month in which the business tax was
due and payable.



   3.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all quarterly taxes
under the provisions of this title shall be due and payable in advance, on
the first day of January, April, July and October and shall be considered
delinquent if unpaid at five p.m. on the last day of the month in which the
business tax was due and payable.



   4.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all monthly taxes under
the provisions of this title shall be due and payable in advance, on the
first day of each month for which the business tax is due and payable and
shall be considered delinquent if unpaid at five p.m. on that date.



   5.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all daily taxes under
the provisions of this title shall be due and payable in advance, on the
effective date and shall be considered delinquent if unpaid at five p.m. on
that date.



   B.   An entity which opens a new business with a fixed place of
business any time during the year shall apply for a business tax certificate
upon commencement of such business and shall be delinquent if taxes due under
the provisions of this title are not paid on or before the last day of the
month in which business commenced. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code
§ 6023)



5.04.240   Proration.



   Except as otherwise provided, no proration of any business tax or
penalty due hereunder shall be made for any portion of the period for which a
business tax is payable. When proration is specifically allowed, for the
purpose of proration, a fractional part of a month shall be considered a full
month. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6025)



5.04.250   Refunds.



   No refund of erroneously paid taxes collected under this title shall be
allowed whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the
collector upon a form prescribed by the collector within a period of three
years from the last day of the calendar month for which the payment was made,
and all such claims for refund of the amount of the payments must be filed
with the collector in writing in the manner prescribed by the collector. Upon
the filing of such a claim and when determination that a payment had been
made, the collector may refund the amount overpaid. Such refund may be made
only under the following conditions:



   A.   Where a refund is specifically authorized by the provision of
law requiring payment of the license, permit or application tax;



   B.   Where the applicant for any business tax certificate has not,
at any time after the commencement of the period or term during which the
requested business tax certificate would have been effective, commenced or
engaged in the business or occupation, or performed any act, for which the
business tax certificate was required;



   C.   Where the money paid was not required by law, or, was
erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city through mistake,
inadvertence or error of law or of fact, and whether paid or charged under
any provision of this title, or otherwise. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6026)



5.04.260   Annual adjustment of fixed tax for inflation.



   In July of each year, the director of finance shall adjust the prior
year's fixed business taxes (including but not limited to minimum, maximum
and other flat and/or fixed business taxes) according to a three year moving
average change in the United States All Urban Consumer Price Index. The
intent of this process is to adjust for impact of inflation. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6027)



5.04.270   Business tax--Gross receipts.



   A.   Every entity which engages in business in the city (except
those covered in Article 2 of Chapter 5.04 and except those included in
Section 5.04.280(C) through 5.04.280(G)), shall pay a tax based upon gross
receipts, unless specifically enumerated in this article, resulting from
business activities within the city limits at the rates and ratios as set
forth, by classification, in the following sections of this title.



   B.   The collector will determine the classification of the
business. In any case where an individual believes that his/her business is
not assigned to the proper classification under this title because of
circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from other businesses of the
same kind, he/she may apply to the collector for reclassification. Such
application shall contain such information as the collector may deem
necessary to determine whether the applicants individual business is properly
classified. The proper classification is the classification which, in the
opinion of the collector, most nearly fits the applicants individual business.



   C.   The reclassification shall not be retroactive, but shall apply
at the time of the next regularly ensuing calculation of the applicant's tax.
No business shall be reclassified more than once in one year. (Ord. 9605 §
33 (part), 1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6028)



5.04.280   Business tax fees.



   A.   All entities subject to business tax based on gross receipts
shall pay said tax based on the following schedule and subject to the
semi-annual minimum and maximum tax as set by resolution of the city council:



   1.   Professionals      $1.25 per thousand



               of gross receipts



   2.   Services      1.00 per thousand



               of gross receipts



   3.   Retailers, Hotels   .70 per thousand



               of gross receipts



   4.   Manufacturers      .40 per thousand



               of gross receipts



   The minimum and maximum taxes for professionals are per individual,
while the minimum and maximum taxes for the other categories are per entity.



   B.   State Licensed Contractors. A person engaged in the business of
contracting is included in this category and shall pay a flat rate
semi-annual tax as set by resolution of the city council, unless the business
is also engaged in activities covered under subsection (A) of this section.



   C.   Public Dance. Every entity carrying on, promoting or managing a
public dance shall pay a flat daily tax as set by resolution of the city
council.



   D.   Cultural Performance. Every entity carrying on, promoting, or
managing a cultural performance for not more than ninety (90) consecutive
days shall pay either a flat daily tax, a flat monthly tax, or a business tax
which is calculated on gross receipts at one dollar ($1.00) per one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof on gross receipts.  The flat rate,
minimum and maximum tax shall be set by resolution of the city council.
Entities classified as a cultural performance shall include, but are not
limited to:



   1.   Musical performance,



   2.   Comedy and/or magic show,



   3.   Truck and/or tractor pulls,



   4.   Vehicle and/or bicycle races, and



   5.   Sporting events.



   E.   Special Event. Every entity, except nonprofit, tax exempt
entities, carrying on, promoting, or managing a special event for not more
than ninety (90) consecutive days shall pay either a flat daily tax, a flat
monthly tax, or a business tax which is calculated on gross receipts at one
dollar ($1.00) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof on
gross receipts. The flat rate, minimum and maximum tax shall be set by
resolution of the city council.



   F.   Temporary Business. Itinerant vendors and temporary businesses
which are not specifically taxed in subsections (A) through (E) of this
section and are carried on, managed, or conducted for not more than ninety
(90) consecutive days, shall pay either a flat daily tax, a flat monthly tax,
or a business tax which is calculated on gross receipts at one dollar ($1.00)
per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or fraction thereof on gross receipts. 
The flat rate, minimum and maximum tax shall be set by resolution of the city
council.



   G.   Distribution of Printed Matter. Every entity conducting,
carrying on or managing the business of advertising, by means of distributing
dodgers, handbills, circulars, printed advertisements, cards, tickets or
advertising samples of merchandise, shall pay either a flat daily tax or a
flat monthly tax.  The flat daily and monthly tax shall be set by resolution
of the city council.



   For purposes of this section, the words "conducting", "carrying on," or
"managing the business" are defined to be and are construed to mean the doing
of any act or series of acts of distributing or advertising.



   H.   Every entity not having a fixed place of business within the
city who enters the city to deliver, collect, gather, load or pick up
passengers, materials, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicle, or
who enters the city to provide any service by the use of vehicle, shall have
the option of paying either an annual business tax for each vehicle (a
trailer shall be deemed to be a separate vehicle for purpose of this section)
or a business tax based on gross receipts using the category for
manufacturers in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 6905 § 33 (part),
1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6029)



5.04.290   Enforcement.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the collector to enforce each and all
of the provisions of this title, and the chief of police, chief of the fire
department, or chief building official, shall render such assistance in the
enforcement hereof as may be required by the collector, city manager or the
city council.



   B.   In accordance with Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state
of California, the director of finance and the collector are authorized to
make arrests without warrants, and issue citations, for the violation of the
provisions of this title.



   C.   The collector and each of his/her assistants and any city
police officer and any fire inspector shall have the power and authority to
enter free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of business within
the city and request to see its business tax certificate. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6041)



5.04.300   Effect of title on past actions--Unexpired business tax
certificate.



   A.   Neither the adoption of this title nor the superseding  of any
portion of any provision of the city ordinance thereby shall in any manner
affect the prosecution of a violation of any city ordinance provisions
committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor shall it be construed as a
waiver of any business tax or any penal provision applicable to any such
violation, nor shall it be construed to affect the validity of any bond or
cash deposit required by any city ordinance to be posted, filed, or
deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect.



   B.   Where a certificate of tax paid has been issued to any entity
by the city and the term of such certificate has not expired, then the tax
prescribed for said business by this title shall not be payable until the
expiration of the term of such expired certificate. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6042)



5.04.310   Discretionary duties.



   Whenever the words "shall," "will," "must," or words of similar print
are used in Title 5 of the city ordinance to establish a responsibility or
duty of the city and/or any board, officer or employee thereof, it is the
legislative intent that such words shall establish a discretionary authority
requiring the exercise of judgment and discretion, as distinguished from a
mandatory duty.  No mandatory duty is imposed upon any member of the city
council, or any officer or employee of  the city by the provisions of Title
5, and Title 5 shall not be construed so as to hold the city, the city
council, or any other officer or employee of the city responsible or liable
for any damage to individuals or property by reason of any action taken or
not taken, or by reason of any approval given or not given thereunder. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code Ch. 15, Art. 18)



5.04.320   Environmental findings of fact.



   The city council finds and determines that the adoption of this title
is exempted from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) under the provisions of the State CEQA Guidelines Section 15273 in
that this title establishes and modifies existing charges and taxes imposed
by the city for the purpose of meeting operating expenses, including employee
wage rates and benefits and capital projects necessary to maintain services
within existing service area. The city council further finds that the
adoption of this title is exempt from CEQA under the provisions of the State
CEQA Guidelines Section 15061 (b)(3) in that there is not possibility that
the provisions enacted by this title will effect a substantial change in the
environment. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code Ch. 15, Art. 19)



Article 2. Exemption from Business Tax Payment



5.04.330   United States Constitution or state of California Constitution.



   A.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to require
payment of such tax as herein prescribed from any entity transacting and
carrying on any business which is exempt from the payment of such tax as is
herein prescribed by virtue of the Constitution of the United States or
applicable statues of the United States or of Section 14 of Article XIII of
the Constitution of the state of California.



   B.   Any entity claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall
file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which
exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the
claim, such entity shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by
this title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6200)



5.04.340   Part-time, over sixty-five or under eighteen years of age.



   The provisions of this title shall not require a business tax payment
on a part-time business conducted or carried on solely by any individual
under the age of eighteen (18) or over the age of sixty-five (65) if annual
gross receipts do not exceed $15,000.00 (fifteen thousand dollars). (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6213)



5.04.350   Artists and art exhibits.



   The provisions of this title shall not require a business tax payment
by an individual artist for the exhibition or display of paintings,
sculpture, photographs, or other fine arts in public buildings, or in any
business establishment, if the exhibition or display is incidental to the
primary business conducted on the premises, and is primarily for cultural and
for educational purposes, and if the annual gross receipts from the sales of
his/her art work within the city do not result in annual gross receipts in
excess of twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500.00). (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6214)



5.04.360   Artists and craft persons sale.



   The provisions of this title shall not require the payment of a
business tax for artists and craft persons who engage in a part-time hobby,
occupation, or activity and who hold a special sale of their own designed,
hand-produced goods and wares in their dwelling, as allowed under Chapter
5.24. No more than two such sales for no more than three consecutive days in
any calendar year shall be exempt from payment of any business tax under the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6215)



5.04.370   Garage sales.



   The provisions of this title shall not require the payment of a
business tax for garage sales, as allowed under Chapter 5.24. No more than
two such sales for no more than three consecutive days in any calendar year
shall be exempt from payment of any business tax under the provision of this
title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6216)



5.04.380   Certain teachers.



   The provision of this title shall not require a business tax payment
for teaching musical, artistic or educational subjects when the following
conditions exist:



   A.   The teaching is done at the residence of the teacher or at the
residence of the pupil; and



   B.   The teacher does not employ an assistant, does not display an
advertising sign at the residence, and does not make a general practice of
selling merchandise in connection with the teaching. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6217)



5.04.390   Exemptions--Revocation of.



   An exemption will be revoked whenever there is reason to believe that
any entity, to whom a tax-exempt status was granted pursuant to Section
5.04.330 through Section 5.04.380 has furnished false or misleading
information in the sworn statement. If the revoked exemptee chooses to appeal
the revocation, he/she must follow the appeal process specified in Section
5.04.180. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6219)



Article 3. Violation and Penalty



5.04.400   Violation--Penalty provision.



   Any violation of any provision of this title shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. Upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney and city agency,
the misdemeanor could be reduced to an infraction.



   A.   Any individual who knowingly or intentionally misrepresents to
any officer or employee of the city any material fact herein required to be
provided is in violation of the title. Additionally, any individual who on a
sworn statement states as a true material fact which he/she knows to be false
is guilty of perjury.



   B.   Any individual who, with the intent to defraud the city or
evade his/her business tax obligation misrepresents in any business tax form
which said individual files, any fact material to the determination of a
correct amount of business tax due shall be assessed a penalty of one hundred
(100) percent of the amount of business tax due plus one percent interest per
month, or a portion thereof, on the unpaid amount from the date the tax was
due until the date of payment.



   C.   Any individual who has a business certificate issued under this
chapter and has said certificate in his/her possession or under his/her
control and who fails to exhibit the same upon request is in violation of the
title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6919)



5.04.410   Misdemeanor.



   Any individual guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and/or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6920)



5.04.420   Infraction.



   Any individual guilty of an infraction shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for the first offense, one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the second, and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
the third and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code
§ 6921)



5.04.430   Suspension/revocation of permit.



   Violations under Sections 5.48.090, 5.48.140 or 5.48.210 may
additionally cause a suspension or revocation of permit(s). (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6922)



Chapter 5.08
AUCTION SALES



Sections:



5.08.010   Definitions.



5.08.020   Permit required.



5.08.030   Application for permit, bond.



5.08.040   Hours of sale.



5.08.050   Auctions prohibited.



5.08.060   Certificate required.



5.08.010   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the
meanings, respectively, as follows:



   Auction Sale. "Auction sale" means a sale of a property by public
outcry to the highest bidder.



   Auctioneer. "Auctioneer" means any individual who shall, by public
outcry, sell or offer to sell to the highest bidder at public offering, when
bids are called for, any property, goods, wares or merchandise. (Ord. 9517 §
1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6850)



5.08.020   Permit required.



   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to advertise for disposal,
offer for sale, dispose of, or sell, or to cause or permit to be advertised
for disposal, offered for sale, disposed of, or cause or permit to be carried
on or conducted within the city any personal property, whether the same shall
be his/her or its own property without first complying with the provisions of
this chapter and obtaining a permit to do so as herein provided; provided,
that no permit shall be granted to carry on or conduct such auction sale
unless the personal property proposed to be sold at such sale is a
substantial part of the stock in trade of a merchant who, continuously and in
good faith, for a period of at least one year next preceding the filing of
the application for such permit, has engaged in the business of selling such
property at a fixed place of business in the city; and provided, further,
that in no event shall any stock of merchandise or other personal property be
offered for sale or sold at auction sale unless the same has been at a place
of business and owned by the individual or entity by or from whom the
application for such permit is made, for a period of not less than ninety
(90) days prior to the filing of said application. (Ord. 9605 § 33 (part),
1996:  Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:  prior code § 6851)



5.08.030   Application for permit, bond.



   All applicants for permits required by this chapter shall be made in
writing and filed with the city clerk addressed to the city manager, by the
individual who as auctioneer, or as owner of  the property to be sold, will
carry on or conduct any auction sale, not less than twenty (20), or more than
forty (40) days before the date of the commencement of such sale.  Each
application shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), no part
of which shall be subject to refund to the applicant. The city manager is
hereby authorized to grant a permit for the carrying on or conducting of an
auction sale, in the city, upon the filing of such applicant and payment of
said fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), unless upon investigation, he/she shall
find that the public interest requires the denial thereof, in which event
he/she shall deny the same; provided, that no permit for any auction sale in
the city shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor shall have
filed with the city clerk a surety bond to the city, executed by a surety
company duly authorized to do business in the state of California, to be
approved by the city attorney, in the penal sum of seven thousand five
hundred dollars ($7,500.00). Said bond must be joint and several, and bind
the principal's executor, administrators, successors and assigns, and shall
insure to the benefit of the city and of any individual injured by a
violation of any of the provisions this chapter, and further insuring them
against any loss or damage that may result to applicant at any auction sale
authorized by such permit, and further conditioned to pay any final judgment
obtained in a court of law, for fraud or misrepresentation in the sale of any
property, goods, wares or merchandise effected at any such auction sale and
that said bond shall not be exhausted by the first recovery thereon, but
shall be and remain in full force notwithstanding one or more actions or
recoveries thereon, until its full penal sum has been exhausted. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6852)



5.08.040   Hours of sale.



   No auction sale shall be conducted or carried on within the city after
6:00 p.m. of any day, nor earlier than 9:00 a.m. of any day. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6853)



5.08.050   Auctions prohibited.



   No auction sale shall be conducted or carried on within the city at any
time between the 25th day of November and the 25th day of December of the
same year. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6854)



5.08.060   Certificate required.



   It is unlawful for any individual to engage in the calling of an
auction without first obtaining a business tax certificate therefor as
required by Chapter 5.04. (Ord. 9605 § 33 (part), 1996: Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6855)



Chapter 5.12
BINGO



Sections:



5.12.010   Limited authorization.



5.12.020   Penal Code Section 326.5 incorporated.



5.12.030   License required.



5.12.040   Application.



5.12.050   Term of license and fees.



5.12.060   Notice of intent and show cause hearing.



5.12.070   Summary suspension or revocation.



5.12.080   Appeal of revocation to city council.



5.12.090   City may enjoin violation.



5.12.010   Limited authorization.



   Bingo games are allowed pursuant to and as restricted by Section 19(c)
of Article IV of the California Constitution, California Penal Code Section
326.5 (including future amendments thereto), and the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 5076)



5.12.020   Penal Code Section 326.5 incorporated.



   The provisions of Penal Code Section 326.5 (including future
amendments) are incorporated herein by this reference; and "charitable
organization" herein means an organization referred to therein. (Prior code
§ 5077)



5.12.030   License required.



   A.   No charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game without a
currently valid, unrevoked, unsuspended license as provided for by this
chapter.



   B.   No person shall promote, supervise, operate, conduct or staff
any bingo game, or participate in such activity, unless he is a member of a
charitable organization which is lawfully licensed to do so and which has
designated him to do so and he is designated in its license to do so.



   C.   An organization licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not
conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless said license is posted
in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. The licensee
shall produce and exhibit the same, when applying for renewal thereof, and
whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to
issue, or inspect licenses. 



   D.   Definition of Bingo. As used in this chapter "bingo" means a
game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers
or symbols on a card which conform to numbers  or symbols selected at
random. 



   E.   Maximum Amount of Prize. The total value of prizes awarded
during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is
held. 



   F.   Hours. No bingo games shall be conducted between the hours of
two a.m. and nine a.m.



   G.   Profits to be Kept in Separate Fund or Account. All profits
derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and
shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee shall
keep full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and
disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervisions
and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The
city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine
and audit such record at any reasonable time, and licensees shall fully
cooperate with the city by making such record available. 



   H.   Bingo Games Open to Public. All bingo games shall be open to
the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. 



   I.   Bingo Games Conducted Only on Licensee's Property. A licensee
shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which
property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the
purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under
this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only
on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. 



   J.   Minors Not to Participate. No person under the age of eighteen
(18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in the bingo game. (Prior
code § 5078)



5.12.040   Application.



   A.   The application for a license to conduct bingo games shall be
made to the chief of police on forms provided by his office.



   B.   The application shall include the following information:



   1.   The name, address, date and place of birth, physical
description and driver's license number of every officer of the charitable
organization;



   2.   The name, address, date and place of birth, physical
description and driver's license number of not more than twenty (20) members
to be authorized to operate bingo games on behalf of the organization;



   3.   The date(s) and location(s) of the proposed bingo game(s);



   4.   Proof that the organization is a charitable organization as
defined by Penal Code Section 326.5(a). 



   C.   License Not Transferable. Each license shall be issued to a
specific charitable organization authorizing not more than twenty named
members to conduct a bingo game on its behalf at one or more named locations.
This license is not transferable from organization to another, from one
member to another, or from one location to another. The license is only a
temporary and non-transferable permit to act within the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations, and always expires no
later than one year from its date. It has no validity when it has been
seized, suspended, or revoked by the chief of police. Any attempt to
transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, or hypothecate the license, or to attach
or execute on it, immediately and permanently voids it. 



   D.   Consent. The application for or acceptance of a license
constitutes:



   1.   Consent to the entry of any peace officer(s) to investigate the
location(s) identified in the application before the issuance of a license as
well as during any game(s) thereafter;



   2.   Consent to the chief of police or his agents reviewing or
auditing the charitable organization's records relating to the conduct of
bingo games and to the special account required by Penal Code Section
326.5(j), for the purpose of verifying compliance with the financial interest
and special fund requirements of Penal Code Section 326.5 and with this
chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations. (Prior code § 5079)



5.12.050   Term of license and fees.



   A.   A bingo license shall be valid for one year and upon
application may be renewed on a yearly basis. There are no fees for license
or application.



   B.   Investigation. Upon receiving a completed application, the
chief of police may investigate to determine whether the license should be
issued.



   C.   Issuance or Denial. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of
a completed application, the chief of police shall either issue the license
or deny it in writing with his reasons therefore.



   D.   Revocation. The chief of police may suspend or revoke a license
for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any applicable law
or regulation, or for any false, misleading of fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application for the license or in the promotion,
supervision, operation, conduct or staffing of any bingo game. (Prior code §
5080)



5.12.060   Notice of intent and show cause hearing.



   If the chief of police determines that a bingo license should be
suspended or revoked, he shall serve on the licensee a notice of his intent
with his reasons therefore. The notice shall provide for a suspension or
revocation of the license seven days after service of the notice upon the
licensee, unless the licensee arranges to appear at a hearing before the
chief of police and show cause why such action should not be taken. (Prior
code § 5081)



5.12.070   Summary suspension or revocation.



   A.   The chief of police may immediately suspend or revoke a bingo
license upon the licensee's refusal to:



   1.   Permit the entry of any peace officer to investigate the
conduct of a bingo game; or



   2.   Permit the chief of police to review or audit the charitable
organization's records relating to the conduct of bingo games under the
license and to the special account required by Penal Code Section 326.5(j).



   B.   Upon taking such action, the chief of police shall within
forty-eight (48) hours serve on the licensee a written statement of the
reasons for this action, and schedule a show cause hearing on re-instatement
of the license within five days of a request to do so by the licensee.



   C.   Decision. The chief of police shall issue his written decision
within seven days after the conclusion of a show cause hearing. (Prior code
§ 5082)



5.12.080   Appeal of revocation to city council.



   A.   Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this
chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in
writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such
appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based.
The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days
after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall
cause the appellant to be given at least ten days written notice of such
hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall
have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or  both,
in support of his appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal
shall be final.



   B.   Any organization whose license is revoked under this section
shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city
council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief of
police. (Prior code § 5083)



5.12.090   City may enjoin violation.



   The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter.
(Prior code § 5084)



Chapter 5.16
CLOSE-OUT, FIRE AND BANKRUPTCY SALES



Sections:



5.16.010   Definitions.



5.16.020   False advertising.



5.16.030   Permit required.



5.16.040   Individuals/entities exempt.



5.16.050   Interval between sales.



5.16.060   Restricted operation of permit.



5.16.070   Application for permit.



5.16.080   Investigation.



5.16.090   Effect of permit.



5.16.100   Surety bond required.



5.16.110   Duties of permittee.



5.16.120   No additional goods, wares or merchandise.



5.16.130   Revocation of permit.



5.16.010   Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings attributed to them as provided in this section:



   "Advertise" means any and all means, whether verbal or written used for
conveying to the public, or any part thereof, notice of the conduct of a
close-out sale, fire sale, or bankruptcy sale as defined herein or notice of
intention to conduct sale.



   Advertising Indicating Future Change in Business Location. The
definitions of bankruptcy sales, close-out sales and fire sales shall apply
to any and all sales advertised in such manner as to convey to the public, or
to that portion of the public to which such advertising is directed, the
belief that upon disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the business of
that portion thereof being conducted at any location will cease, be removed
or relocated.



   "Bankruptcy sales" means any sale of or offer to sell, to the public or
any part thereof, goods, wares or merchandise in stock which has been
involved in any business failure or have been derived from any business which
has been adjudicated bankrupt, has been closed, has been discontinued, has
been liquidated, or has been placed in receivership.



   "Close-out sales" means any sale of, or offer to sell, to the public or
any part thereof, goods, wares or merchandise in stock, in furtherance of a
declared purpose, as advertised, when such sale is anticipatory of or to
avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance,
removal, relocation, dissolution, closing or abandonment of a business
conducted at any location.



   "Fire sales" means any sale of, or offer to sell, to the public, or any
part thereof, goods, wares or merchandise in stock which has been involved in
any business failure or have been derived from any business which has been
adjudicated bankrupt, has been closed, has been discontinued or liquidated,
or has been placed in receivership.



   "Permit" means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.



   "Permittee" means any individual or entity to whom a permit has been
issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6800)



5.16.020   False advertising.



   It is unlawful for any entity to advertise or otherwise represent the
public, or any part thereof, in any manner a reduction in price of any goods,
wares, merchandise, service, facility or accommodation, whether such price
reduction be represented in complete price figures or by percentage reduction
unless the price from which the reduction is calculated is the price
customarily charged by applicant for the goods, wares, merchandise, service,
facility or accommodation so offered to the public. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6801)



5.16.030   Permit required.



   It is unlawful for any entity to advertise or conduct a close-out sale,
or bankruptcy sale, as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the collector of the city in the manner provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6802)



5.16.040   Individuals/entities exempt.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to, or, or affect the
following individuals/entities:



   A.   Individuals acting in their official capacities as public
officials;



   B.   Individuals/entities acting pursuant to process issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction;



   C.   Duly licensed auctioneers, selling auction;



   D.   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical or
publication, who publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge
that compliance has not been had with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6803)



5.16.050   Interval between sales.



   Any entity that has held a sale, regulated hereunder, at the same
location as stated in the application within one year preceding the date of
the application, shall not be granted a permit. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6804)



5.16.060   Restricted operation of permit.



   In the event the entity which is applying for a permit hereunder
operates more than one place of business, any permit issued hereunder shall
apply only to the one store for which application is made and no other store
or branch shall advertise, or represent that it is cooperating with it or in
any way participating in such sale, nor shall the store at which such sale is
conducted advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with it or participating in any way in such sale. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6805)



5.16.070   Application for permit.



   Any entity desiring to advertise and conduct a sale regulated by this
chapter shall make a written  application therefor, under oath, accompanied
by a fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the collector of the
city setting forth and containing the following information:



   A.   The true name and address of the owner of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be subject of the sale;



   B.   The true name and address of the entity, from whom the
applicant purchased the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold and the price
thereof, or, if not purchased, the manner of acquisition. The price at which
said goods were offered for sale to the public immediately prior to such
application;



   C.   The address of the place where such sale is to held;



   D.   The nature of the occupancy of applicant of that place where
the sale is to be conducted whether by lease, sublease or otherwise, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy;



   E.   The dates when the sale is to be conducted;



   F.   A full and complete statement of the facts relating to the
sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods,
wares or merchandise thereby, and the manner in which the sale will be
conducted;



   G.   The means proposed to be employed in advertising such sale
together with the proposed content of such advertising, if any;



   H.   An itemized stock list of inventory of the goods, wares and
merchandise to be offered for sale, together with the cost at which the same
were obtained by the owner thereof or the individual or entity conducting the
sale. All goods, wares and merchandise listed upon the inventory herein
required shall be so described in detail by manufacturer's name and lot
number of articles so described, colors, sizes and otherwise, that the
identity of such good with the goods listed on such inventory can be readily
determined;



   I.   All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased
by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation
privileges in the ordinary course of business and shall not comprise goods
held on consignment;



   J.   Such inventory shall not include goods, wares or merchandise
ordered in expectation or contemplation of conducting a sale of the type
regulated hereby. Any purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the
entity applying for a permit hereunder shall be presumed to be a purchase
made in expectation or contemplation of a sale as herein regulated. Such
presumption may be rebutted by evidence that such purchases or additions were
not made in expectation or contemplation thereof;



   K.   Such inventory shall include only goods which are, at the time
of said inventory is taken and prepared, on the premises of the applicant and
at the location where the sale is proposed to be conducted. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6806)



5.16.080   Investigation.



   A.   Upon the filing of the application for a permit as provided in
this chapter, the collector shall make or cause to be made such examination,
audit, or investigation of the applicant and his/her business, history and
affairs in relation to the proposed sale as he/she shall deem necessary. If
the collector finds that the statements in the application are true, that the
inventory is complete and accurate, that the advertising proposed to be used
is not false, fraudulent, deceptive or misleading in any respect, that
proposed price reductions are bona fide, and that the methods proposed to be
used by the applicant in conducting  the sale are not such as, in his/her
opinion, will work a fraud or deception upon prospective purchasers, he/she
shall recommend the issuance to the applicant of a permit to conduct such
sale in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; otherwise, he/she
shall recommend a denial of the application. The collector may also refuse to
issue a permit to the applicant because of the insufficiency of the
information. The collector shall grant the applicant permission to file an
amended application.



   B.   No permit may be issued to any applicant who has been convicted
of any crime involving fraud or moral turpitude within five years preceding
application. The collector also may refuse to issue a permit to any entity
that has heretofore violated any provisions of any ordinance of the city
regulating the conduct of sales of the type herein regulated.  Upon approval
of the application by the collector, the application, together with a report
of the investigation made pursuant thereto shall be sent to the city manager
for approval or disapproval. Upon approval of the application by the city
manager, the collector shall issue a permit. In no event shall the fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6807)



5.16.090   Effect of permit.



   Any permit issued hereunder shall be issued on the following terms:



   A.   The permit shall authorize the sale described in the
application for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days;
provided, that no such sale shall commence until fifteen (15) days shall have
passed since the applicant shall have filed his/her inventory with the
collector; and provided further, however, that the collector, with the
approval of the director of finance, may, upon application therefore,
accompanied by a renewal fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) renew said
permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar  days.
Such application for renewal shall set forth a complete list of goods, wares
or merchandise listed in the original application which remain unsold. No
goods, wares or merchandise not listed in the original application may be
sold pursuant to any renewal permit granted hereunder. Upon receipt of such
application at once, and, if satisfied of the truth of the statements made
therein shall refer the renewal application, together with the attendant
investigation report, the collector shall issue a renewal applicant.



   B.   The permit shall authorize only the one type of sale described
in the application at the location therein described.



   C.   The permit shall authorize only the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise described in the inventory appended to the application.



   D.   Any permit or renewal thereof granted herein provided shall not
be assignable or transferable. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6808)



5.16.100   Surety bond required.



   Any applicant to whom a permit is to be issued under the provisions of
this chapter shall submit to the collector, a corporate surety bond
satisfactory to the city payable to the city in the penal sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. No permit shall be issued unless and until such bond has been filed
with said officer of the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6809)



5.16.110   Duties of permittee.



   A permittee hereunder shall:



   A.   Make no additions or substitutions whatever to or of the stock
of goods, wares or merchandise, described in the inventory attached to the
permit application during the period subsequent to the filing of the
inventory and prior to termination of sale or renewal thereof herein
authorized;



   B.   Refrain from any false, deceptive or misleading advertising;



   C.   Conduct such sale in strict conformity to any advertising or
hold out relating thereto;



   D.   Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the
inventory to the application, for presentation thereof to inspection
officials upon request therefor;



   E.   At the close of business each day, the stock inventory shall be
revised and made current; items on such list disposed of during such day
shall be noted thereon. Suitable books and records as prescribed by the
collector shall be kept by permittee and shall be open at all times to
inspection by the collector, or his/her authorized representatives. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6810)



5.16.120   No additional goods, wares or merchandise.



   No goods, wares or merchandise shall be offered for sale at the place
of business where such sale is to be conducted other than those items listed
in the inventory filed with the application for the permit. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6811)



5.16.130   Revocation of permit.



   The collector or his/her authorized representative shall have the power
to revoke at any time any permit granted in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, or in such a manner as to deceive or defraud the public, if:



   A.   The holder of any such permit has made any material
misstatement in the application for such a permit;



   B.   The holder of any such permit has been guilty of any fraudulent
practice or practices in the conduct of the sale authorized by such permit;



   C.   The holder of any such permit has failed to inventory all the
goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale pursuant to such permit;



   D.   The holder of any such permit has added or caused to be added,
or permitted to be added any goods, wares or merchandise not described in the
original inventory and has offered such additions for sale under permit;



   E.   The holder of any such permit has violated any of the
provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6812)



Chapter 5.20
FORTUNETELLERS



Sections:



5.20.010   Purpose.



5.20.020   Definitions.



5.20.030   Permit required.



5.20.040   Filing and fee provisions.



5.20.050   Applications.



5.20.060   Referral of application to other departments.



5.20.070   Issuance of permit.



5.20.080   Denial of permit.



5.20.090   Term of permit.



5.20.100   Sale, transfer or change of location.



5.20.110   Operating requirements.



5.20.120   Display of permit and identification cards.



5.20.130   Employment of individuals under the age of eighteen is
prohibited.



5.20.140   Services and rate sign.



5.20.150   Inspection sign.



5.20.160   Inspection.



5.20.170   Employment of individuals without permits unlawful.



5.20.180   Suspension or revocation of permit.



5.20.190   Appeal from suspension or revocation.



5.20.200   Reapplication of denied or revoked permit.



5.20.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, welfare and
safety of the public at large and patrons of fortunetelling establishments by
ensuring that the services provided by those establishments are, to the
greatest extent possible, free from fraud, corruption, vice, trickery and
other criminal influences. It is also the purpose of this chapter to minimize
the impact upon local neighborhoods caused by concentrations of
fortunetelling establishments in localized area and to provide that such
establishments are located in areas designated to serve broader portions of
the community. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6650)



5.20.020   Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:



   "Applicant" means an individual who is required to file an application
for a permit under this chapter, including a fortuneteller, individual,
owner, managing partner, managing officer of a corporation, or any other
operator, manager, or employee of a fortunetelling establishment.



   "For pay" means a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of
value.



   "Fortune telling" means telling of fortunes, forecasting of  futures,
or furnishing of any information by means of any occult, psychic power,
faculty, force, chiromancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy,
psychology, psychometery, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such
reading, mediumship, telepathy, or other craft art, science, cards, talisman,
charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or
foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries, or magic, of any kind or
nature, or other means beyond the ordinary process of knowledge.



   "Fortunetelling establishments" means any establishment having a fixed
place of business where any individual or entity engages in, or carries on,
or permits to be engaged in or carried on any activities defined in this
section.



   "Fortuneteller" means any individual who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of fortunetelling as herein defined
unless otherwise excepted. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6651)



5.20.030   Permit required.



   A.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to engage
in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried
on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a fortunetelling
establishment without first having obtained a permit from the city as herein
required.  A fortunetelling establishment permit shall include the right of
the individual permittee to practice fortunetelling at such an establishment.



   B.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in the city without first having obtained a permit from the
city as required.



   C.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual to act as a
fortuneteller in other than a duly licensed fortunetelling establishment.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6652)



5.20.040   Filing and fee provisions.



   A.   Every individual or entity that proposes to maintain, operate
or conduct a fortunetelling establishment in the city shall file an
application with the director of finance upon a form provided by the city,
together with a nonrefundable filing fee. Said filing fee shall be
established by the city manager, and may be revised from time to time. This
fee shall not be deemed in lieu of a business tax as required by Chapter 5.04.



   B.   Every individual or entity that proposes to maintain, operate
or conduct a fortunetelling establishment in the city shall file an
application with the director of finance upon a form provided by the city
together with a nonrefundable filing fee. Said filing fee shall be
established by the city manager and may be revised from time to time. This
fee shall not be deemed in lieu of a business tax as required by Chapter 5.04.



   C.   A permit, when issued, shall state whether it is for a
fortunetelling establishment or for a fortuneteller.



   D.   Fortunetelling establishment applicant(s) must post, with the
city clerk, a surety bond in the principal sum amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) executed as a surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety
authorized to do surety business in state of California and a principal by
the applicant. This form of bond shall be approved by the city attorney and
shall be given to insure good-faith and fair dealing on the part of the
applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage,
theft, or other unfair dealings suffered by any patrons of the applicant
during the term of the permit. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6653)



5.20.050   Applications.



   To obtain the permit required by this chapter, the applicant shall
submit an application to the director of finance on a form provided by the
director of finance and shall include such information as may be required by
the chief of police to complete his/her investigation. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6654)



5.20.060   Referral of application to other departments.



   A.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments
shall be referred by the director of finance to the planning manager, who
shall make written recommendations to the director of finance concerning
compliance with the laws and ordinances that he/she administers and enforces.



   B.   All applications for permits for fortunetelling establishments
or for the practice of fortunetelling shall be referred by the director of
finance to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be
conducted to verify the facts contained in the application. To this effect,
the chief of police shall require the applicant to have his/her fingerprints
taken and may require such additional information as may be necessary to
establish the identification of the applicant. When the investigation is
completed a report and recommendation shall be made in writing to the
director of finance. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6655)



5.20.070   Issuance of permit.



   The director of finance shall issue the permit if, based upon the
investigation, it is found:



   A.   That the operation as proposed by the applicant, would comply
with all applicable laws;



   B.   That the applicant has not been  convicted in a court of
competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses:



   1.   An offense involving use of force or violence upon another
individual,



   2.   An offense involving the element of fraud or theft,



   3.   A crime requiring registration under Section 290 of the
California Penal Code, or of any violation of Section 311 through 311.7, 314,
315, 316, 318, or 647 (a), (b), or (d) of the California Penal Code,



   4.   A crime requiring registration under Section 11590 of the
California Health and Safety Code, or violations of Sections 11360, 11366,
11377, 11352, or 11379 of the Health and Safety Code,



   5.   Any other crime involving moral turpitude,



   6.   Any of the above substantive offenses as defined in the laws of
any jurisdiction other than the state of California or as defined by any law
of the state of California in effect before the above sections were adopted;



   C.   That the applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive
made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements of fact in the license
application or any other document required by the city in conjunction
therewith. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6656)



5.20.080   Denial of permit.



   A.   If one or more of the findings set forth in Section 5.20.070
cannot be made, the permit shall be denied. In the event of denial,
notification and reasons for denial shall be communicated by the director of
finance to the applicant. The denied applicant shall upon submission of
his/her written request, have the right to receive a hearing before the city
manager or his/her designee. If such a hearing is not requested within ten
days of the date of notification of denial of permit by the director of
finance, the denial shall be final.



   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or
practices fortunetelling after denial of an application, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6657)



5.20.090   Term of permit.



   Permits issued under the provision of Section 5.20.070 shall be valid
until the first day of January of the next year and may be renewable
annually. Initial permit application fees will not be prorated; however,
applications submitted on or after the first day of October will be valid
until the first day of January of the second successive year. All
applications for renewal of fortunetelling establishments permits and
fortuneteller  permits shall be filed with the director of finance on forms
provided by the city.



   A.   An application for renewal of a fortunetelling establishment
permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the
fee shall be established by the city manager and may be amended from time to
time.



   B.   An application for renewal of a fortuneteller permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee. The amount of the fee shall be
established by the city manager, and may be amended from time to time.



   C.   All applications for renewal shall be referred to the chief of
police, who may require an applicant to have his/her fingerprints taken and
to furnish such additional information as may be necessary to establish the
identification of the applicant. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6658)



5.20.100   Sale, transfer or change of location.



   Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a fortunetelling establishment
the permit therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon
death or incapacity of the permittee, a fortunetelling establishment may
continue in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three
months, to allow for an orderly transfer of the business. No permittee shall
operate under the name or conduct his/her business  under any designation or
at any location not specified in the permit. Any fortuneteller may have a
valid permit transferred for use at any other fortunetelling establishment
upon written application to the director of finance accompanied by a
nonrefundable transfer fee. Said transfer fee shall be established by the
city manager and may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6659)



5.20.110   Operating requirements.



   A.   No fortunetelling establishment or any portion of a building in
which the fortunetelling establishment is located shall be used for
residential or sleeping purposes.



   B.   Fortunetelling establishments may be open for operation only
between the hours of seven a.m. and twelve a.m., inclusive, of each day, or
as otherwise permitted by applicable zoning regulations.



   C.   No fortunetelling establishment shall be located closer than
one thousand (1,000) feet to any other licensed fortunetelling establishment.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6660)



5.20.120   Display of permit and identification cards.



   A.   Every fortunetelling establishment shall display at all times
during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for such establishment in a conspicuous place so that the same may be
readily seen by all individuals entering this establishment.



   B.   The director of finance shall provide each fortuneteller, or
other employee granted a permit, with an identification card which shall
contain a photograph and the name and permit number of said fortuneteller or
employee which must be displayed at all times during the hours of employment.
The chief of police or his/her designee shall be responsible for providing
the photograph for the identification card. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6661)



5.20.130   Employment of individuals under the age of eighteen is
prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any individual owner, managing partner, managing
officer, or other individual in charge of any fortunetelling establishment to
employ any individual who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6662)



5.20.140   Services and rate sign.



   Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in
a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch in height, listing the services available and the rate to be
charged therefor. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged
for such services other than those shown on the sign posted. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6663)



5.20.150   Inspection sign.



   Every permittee of a fortunetelling establishment shall post a sign in
a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all individuals
entering the fortunetelling establishment, printed in bold letters not less
than one inch in height, with the following thereon: "These premises are
subject to inspection without notice by authorized officials of the city."
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6664)



5.20.160   Inspection.



   The chief of police shall from time to time cause an inspection to be
made of the premises of each fortunetelling establishment in the city for the
purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6665)



5.20.170   Employment of individuals without permits unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge
of or in control of a fortunetelling establishment to employ any individual
who is not in possession of a valid, nonrevoked permit to practice
fortunetelling within a fortunetelling establishment. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6666)



5.20.180   Suspension or revocation of permit.



   Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by the director of finance for violation of any provision of this
chapter or for grounds that would warrant denial of the issuance of such
permit in the first instance. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6667)



5.20.190   Appeal from suspension or revocation.



   A.   Within ten days after any denial, suspension, or revocation of
a permit, the individual aggrieved may appeal such action to the city manager
by filing a written request for a hearing with the city manager or his/her
designee. Upon the filing of such a request, the city manager shall set a
time and place for the hearing and shall notify the appellant thereof. The
hearing shall be set within thirty (30) days after the request is filed. At
the hearing, any individual may present evidence in opposition to or in
support of the appellants case. The suspension or revocation of the permit
shall be stayed pending a decision of the city manager or designee, on the
appeal.



   B.   Any individual who operates a fortunetelling establishment or
practices fortunetelling after suspension of a permit or after revocation of
a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code
§ 6668)



5.20.200   Reapplication of denied or revoked permit.



   Any individual whose permit is denied or revoked may not apply for a
permit to operate a fortunetelling establishment or practice fortunetelling
in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
individual solely by reason that he/she is engaged in the business of
entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind-reading, mental telepathy,
thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places
and in the presence of and within the hearing of other individuals and at
which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a
manner to permit all individuals present at such public place to hear such
answers.



   B.   No individual shall be required to pay any fee or take out any
permit for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service
when such individual holds a certificate of ordination as a minister,
missionary, hereinafter collectively referred to as a minister, medium,
healer, or clairvoyant, hereinafter collectively referred to as a medium,
healer, or clairvoyant, from any bona fide church or religious association
maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set
of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith;
provided that:



   1.   Except as provided in subsection (B)(3) of this section, the
fees, gratuities, emolument and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted
for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or
religious association, as defined in this section.



   2.   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona
fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file
with the Director of Finance a certified copy of the minister's certificate
of ordination with the minister's name, age, street address, and phone number
in this city where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted.



   3.   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in
this section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the
minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of
such church or religious association. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6669)



Chapter 5.24
GARAGE SALES AND ARTIST AND CRAFT PERSON SALES



Sections:



5.24.010   Definitions.



5.24.020   Regulations.



5.24.030   Unlawful to violate provisions of this chapter.



5.24.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:



   Artist and/or Craft Persons Sale. "Artist and/or craft persons sale"
means a sale, offer to sell, or holding for the purpose of selling, of goods
or other merchandise made by such individual or group of individuals. The
sale must be conducted in a noncommercial garage, yard, patio, driveway, or
on any portion of the premises in a residential zone. This definition does
not include sales made on commercial premises.



   Garage Sale. "Garage sale" means a sale, offer to sell, or holding for
the purpose of selling, conducted by any individual or individuals, of
household furnishings, goods, or other tangible personal property, conducted
in a non-commercial garage, yard, patio, driveway, or on any portion of the
premises in a residential zone. This definition does not include sales made
on commercial premises. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6350)



5.24.020   Regulations.



   All garage sales and artist and/or craft persons sales conducted within
the city shall be subject to the following limitations:



   A.   Sales shall be conducted only between the hours of eight a.m.
and eight p.m.



   B.   One sale shall not exceed three consecutive days;



   C.   One sign not exceeding two feet by two feet in size may be
posted on the property where the sale is being held during the duration of
the sale only.  No signs regarding such sale shall be posted on any property
other than where the sale is held;



   D.   No more than two garage sales shall be conducted on the same
premises more than twice in any calendar year;



   E.   No more than two artist and/or craft persons sales shall be
conducted on the same premises more than twice in any calendar year. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6351)



5.24.030   Unlawful to violate provisions of this chapter.



   It is a violation for any individual to promote, advertise or conduct
any garage sale or artist and/or craft sale in violation of any conditions or
provisions of this chapter. In addition, a statement of noncompliance as
defined in Section 5.04.130 may be required. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6352)



Chapter 5.28
HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES



Sections:



5.28.010   Definitions.



5.28.020   Register.



5.28.030   Registration required.



5.28.040   Unlawful to register under fictitious name.



5.28.010   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the term "lodging house" shall be
deemed to be and is declared to include any building in which sleeping rooms
or apartments are or may be let or hired to six or more individuals for one
or more nights, whether then compensation therefore be paid in money, labor,
merchandise or otherwise, and includes hotels and apartment houses where
cooking is not done in any room or apartment except in the general kitchen
used and operated in connection with the business of such lodging house,
hotel or apartment house. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6700)



5.28.020   Register.



   Every individual or entity conducting or operating a lodging house or
hotel in the city whether as owner, lessee, agent or manager, shall keep a
register wherein every guest and every individual hiring, obtaining or
procuring lodging or the right to occupy or use any room or rooms, in such
lodging house or hotel, shall be required to inscribed his/her true name at
the time of procuring such lodging or the right to occupy or use any room or
rooms in such lodging house or hotels. Said register shall show the time the
name was inscribed (the day, the month and the year), also the room or rooms
hired or procured by such guest or lodger. Said register shall be kept in a
conspicuous place in said lodging house, or hotel and shall be, at all times,
open to inspection by any other guest or lodger in said lodging house and to
the chief of police and to all other city police officers. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6701)



5.28.030   Registration required.



   Before furnishing any lodging, permitting any individual to use or
occupy any room or rooms in any such lodging house or hotel, the owner,
operator, manager or individual in charge thereof shall require registration
as provided in 5.28.010. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6702)



5.28.040   Unlawful to register under fictitious name.



   Every guest and every individual hiring, obtaining or procuring lodging
or the right to occupy or use any room or rooms, in any lodging house or
hotel in the city, at the time of hiring, obtaining or procuring such lodging
or the right to use or occupy any such rooms or rooms and before occupying or
using any room or rooms in any such lodging house or hotel, must register as
provided in Section 5.28.010 of and it is unlawful for any individual to so
register under a fictitious name or under any name not the true name of the
individual so registering. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6703)



Chapter 5.32
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Sections:



5.32.010   Compliance required.



5.32.020   Application process.



5.32.030   Business tax certificate required.



5.32.040   Hours of peddling and/or soliciting.



5.32.050   Violations.



5.32.010   Compliance required.



   A.   No individual shall peddle or solicit without first having
complied with the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be waived at
the discretion of the collector. The collector may revoke such waiver at any
time and require compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6300)



5.32.020   Application process.



   A.   A business tax application can not be completed and the fees
paid until the following process is completed:



   1.   Step One. Furnish his/her fingerprints and thumbprints, to be
taken by the police department.  The police department does charge a fee and
the fee will be paid by the individual;



   2.   Step Two. The individual will then send the
fingerprint/thumbprint card to the Department of Justice in Sacramento. This
card is then returned to the finance office for approval. The department of
justice also has a fee for this process;



   3.   Step Three. With the finance office's approval, a business tax
application can then be completed and the fees paid.



   B.   The manager/owner must provide a list of sellers. Only the
persons on the list will be permitted to peddle or solicit. It is only
necessary for the manager/owner to furnish the fingerprint/thumbprint card.
All persons on the list shall carry credentials showing he/she is an
authorized employee or representative of the employer. Each persons shall
also carry a copy of the business tax certificate to be shown when asked for.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6301)



5.32.030   Business tax certificate required.



   No individual shall peddle or solicit without having a valid, and in
effect, business tax certificate from the city to do so at the time. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6307)



5.32.040   Hours of peddling and/or soliciting.



   No individual shall peddle or solicit before the hour of nine a.m. of
any day or after sunset or seven p.m. whichever is earlier. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6308)



5.32.050   Violations.



   Any of the following shall be considered a violation pursuant to this
chapter:



   A.   False Application. Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false
statement contained in application for business tax certificate;



   B.   False Information. Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false
statement made to the police department in furnishing the information
required pursuant to this chapter;



   C.   Improper Peddling, Soliciting. Conducting the peddling or
soliciting in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
breach of the peace or to be a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the people of the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code
§ 6305)



Chapter 5.36
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICES



Sections:



5.36.010   Definitions.



5.36.020   Registration required.



5.36.030   Uniforms and insignias worn by uniformed private patrol service
employees.



5.36.040   Vehicles used by private patrol service.



5.36.050   Exceptions.



5.36.010   Definitions.



   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:



   The term "Private patrol service" means any individual or entity which
furnished or purports to furnish to members, subscribers, or customers any
uniformed security guard or special officer for the purpose of affording
security protection for hire or reward, and as defined in Section 7582.1,
Division 3, Chapter 11.5, Article 3 of the Business and Professions Code of
the State of California. 



   B.   This chapter shall not apply to a watchman or caretaker working
for a single employer in a line of business other than a licensed private
patrol service or to an individual operating an armored car service for
transporting money or other valuable personal property under guard. (Ord.
9605 § 16 (part), 1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6600)



5.36.020   Registration required.



   Any private patrol service operator, or any employee thereof, as
defined by Section 5.36.020 of this chapter and Section 7582.1, Division 3,
Chapter 11.5, Article 3 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of
California, shall register their firm name, names of employees, and file a
copy of their State Bureau of Consumer Affairs identification cards with the
Chief of Police, or designee, before engaging in the provision of private
patrol services within the corporate limits of the city notwithstanding
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 5.04. No application for such
registration as required by this section. It is unlawful for any private
patrol operation, or employee thereof, to engage in the business of private
patrol service without first complying with the registration requirements of
this section. (Ord. 9605 § 16 (part), 1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6601)



5.36.030   Uniforms and insignias worn by uniformed private patrol service
employees.



   The chief of police shall approve the type or character of
identification markings and/or insignia placed on uniforms worn by private
patrol service employees so as to insure that the uniforms and insignia are
clearly distinguishable from the uniforms and insignia worn by Visalia police
personnel. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6602)



5.36.040   Vehicles used by private patrol service.



   The chief of police shall approve the type or character of
identification markings and/or insignia placed on any motor vehicle used in
the operation of any private patrol service. No vehicle used by a private
patrol service shall be equipped with a red light or a siren. Such vehicles
will be clearly distinguishable from the vehicles used by the Visalia
Department of Public Safety as emergency vehicles. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6603)



5.36.050   Exceptions.



   No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or
indirectly, to authorize any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of
the state of California or require any act which is otherwise prohibited by
any law of the state of California. Nor shall any provision of this chapter
be deemed whether directly or indirectly, to authorize any act or acts which
are prohibited by any law of the state of California. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6604)



Chapter 5.40
PUBLIC DANCES



Sections:



5.40.010   Definitions.



5.40.020   Permit and license required.



5.40.030   Regulations.



5.40.040   Misdemeanor.



5.40.010   Definitions.



   Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is
intended, the following words and/or phrases, when used herein, shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them and shall be interpreted and
construed accordingly. As used in this chapter, the following words or
phrases shall mean:



   Adult Sponsoring Group. "Adult sponsoring group" means a nonprofit
organization whose primary object is to sponsor, regulate and control youth
activities and child welfare.



   Dancing Club. "Dancing club" means any club or association of
individuals which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members
or bona fide guests.



   Dancing School. "Dancing school" means any school, class or classes
wherein dancing is the principal subject taught.



   Private Dance. "Private dance" means a gathering of individuals in or
upon any premises where dancing is permitted either as the main purpose for
such gathering, or as an incident to some other purpose and to which premises
only club members, pupils or members of such club or school are admitted.



   Public Dance. "Public dance" means a gathering of individuals in or
upon any premises where dancing is permitted either as the main purpose for
such gathering or as an incident to some other purpose, and to which premises
the public is invited.



   Public Dancing Place. "Public dancing place" means a place where
dancing is permitted, whether for profit or not for profit, and to which the
public is admitted either with or without charge, or at which the public is
allowed to participate in the dancing, either with or without charge.



   Youth Dance. "Youth dance" means a nonprofit dance or club dance
sponsored by a service group, parents group, or other adult sponsoring groups
to which no one over the age of twenty-one (21) is admitted as a participant,
and at which no alcoholic beverage is served, sold or permitted. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6500)



5.40.020   Permit and license required.



   A.   Public Dances.



   1.   No individual(s), dancing club or dancing school shall conduct,
permit, operate or assist in conducting or operating any public dance unless
and until a written permit has been obtained from the chief of police and a
license obtained from the director of finance.



   2.   No permit or license shall be issued for a public dance where
alcoholic beverages are sold unless the place of business has seats at tables
adequate to seat thirty (30) people, not counting stools at the bar or
counter where alcoholic beverages are served, and has not less than one
hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor space maintained in a smooth, safe
condition for dancing.



   3.   This subsection shall not apply to any individual(s) or
organization conducting a public dance in connection with a dinner when any
alcoholic beverage is served by a caterer licensed to serve such alcoholic
beverages.



   B.   Exemptions.



   1.   No permit or license shall be required for any dance conducted
by school authorities or by the city recreation and parks department when
such dance is conducted on property owned by such school system or the city.



   2.   Any public dance conducted by school authorities or by the
recreation and parks department of the city shall be exempt licensing
provisions of this chapter.



   3.   No permit or license shall be required for any public dance
conducted by a bona fide fraternal organization, veterans organization, or
other service or civic organization.



   4.   No permit or license shall be required for any private dance,
dancing club or dancing school as defined in Section 5.40.010, except that
dancing clubs and dancing schools shall pay the license fee prescribed by the
licensing ordinance of the city for such businesses.



   5.   Any public dance conducted by a bona fide local organization
where the entire proceeds of such dance are used for a charitable cause or
are donated to a charitable organization, shall be exempt from the licensing
provisions of this chapter. The director of finance shall conduct any
investigation necessary to determine if any proposed dance meets the
requirements specified herein. He/she shall be the sole judge as to the
authenticity  of such charity dance.



   C.   Revocation  of Permit. In the event any individual(s) holding
a permit under this chapter shall violate any of the provisions hereof, or
shall permit or allow any illegal, improper or disorderly conduct in any
public dancing place, the chief of police, or his/her duly authorized
representative may revoke such permit on ten days written notice to the
individual holding the permit.



   D.   Application. Every individual desiring a permit and license
pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the chief of police
operations at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the date of such dance
upon a form to be provided by said chief of police, or his/her duly
authorized representative, and shall pay any required license fee to the
director of finance.



   E.   Issuance of Permit. No permit shall be issued by the chief of
police except upon a reasonable showing.



   F.   Appeals. Any decision of the chief of police denying or
revoking a dance permit or of the director of finance determining a proposed
dance to be nonexempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter, may be
appealed to the city council by filing a written notice for an appeal with
the city clerk within ten days of such action. The city council shall hear
such appeal at its next succeeding regular meeting. If such an appeal is
taken from revocation of a permit, the revocation shall not be effective
until after a decision upholding the revocation has been made by the city
council. The decision of the city council on an appeal shall be final. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6501)



5.40.030   Regulations.



   A.   No individual conducting any public dance or any public dancing
place shall permit or allow any intoxicated, boisterous or disorderly
individual to enter, be, remain, or dance therein, nor shall any of the
patrons of such dance bring, or be permitted to bring, any alcoholic beverage
into such dance.



   B.   No individual shall shut or turn off or reduce the intensity of
the lighting in the area used for dancing to such an extent as to provide
less lighting or illumination than is customary for rooms or areas of like
dimensions or to a degree which makes it difficult or impossible to clearly
see or identify individuals dancing on the floors provided therefor.



   C.   No individual shall permit or allow any minor under the age of
sixteen (16) to enter, be, or dance in any public dancing place. No parent or
guardian of a minor under sixteen (16) years of age, or the proprietor or
individual in charge of any public dance, shall permit any such minor
individual to enter, be or dance in any public dancing place;  provided,
that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a minor individual under
the age of sixteen (16) years from being in a bona fide hotel, cafe or other
place where meals are regularly served, and where a public dance is being
held, in the event that such minor does not participate in the dancing
herein; provided, further, that nothing in this section shall apply to
private dances or dances conducted by dancing clubs or dancing schools as
defined herein, or dances conducted by the school system or the recreation
and parks department of the city, or youth dances conducted in full
compliance with the provision of this chapter.



   D.   At every public dance licensed hereunder in a place having a
capacity of not less than two hundred (200) individuals, whether this number
of individuals is actually present or not, there shall be at least two
licensed security guards, plus one additional security guard for each one
hundred (100) individuals over two hundred (200) in attendance during the
entire time such dance is in progress and they shall devote their entire time
and attention to keeping order and seeing that all provision of this chapter
are complied with. The cost of supplying shall be borne by the individual(s)
conducting such dance.



   E.   Every permit obtained hereunder shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises where the public dance is conducted for
which such permit was issued and shall remain posted during all the time
dancing is taking place.



   F.   No individual who has left a youth dance during the time it is
in progress shall be readmitted to such dance unless either:



   1.   An admission charge not less than that charged to individuals
entering such youth dance for the first time is again paid; or



   2.   A permit issued by the chief of police specifically provides
that such readmission may be otherwise allowed. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6502)



5.40.040   Misdemeanor.



   Any individual violating any of the provisions of Section 5.40.020 or
Section 5.40.030 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6503)



Chapter 5.44
SELF-SERVICE CAR WASHES



Sections:



5.44.010   Purpose.



5.44.020   Short title.



5.44.030   Authorization.



5.44.040   Application.



5.44.050   Engine cleaning.



5.44.060   Enforcement.



5.44.070   Severability.



5.44.010   Purpose.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prohibit engine
cleaning in self-service car washes. (Prior code § 9650)



5.44.020   Short title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Engine Cleaning Ordinance of the
City of Visalia." (Prior code § 9651)



5.44.030   Authorization.



   The city manager, or his designee, is authorized and directed to
implement the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 9652)



5.44.040   Application.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers,
and property within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 9653)



5.44.050   Engine cleaning.



   Cleaning of internal combustion engines in a self-service car wash is
prohibited. (Prior code § 9654)



5.44.060   Enforcement.



   Any person who intentionally cleans an internal combustion engine in a
self-service car wash, shall be found to have engaged in criminal conduct
punishable as an infraction, subject to penalties in accordance with Section
1.12.010. (Ord. 9605 § 17, 1996: prior code § 9655)



5.44.070   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Prior
code § 9656)



Chapter 5.48
TAXICABS



Sections:



5.48.010   Definitions.



5.48.020   Public transit and medical transportation exempt.



5.48.030   General provisions of business permit.



5.48.040   Business permit--Prerequisite to operate.



5.48.050   Application for business permit.



5.48.060   Action on business permit application.



5.48.070   Compliance.



5.48.080   Discontinuance of service may cancel business permit.



5.48.090   Suspension or revocation of business permits.



5.48.100   Driver permit is a prerequisite to operate.



5.48.110   Application for taxicab or vehicle for hire driver permit.



5.48.120   Action on the driver permit application.



5.48.130   Temporary driver permit.



5.48.140   Suspension, revocation of driver permit.



5.48.150   Rules and regulations for operation.



5.48.160   Things deemed to make taxicabs or vehicle for hire unsafe or
unsuitable.



5.48.170   Vehicle inspection.



5.48.180   Authority of police department to inspect taxicabs.



5.48.190   Appeal by applicant.



5.48.200   City held harmless.



5.48.210   Liability insurance.



5.48.220   Establishment of rates.



5.48.230   Taximeter.



5.48.240   Taxicab stand.



5.48.250   Suspension/revocation of permit.



5.48.010   Definitions.



   Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is
intended, the following words and/or phrases, when used herein, shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them and shall be interpreted and
construed accordingly. As used in this chapter, the following words or
phrases shall mean:



   "Business tax certificate" means a business tax certificate as is
required by Chapter 5.04.



   "Business permit" means a permit to operate a taxicab or vehicle for
hire business within the city.  Business permit is herein referred to as
permit in this chapter.



   "Compensation" means and includes any  money, thing of value, payment,
consideration, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or profit paid to or accepted
or received by the driver of any vehicle in exchange for transportation of
any individual or individuals whether paid upon solicitation, demand or
contract, voluntarily, or intended as a gratuity or donation.



   "Driver" means every individual in charge of, or operating, any
passenger-carrying vehicle or motor-propelled vehicle, as herein described,
either as agent, employee, lessee, or otherwise, of owner, as owner, or under
the direction of the owner, as defined in this section.



   "Out of service" means a taxicab or vehicle for hire, when it is
currently unavailable to render service and cannot return immediately to an
in-service status as evidenced by a sign. The sign shall have a minimum of
two inch bold lettering of "Out of Service" and be visible through the front
windshield.



   "Owner" means every individual or entity having use or control of any
passenger-carrying vehicle or motor-propelled vehicle, as defined, whether as
owner, lessee or otherwise.



   "Permittee" means any corporation, partnership, association, individual
or other organization owning, operating or proposing to operate any taxicab
or vehicle for hire.



   "Rates" means the monetary charge for transportation in vehicle for
hire.



   "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel.



   "Taxicab" means every vehicle used for the transportation of passengers
for hire, compensation, profit, financial gain, benefit or consideration of
any kind over the public streets of the city and whether or not over a
defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the
boundary limits of said city, and such vehicle is routed under the direction
of such passenger or passengers, or of such individuals hiring the same and
charge for transportation is measured by the distance traveled, or by a
combination of distance traveled and time required for such transportation.



   "Taxicab stand" means a public place alongside the curb of a public
street or elsewhere, which has been designated by the city manager or
designee of the city as reserved exclusively for the use of the city
permitted taxicab businesses.



   "Taximeter" means that device which the charge for hire of a
passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically or electronically calculated,
either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both and upon said
instrument appliance, device or machine, such charge is indicated by figures.



   "Unattended" means a taxicab or vehicle for hire parked on a public
street or taxicab stand without an individual with a driver permit, as
defined in Section 5.48.100, within ten feet from the taxicab or vehicle for
hire for more than ten minutes.



   "Vehicle for hire" means every vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers for hire, compensation, profit, financial gain, benefit, or
consideration of any kind exclusively over the public streets of the city and
whether or not over a defined route and irrespective of whether the
operations extend beyond the boundary limits of said city, and such vehicle
is routed under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such
individuals hiring the same.  The charge for transportation is determined by
a flat hourly rate, distance traveled, or by a combination of distance
traveled and time required for such transportation. The vehicles are not
governed by the Public Utilities Commission, State Passenger Charter Party
Carriers' Act. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6550)



5.48.020   Public transit and medical transportation exempt.



   This chapter shall not apply to public transit provided by government
agencies and private parties under contract to government agencies or the
transportation of the handicapped or chronically ill in specially equipped
vehicles. Individuals operating a medical transportation service claiming
such an exemption shall transport only individuals who are handicapped or
chronically ill and their attendants. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6551)



5.48.030   General provisions of business permit.



   A.   No vested right or property interest of any type if acquired by
a business or driver permit issued to any individual under this chapter.



   B.   All business and driver permits are revocable and subject to
suspension in accordance with the provision of this chapter and are to be
exercised only in conformance with the regulations provided in this chapter.



   C.   1. A permittee shall not permit any right or privilege granted
by his/her permit to be exercised by another, nor shall his/her permit or any
interest therein or any right or privilege thereunder be in whole or in part
sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, either by merger or
consolidation, expressly or by operation of law or otherwise. A transfer in
violation of this subsection shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of
this permit.



   2.   Upon the death of any business permit holder, the permit many
not be exercised by the executor or administrator of the deceased permittee's
estate in accordance with this chapter for a period in excess of one year
from the date of death of the permit holder.



   D.   Driver permits are annual permits which expire and become null
and void on the next thirtieth day of June; provided, that whenever a driver
permit has been applied for and issued within a period of sixty (60) days
before June 30th, it shall be valid when issued for the next ensuing year.
Application for renewal must be received by the chief of police before
expiration of the permit.  Renewals may be endorsed on the permit form.



   E.   The renewal fee for each business permit shall be the annual
amount designated by the city manager. If any permit is not exercised, the
fee shall not be refunded. The fee required is a permit fee and shall not be
deemed to be in lieu of business tax as required by the provisions of Chapter
5.04. The business permit fee shall be paid annually, in advance, on or
before the thirtieth day of June. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6552)



5.48.040   Business permit--Prerequisite to operate.



   No individual shall operate any taxicab or vehicle for hire within the
city without the owner first having obtained a business permit from the city.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6553)



5.48.050   Application for business permit.



   Any individual desiring to obtain a business permit to operate a
taxicab or vehicle for hire service shall pay a one-time, nonrefundable
application fee established by the city manager and file a certified
application with the chief of police. The application fee shall be in
addition to the usual and customary fee charged for a business tax
certificate.  This fee shall not be deemed to be in lieu of business tax as
required by Chapter 5.04. The application shall be on a standard city form
and include:



   A.   The name, address and birth date of the applicant, and if the
same be a corporation, the names, addresses and birth dates of its principal
officers, or if the same be a partnership, association, or fictitious
company, the names, addresses and birth dates of the partner or individuals
comprising the association or company;



   B.   A statement as to whether the business permit is desired for a
taxicab or vehicle for hire company;



   C.   A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant
proposes to use giving: (1) year, (2) make, (3) motor, (4) serial number, (5)
license number, and (6) seating capacity.



   D.   Any distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia which
shall be used on the vehicle;



   E.   Proof of public liability policy as stated in Section 5.48.210;



   F.   A complete and certified vehicle inspection form for all
vehicles to be operated under  regulations in Section 5.48.150;



   G.   Such other information as the city council or city manager may
require. All changes in the required information shall be filed within five
days from the date of the change. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6554)



5.48.060   Action on business permit application.



   A.   Upon receipt by the police department the applicant(s) shall be
investigated for character, reputation and criminal history.  After such
investigation and report, a business permit shall be issued provided that:



   1.   The applicant has submitted all information required under
Section 5.48.050;



   2.   The applicant is found to be a fit and proper individual to
conduct business;



   3.   That neither the name under which the applicant will conduct
business or the taxicab's color scheme or other insignia will tend to confuse
the identification of the taxicabs which applicant proposes to operate with
those already permitted to conduct business; and



   4.   There are not other appropriate reasons for denial of the
application.



   B.   Should the city deny the application, written notice shall be
given to the applicant with the reason(s) for such denial. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6555)



5.48.070   Compliance.



   No business permit shall be issued to any individual who has not fully
complied with all  of the requirements hereof necessary to be complied with
before commencing operation of the proposed service. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6556)



5.48.080   Discontinuance of service may cancel business permit.



   After the service for which a business permit is granted hereunder is
discontinued, or if the individual or entity sells their business or
discontinues their business for a period of forty-five (45) consecutive days,
without having first obtained permission for cessation of such operation from
the chief of police, shall have their business permit canceled. Permits
granted hereunder shall not be transferable. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6557)



5.48.090   Suspension or revocation of business permits.



   Permits may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police at anytime
in the event the chief of police finds:



   A.   The owner's past record to be unsatisfactory;



   B.   The owner fails to operate any taxicab or vehicle for hire in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;



   C.   The owner shall cease to operate any taxicab or vehicle for
hire for a period of forty-five (45) consecutive days without having obtained
permission for cessation of such operation from the chief of police;



   D.   A taxicab or vehicle for hire are operated at rate of fare
greater than that posted with the city as set forth in Section 5.48. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6558)



5.48.100   Driver permit is a prerequisite to operate.



   It is unlawful for any individual to drive or operate or for any
permittee to knowingly allow any individual to drive or operate any of the
vehicles regulated by this chapter without first obtaining a permit in
writing to do so from the chief of police. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6559)



5.48.110   Application for taxicab or vehicle for hire driver permit.



   A.   Any individual desiring to secure a taxicab or vehicle for hire
driver permit shall submit an application therefor to the chief of police.
The application shall be in a form approved by the chief of police and shall
include the following:



   1.   The applicant's name, home address, business address and
telephone numbers;



   2.   The applicant's age and place of birth;



   3.   The date upon which the applicant wishes the permit to be
issued;



   4.   Identification, including any previous driver permit issued to
the applicant;



   5.   A current identification picture of the applicant;



   6.   A statement of the applicant's criminal convictions within the
last five years, excluding parking violations;



   7.   Type, number and description of California Driver License(s)
held by the applicant; and



   8.   Such other and further information as the chief of police may
require.



   B.   Both the original and renewal driver permit application fee
shall be determined by the chief of police. Neither fee is refundable. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6560)



5.48.120   Action on the driver permit application.



   A.   The police department shall then investigate the character,
reputation and driving record of the applicant. After such investigation and
report, the police department shall either issue a regular driver permit or
deny the application providing notice to the applicant of the reason(s) for
denial.



   B.   No permit shall be issued to any of the following individuals:



   1.   Any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years;



   2.   Any individual who has been convicted of  a felony or a crime
involving moral turpitude or narcotics;



   3.   Any individual who has been convicted of driving a vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating substances or driving a vehicle
recklessly within the five years immediately proceeding the application for a
permit;



   4.   Any individual not possessing a valid Class 1, 2 or 3
California Driver License. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6561)



5.48.130   Temporary driver permit.



   Any individual who has applied for a taxicab or vehicle for hire driver
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon request
therefor, be issued a temporary driver permit for not to exceed sixty (60)
days by the chief of police who shall not issue such a temporary permit if in
possession of information which indicates that a driver permit should not be
issued. Such temporary driver permit, while it is in effect, shall for all
purposes have the same force and effect and be subject to the same conditions
as any driver permit issued under the terms of this chapter, except the chief
of police may summarily revoke or suspend any such temporary driver permit if
the temporary licensee violates any of the terms or conditions of this
chapter. There shall be no appeal from such revocation or suspension. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6562)



5.48.140   Suspension, revocation of driver permit.



   The chief of police may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a driver
permit if the driver or applicant has, since the granting of the permit:



   A.   Been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral
turpitude, pandering, using, possessing, selling or transportation of
narcotics, or imparting information for obtaining narcotics;



   B.   Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the
influence of substances;



   C.   Had their California Drivers License revoked or suspended;



   D.   Had two or more convictions of any of the offenses set forth in
Sections 22348 or 22350 or the State Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, or
any combination of either of any such offenses, occurring during any
continuous period not exceeding twelve (12) months;



   E.   When, for any reason, including or other than the above, in the
opinion of the chief of police, the applicant is unfit to drive a taxicab;



   F.   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6563)



5.48.150   Rules and regulations for operation.



   The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all
individuals operating taxicabs or vehicles for hire governed under this
chapter:



   A.   The driver permit shall be displayed in the vehicle in full
view of the passenger;



   B.   Every taxicab shall have visible from the outside a schedule of
all rates and charges, established pursuant to Section 5.48.220 of this
Ordinance, in a minimum of one inch numeral and letter size on each side of
the taxicab. One additional schedule of all rates and charges shall be posted
in full view of the passenger while seated in the taxicab;



   C.   No charge shall be made by any driver or owner in excess of the
posted rates established pursuant to Section 5.48.220;



   D.   No taxicab or vehicle for hire shall be operated unless kept in
a clean, sanitary and mechanically safe condition;



   E.   The driver of any taxicab or vehicle for hire shall transport
passengers in a safe and expeditious manner to their destination by the most
direct and accessible route;



   F.   No individual shall operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire in
violation for any law or ordinance;



   G.   No owner or operator of any taxicab or vehicle for hire shall
indulge in unfair competition or commit fraud upon the public. The city
manager, or designee, shall determine what constitutes unfair competition or
fraud;



   H.   Drivers shall provide receipts to passengers so requesting;



   I.   The individual(s) engaging a taxicab or vehicle for hire shall
have the exclusive right to the full and complete use of the taxicab or
vehicle for  hire and it is unlawful for the driver to solicit or carry
additional individuals without the prior permission of the passenger;



   J.   Display of Flag--When Unlawful.



   1.   The driver of a taxicab shall not display the flag or device
attached to such taximeter in a recording position when such taxicab is not
actually employed. The driver of a taxicab shall throw the flag or other
device of such taximeter to the non-recording position at the termination of
each service.



   2.   The driver of a taxicab while carrying passengers or under
employment, except on an hourly basis or contract  basis, shall not display
the flag or device affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote
that he/she is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he/she
is entitled;



   K.   All taxicabs shall operate under a two-way radio dispatch
system;



   L.   The taxicab or vehicle for hire driver shall immediately return
any property of value left in his vehicle to its owner or report such an
incident to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6564)



5.48.160   Things deemed to make taxicabs or vehicle for hire unsafe or
unsuitable.



   For the purposes of Section 5.48.150, the existence of the following
named things, but not to the exclusion of other things, shall be deemed to
make a taxicab unsafe or unsuitable for taxicab service:



   A.   Excessive leakage of oil, grease, gas or any other substance
from any part of the taxicab;



   B.   The existence of any defects in the frame of the taxicab;



   C.   The failure of any movable parts of the car, including doors,
windows, trunk, lights, etc. to function in the proper working order;



   D.   Failure to maintain the tires, lights, turning signals or
brakes in good and safe working condition;



   E.   Failure to maintain the motor and other mechanical parts of the
car in good and safe operating condition;



   F.   The existence of large or excessive dents in the body of the
taxicab;



   G.   Failure to maintain the exterior approved paint color scheme;



   H.   The existence of excessive wear and tear on the upholstery,
floor mats, and other parts of the interior of the taxicab;



   I.   Failure to have adequate interior lighting in proper working
condition;



   J.   An inoperable two-way radio;



   K.   Failure to possess a basic first-aid kit;



   L.   Failure to possess a charged fire extinguisher. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6565)



5.48.170   Vehicle inspection.



   A.   Business permit holder shall be responsible for having each
taxicab or vehicle for hire inspected for mechanical fitness every six months
by a qualified mechanic certified by the State Department of Consumer
Affairs. The city shall provide inspection forms which the mechanic shall
complete and certify and the permit holder shall submit the completed forms
to the city.



   B.   New business permit applicants must have the inspection prior
to consideration of application for approval. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6566)



5.48.180   Authority of police department to inspect taxicabs.



   A.   The chief of police or any member of the police department,
under his/her direction, shall have the right at any time, when a taxicab or
vehicle for hire is not transporting a customer and after displaying proper
identification, to enter into that vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not any of the provisions set for in this chapter are being
violated.



   B.   Such police inspection may occur when a customer is present and
the chief of police or his/her designate has probable cause. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6567)



5.48.190   Appeal by applicant.



   Any applicant denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed a business
permit or driver permit, may appeal the decision to the city manager, or
designee, by filing a written notice with the city clerk within ten days from
the receipt of the notice of denial. The city manager or representative shall
hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days  from the receipt of
the notice by the city clerk. The decision of the city manager, or designee,
following the hearing shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6568)



5.48.200   City held harmless.



   A taxicab or vehicle for hire permittee shall, and by acceptance of a
business permit, keep and hold the city, it's agents and employees free and
harmless from any and all claims, costs, liabilities, damages or expenses,
including costs of suits and fees and expenses for legal services on account
of any damages claimed by any third party, including such claims by agents or
employees of the business permit holder, alleged to have been sustained in or
about any taxicab stand established or maintained by or for taxicabs, or in
or about any of the permittee's premises, or arising out of the permittee's
operations, as a result of anything claimed to have been done or not done by
the permittee, or by anyone claiming or acting under the permittee. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6569)



5.48.210   Liability insurance.



   A.   No taxicab or vehicle for hire shall be driven or operated in
the city unless the owner or operator thereof obtains and maintains a motor
vehicle liability insurance policy or policies from a responsible and solvent
corporation, authorized to issue such policies under the laws of the State of
California, insuring said owner or operator and covering such taxicab or
vehicle for hire.



   B.   Such policy shall insure any individual driving, using or
responsible for the use of any taxicab or vehicle for hire covered by said
policy with the consent, express or implied, of the owner, against loss from
liability imposed on any of them by law for injury to or death of any
individual, or damage to property, arising from or growing out of the
maintenance, operation or ownership of any taxicab or vehicle for hire
covered by the policy to not less than the type and amounts or limits
required for operation as prescribed by the chief of police.



   C.   The applicant or permittee shall file with the city said policy
or policies or certificates thereof.  The policy or policies shall provide
that they shall not be canceled except after thirty (30) days written notice
to the city.



   D.   Upon the chief of police receiving notice of cancellation, the
chief of police by written notice shall inform the business permit holder
that the permit will be automatically suspended on the expiration date of the
policy, without further notice unless evidence of required insurance is filed
with the chief of police on or before that date. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 6570)



5.48.220   Establishment of rates.



   A.   The city council by resolution, may establish maximum and
minimum rates of fare charged to the public for use of taxicabs or vehicles
for hire, or for any services incidental thereto.



   B.   Each business permit holder shall establish rates for the
individual business. The schedule of rates for each business shall be filed
with the city fifteen (15) days prior to becoming effective. Rates shall
apply to any trip when the taxicab is registered with the city pursuant to
this chapter, and either picks up or discharges a fare within the city.



   C.   The rates in Section 5.48.220(B) shall be indicated in the
following manner:



   1.   First one-half mile;



   2.   Each additional one-tenth mile;



   3.   Each per minute waiting charge;



   4.   All other specific incidental charges.



   D.   The fare schedule may not be applied if any trip exceeds twenty
(20) miles and the taxicab driver and customer negotiate a flat fee. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6571)



5.48.230   Taximeter.



   A.   Every taxicab shall be equipped with an accurate single tariff
taximeter. It is unlawful to tamper with any taximeter or other measuring
instrument for the purpose of gauging or indicating distance traveled, or
waiting time, or for the purpose of fixing rates to be collected from the
public or to operate a taxicab with a broken lead tag and/or lead wire or
upon notification from the Tulare County Department of Weights and Measures
or other appropriate agency that the meter is inaccurate.



   B.   The business permit holder shall insure that each vehicle's
taximeter is inspected a minimum of once a year by the Tulare County
Department of Weights and Measures and immediately upon a charge effecting
the meter rate. The permittee's taximeter(s) shall be subject to inspection,
at any time by the Tulare County Department of Weights and Measures. The
taximeter shall be so placed in said taxicab that the reading dial showing
the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible by the
passenger riding in such taxicab, unless such taximeter is equipped and
operated as a receipt-printing taximeter. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6572)



5.48.240   Taxicab stand.



   A.   It is unlawful for any carrier, or driver of any vehicle
operated pursuant to the terms of this chapter, to stand, or permit to stand,
any such vehicle at any place upon any portion of the city streets, other
than at a certain place designated by the city manager. This provision shall
not be applicable to any taxicab displaying an "Out of Service" sign defined
in this chapter.



   B.   The city manager, or designee, may upon written request from a
city permitted taxicab business; designate a taxicab stand as defined in this
chapter. Such taxicab stand shall be subject to revocation by the city
manager with five days prior written notice to all effected and permitted
taxicab businesses.



   C.   It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to allow such
taxicab to remain in any taxicab stand, as set out in this section,
unattended.



   D.   No carrier or driver of any taxicab shall solicit passengers at
a distance greater than ten feet from his/her taxicab.



   E.   It is unlawful to park an out of service taxicab in a
designated taxi stand. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6573)



5.48.250   Suspension/revocation of permit.



   Violations under Sections 5.48.090, 5.48.140 or 5.48.210 may
additionally cause a suspension or revocation of permit(s). (Prior code §
6918)



Chapter 5.52
TOWN CENTER BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA



Sections:



5.52.010   Authority.



5.52.020   Resolution of city council.



5.52.030   Establishment of district.



5.52.040   Rate of tax.



5.52.050   Definitions and classifications of business.



5.52.060   Businesses subject to tax.



5.52.070   Use of tax.



5.52.080   Time of collection of tax.



5.52.090   Advisory board, budget and agreement.



5.52.100   Voluntary contribution.



5.52.110   Delinquency penalty.



5.52.010   Authority.



   The actions taken in this chapter are pursuant to the authority of the
"Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1965" as added to the Streets
and Highways Code by Statutes 1965, Chapter 241, being Section 36000 to
Section 36081 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6100)



5.52.020   Resolution of city council.



   A.   The city council of the city adopted Resolution 443 October 25,
1966 entitled: "A Resolution of the City Council of the City of Visalia,
California, declaring its intention to establish a Town Center Business
Improvement Area."



   B.   A hearing was held in November 7, 1966 at seven-thirty p.m. in
the council chambers of the city hall and continued until November 21, 1966
at which time Resolution 452 was passed declaring a majority protest had not
been filed. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6101)



5.52.030   Establishment of district.



   The city council established a town center business improvement area
within the boundaries of the following area:



All that portion of the SW 1/4 of Sec. 29, and the SE 1/4 of Sec. 30,
Township 18 South, Range 25 East, M.D.B. & M., described as follows:



Beginning at the point of intersection of the west line of Conyer Street and
the north line of Oak Street, thence easterly along the north line of Oak
Street to the west line of Johnson Street; thence northerly along the west
line of Johnson Street to the north line of School Street; thence easterly
along the north line of School Street to the east line of Santa Fe Avenue;
thence southerly along the east line of Santa Fe Avenue to the south line of
Mineral King Avenue; then westerly along the south line of Mineral King
Avenue to its intersection with the west line of Conyer Street; thence
northerly along the west line of Conyer Street to the north line of Oak
Street; to the point  of  beginning.



(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6102)



5.52.040   Rate of tax.



   A.   The initial rate of increase or the additional levy of the
general business tax imposed upon business within said area are fixed,
levied, determined and established as one hundred percent (100%) of the
business tax.



   B.   Those entities covered under Article 2 of Chapter 5.04 are
exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6103)



5.52.050   Definitions and classifications of business.



   The definitions and classifications of businesses referred to in this
chapter shall be determined by the definitions and classifications as set
forth in Chapter 5.04. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6104)



5.52.060   Businesses subject to tax.



   The businesses in the area established by this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions of the additional tax provided by this chapter. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6105)



5.52.070   Use of tax.



   The proposed uses to which the proceeds obtained from the additional
tax on the businesses within said area may be put, are:



   A.   The acquisitions, construction and maintenance of parking
facilities for the benefit of the area;



   B.   Decoration of any public place in the area;



   C.   Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in
public places in the area;



   D.   Furnishing of music in any public place in the area;



   E.   The general promotion of retail trade activities in the area.
(Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6106)



5.52.080   Time of collection of tax.



   The collection of said additional tax from any business in said area
shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as any other business
tax is collected. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6107)



5.52.090   Advisory board, budget and agreement.



   For the sole purpose of advising the council and making recommendations
on the operation and extent of the area, the methods and ways in which the
revenue derived from the additional levy of business tax imposed by this
chapter shall be used within the scope of the purposes set forth in Section
5.52.070, and to have and to be created an advisory board which may consist
of fifteen (15) members to be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of
the city council for a term of one year, to serve at the pleasure of the
mayor and city council; said members to be individuals who have businesses
within the area and pay an additional levy of business tax as provided by
this chapter. The council may annually approve a budget to include an
estimate of expenditures to be made to carry out the purposes of the town
center business improvement area. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6108)



5.52.100   Voluntary contribution.



   Any entity, individual, business, or institution which is exempt from
the payment of business tax in the city by reason of the provision of the
United States of America or of the state of California, or whose place of
business is outside the area, is not taxed under this proceeding, may make a
voluntary contribution to the town center business improvement area. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6109)



5.52.110   Delinquency penalty.



   The delinquency penalty and interest assessed on said additional tax
shall be calculated at the same time and in the same manner as any other
business tax, as set forth in this title. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6110)



Chapter 5.56
WASTE TIRE HAULERS



Sections:



5.56.010   Definitions.



5.56.020   Waste tire haulers business license required.



5.56.030   Exceptions to waste tire hauler's business license requirement.



5.56.040   Display of waste tire hauler's business license.



5.56.050   Use of licensed waste tire hauler required.



5.56.060   Report of transactions by licensee.



5.56.070   Report of disposition by tire dealers.



5.56.080   Penalties.



5.56.090   Conflict with other laws and regulations.



5.56.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:



   Association. "Association" means every club, syndicate, joint
adventure, and every other group of individuals who are united together for
some common purpose but are not organized as a partnership or corporation.



   Business. "Business" means the operation or carrying on of any
activity, whether for profit or gratuitously, for which a license is required
by this chapter.



   Business Premises. "Business premises" means the office, building,
location or place in which or from which a business is conducted or carried
on.



   Disposition. "Disposition" means the removal of waste tires from the
business premises or other location used by the dealer in its business.



   Public Works Director or Director. "Public works director" or
"director" means the public works director for the county of Tulare.



   Tax Collector. "Tax collector" means the tax collector for the county
of Tulare.



   Tire. "Tire" means a pneumatic tire or solid tire manufactured for use
on any type of motor vehicle.



   Tire Dealer. "Tire dealer" means any person who engages in the business
of selling, trading or dealing in tires for profit.



   Waste Tire. "Waste tire" means a tire that has been removed from the
wheel of a motor vehicle and is no longer suitable for its originally
intended purpose due to wear, damage or defect.



   Waste Tire Hauler. "Waste tire hauler" means any person who engages in
the collection and/or transportation of waste tires for compensation.



   Waste Tire Hauler's Business License. "Waste tire hauler business
license" means a license to engage in the collection and/or transportation of
waste tires for compensation as required by Section 6172 of the Ordinance
Code of Tulare County found at Article 2.6 of Chapter 2, Part VI of said
Code. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6900)



5.56.020   Waste tire haulers business license required.



   Any person engaging in, and any vehicle used in, the business of a
waste tire hauler within the city shall have a valid waste tire hauler's
business license issued by the county of Tulare to engage in or be used in
such business. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6901)



5.56.030   Exceptions to waste tire hauler's business license requirement.



   The following persons shall be exempt from the requirement to be
licensed:



   A.   Refuse collectors licensed by the County of Tulare or city;



   B.   The city and its employees;



   C.   Any tire dealer transporting only its own waste tires; and



   D.   Any common carrier which transports freight of various kinds
and for which the transportation of waste tires is only incidental. (Ord.
9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6902)



5.56.040   Display of waste tire hauler's business license.



   It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the following
requirements concerning business licenses:



   A.   Any vehicle used to collect and/or transport waste tires within
the city must bear on both sides the name of the licensee and the words
"Waste Tire hauler License No.                 " with the applicable
license number in contrasting  lettering not less than two inches in height.



   B.   The waste tire hauler's business license shall be displayed at
all times in a conspicuous place near the main entrance of the business
premises.



   C.   A waste tire hauler's business license issued for the use of a
vehicle shall be carried at all times in the vehicle for which the license
was issued.



   D.   If a waste tire hauler's business license has been issued
authorizing the licensee to conduct a business independent of a fixed
location, the licensee shall carry the license upon his person at all times
when he is conducting such business.



   E.   No person shall post, display or carry any revoked, suspended,
expired or otherwise invalid waste tire hauler's business license.



   F.   A waste tire hauler's  business license shall be displayed to
the tax collector, any investigating officer or any peace officer on demand.



   G.   Any waste tire hauler's  business license that has been
revoked or suspended shall be surrendered to the tax collector, any
investigation officer or to any peace officer immediately after a demand for
such surrender has been made. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6903)



5.56.050   Use of licensed waste tire hauler required.



   It is unlawful for any tire dealer in the city to contract with, or
otherwise permit, any person to collect and/or transport its waste tires
unless that person holds a valid waste tire hauler license or is a person
excepted from the provisions of this chapter by Section 5.56.030. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6904)



5.56.060   Report of transactions by licensee.



   A.   All licensees shall be required to file a monthly report with
the public works director on a form prescribed by the director of each and
every transaction in which the licensee was involved in the collection and/or
transportation of waste tires within the city. Said form shall contain the
following information as to each such transaction:



   1.   The date and time of waste tires were collected and/or
transported;



   2.   The approximate quantity of waste tires collected and/or
transported;



   3.   The name and address of the person for whom the waste tires
were collected and/or transported;



   4.   The location from which the waste tires were collected and/or
transported;



   5.   The location to which the waste tires were transported.



   B.   The licensee shall retain receipts or other appropriate
documentation which verify that the waste tires in each  transaction were
transported to lawful disposal sites, and shall produce that documentation to
the public works director on a monthly report on a form prescribed by the
Director of each and every disposition of its waste tires, which such form
shall contain the information contained in Section 5.56.070 as to each such
disposition. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6905)



5.56.070   Report of disposition by tire dealers.



   A.   All tire dealers located in Tulare County shall be required to
file with the public works director a monthly report on a form prescribed by
the director of each and every disposition of its waste tires, which such
form shall contain the following information as to each such disposition:



   1.   The date and times of each such disposition;



   2.   The approximate quantity of waste tires disposed;



   3.   The manner of transportation used to dispose of the waste
tires, including the name and license number of the waste tire hauler used,
if applicable;



   4.   The location of the site to which the waste tires were
transported, if known.



   B.   For purposes of this section, "disposition" means the removal
of waste tires from the business premises or other location used by the
dealer in its business. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6906)



5.56.080   Penalties.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter which is declared
to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalties in
accordance with Section 1.12.010. Notwithstanding the classification of a
violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is
commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon
recommendation the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from
a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under
this chapter shall be subject to penalties in accordance with Section
1.12.010. (Ord. 9605 § 18, 1996: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
6907)



5.56.090   Conflict with other laws and regulations.



   No provision of this chapter, nor any of the procedures set forth
herein, shall constitute a waiver of any of the requirements of any statues
or any provisions of this Ordinance Code or any other ordinance of the city
which are now in effect or which may hereafter be enacted. (Ord. 9517 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 6908)



Chapter 5.60
CABLE TELEVISION



Sections:



5.60.010   Authority and intent.



5.60.020   Definitions.



5.60.030   Franchise to install and operate.



5.60.040   Term of the franchise.



5.60.050   Franchise territory.



5.60.060   FCC or California Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction.



5.60.070   Franchise transfer.



5.60.080   Geographical coverage.



5.60.090   Nonexclusive franchise.



5.60.100   Renewals.



5.60.110   Application required.



5.60.120   Application contents.



5.60.130   Setting for public hearing.



5.60.140   Notice of hearing.



5.60.150   Posting and publishing notice.



5.60.160   Comments by interested persons.



5.60.170   Conduct of hearing.



5.60.180   Decision after hearing.



5.60.190   Minimum service standards.



5.60.200   Franchise fee.



5.60.210   Bond.



5.60.220   Construction requirements.



5.60.230   Technical standards.



5.60.240   Rates.



5.60.250   Indemnity.



5.60.260   Insurance.



5.60.270   Records required.



5.60.280   Grantor's right to inspect.



5.60.290   Plant performance report.



5.60.300   Public reports.



5.60.310   Reports.



5.60.320   Notice of violation.



5.60.330   Default.



5.60.340   Hearing available to grantee.



5.60.350   Appeal of default.



5.60.360   Revocation.



5.60.370   Procedures governing revocation.



5.60.380   Unauthorized operations.



5.60.390   Unauthorized use.



5.60.400   Abandonment or removal of franchise property.



5.60.410   Receivership and foreclosure.



5.60.420   Waivers.



5.60.430   Rights of individuals.



5.60.440   Tenant rights.



5.60.450   Poles.



5.60.460   Possessory interest taxation.



5.60.470   Penalties.



5.60.480   Separability.



5.60.010   Authority and intent.



   A.   The city council finds that the development of cable television
and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and
positive impact upon the people of the city. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city
council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare
can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested
in the city or such persons as the city shall designate.



   B.   The cable ordinance shall apply to all franchises granted,
renewed or otherwise extended after the adoption of the ordinance codified in
this chapter. Nothing herein is intended to preempt, modify or supersede
Ordinance No. 2226 (as amended by Ordinance No. 8033) of the city. Ordinance
No. 2226 (as amended by Ordinance No. 8033) shall continue in full force and
effect, controlling the franchise granted therein before the adoption of the
cable ordinance, until such time as Ordinance No. 2226 (as amended by
Ordinance No. 8033) shall expire by its own terms on December 31, 1995. (Ord.
9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3800)



5.60.020   Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations, whether capitalized or not, shall have the meaning
given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning. 



   "Approval" or "consent" or "agree" or derivations of said words or
words of similar import mean, unless otherwise expressly provided in this
chapter or the grantee's franchise, the prior approval, consent or agreement
of the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree with respect to
the matter in question, and "require" or "judgment" or "satisfy" or
derivations of said words or words of similar import mean the requirement,
judgment or satisfaction of the person who may make a requirement or exercise
judgment or who must be satisfied, which approval, consent, agreement,
requirement, judgment or satisfaction shall, unless otherwise expressly
provided in this chapter or the grantee's franchise, not be unreasonably
withheld by the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree or make
a requirement or judgment or who must be satisfied.



   "Basic cable service" means the lowest priced level of service which
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals (as
authorized) and educational and governmental access channels.



   "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming services and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.



   "Cable system" or "system", means a system of antennas, cables, wires,
lines, fiber optic cables, towers, waveguides or other conductors,
converters, pedestals, equipment or facilities, used for distributing video
programming to home subscribers, and/or producing, receiving, amplifying,
storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of
signals.



   "Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering either one National Television Standards Committee ("NTSC") video
signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some
combination of such signals.



   "City" means the city of Visalia.



   "Council" means the city council of Visalia.



   "Educational and governmental ("EG") access programming" means
programming created, produced, or acquired by representatives of the
educational community acting in their official capacity, or programming
created, produced, or acquired by representatives of the city acting in their
governmental capacity. Grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over
EG access programming except as otherwise required by law.



   "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued
hereunder which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.



   "Grantee" means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this
chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its
successors, transferees or assignees, and further including any lessees,
licensees, or permittees, of whatsoever kind and nature, except city and any
public school district located in the city. 



   "Grantor" means the city as represented by the city council or any
delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction and authority.



   "Gross revenues" means any and all cash, credits, property of any kind
or nature, compensation, or other consideration, received directly or
indirectly by the grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any
person in which the grantee has a financial interest, or from any source
whatsoever, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable
services by the grantee. Gross revenues shall include but not be limited to
basic service monthly fees, pay tiers, premium channels, pay-per-view fees,
leased channel fees, converter rental or sales, advertising revenue, any
other payments by subscribers or users of the grantee's cable system directly
or indirectly made to or received by any person who has contracted to provide
cable service on the cable system, and such other revenues as agreed to in
the franchise agreement. Gross revenues shall not include:  (1) the amount
of any refunds, credits, or other payments made to subscribers or users; (2)
any taxes on cable service furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any
subscribers or users by any municipal corporation, political subdivision,
state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for the
governmental unit; (3) the sale or transfer of tangible property (except as
otherwise permitted in this definition); (4) the sale or transfer of the
franchise; (5) the issuance, sale, or transfer of corporate stocks, bonds, or
other securities; (6) nonforfeited equipment deposits; (7) uncollected bad
debt; and (8) such other revenues expressly excluded in the franchise
agreement. Gross revenues of the grantee shall not be reduced for any
purposes other than provided herein.



   "Installation" means the connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.



   "Local origination programming" means programming, created, produced,
purchased, or otherwise acquired by grantee for distribution to subscribers.
The selection, creation, production, purchase, or other acquisition of local
origination programming shall be exclusively within the editorial discretion
of grantee.



   "Other programming service" means information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally.



   "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock
company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.



   "Public property" means any real property owned by the city other than
a street.



   "Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area
within the city designated in a franchise agreement to receive cable service.



   "State" means the state of California. 



   "Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public
street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court,
sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of- way now or
hereafter held by the city, or dedicated for use by the city, use by the
general public, or use compatible with cable system operations.



   "Video programming" means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast
station. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3801)



5.60.030   Franchise to install and operate.



   A.   A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this
chapter shall permit constructing, operating and maintaining a system in the
service area, including the right to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along
the streets and public property such lines, cables, fiber optics, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals,
attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appropriate
to the operation of the system.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate
a cable television system in the city within any street or within any other
right-of-way within the city without a properly granted franchise awarded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which franchise is in full force
and effect. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3802)



5.60.040   Term of the franchise.



   A.   Term. An initial franchise granted hereunder shall be for a
term established in the franchise agreement. A renewal shall be granted for a
minimum term of fifteen (15) years or a maximum of twenty (20) years.



   B.   Renewal.



   1.   A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed if:



   a.   The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms
of the existing franchise and with applicable law;



   b.   The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality,
response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to
the mix, level or quality of cable services or other services provided over
the system has been reasonable in light of community needs; 



   c.   The grantee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to
provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in the grantee's
proposal; and



   d.   The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of
meeting such needs and interests. The city may not declare grantee's proposal
unreasonable and deny renewal, nor may community needs be established, on the
basis of facilities, equipment, or services which another party has indicated
it is willing to provide; except, nothing herein shall prohibit city from
considering the adequacy or inadequacy of any proposed or requested upgrade
of the cable system when determining whether grantee's proposal is reasonable.



   2.   In any renewal proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded
adequate notice and the grantee and the city, or its designee, shall be
afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to
introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence, and to question
witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 



   3.   A proceeding under this subsection shall be completed within
twelve (12) months of its commencement, within which time the city shall
issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based
upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to
the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor.



   4.   Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or
more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in
subsection (B)(1) of this section, pursuant to the record of the proceeding
under subsection B(2) and (3) of this section. Grantor may not base a denial
of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of
the franchise under subsection B(1)(a) or on events considered under
subsection B(1)(b) of this section unless the grantor has provided grantee
notice and the opportunity to cure as provided in this chapter, or in any
case in which grantor has waived its right to object, or the grantee has
given grantor written notice of a failure to cure and the grantor fails to
object within a reasonable time after receipt of such notice.



   5.   Grantee is expressly reserved its rights of appeal under
federal and state law. In addition to such rights, the franchise shall remain
in effect at all times during which a renewal proceeding or appeal remains
pending. 



   6.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (B)(1) through
(5) of this section, grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of a
franchise, and grantor may, after affording the public adequate notice and
opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including
after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced). The provisions of
subsections (B)(1) through (B)(5) of this section shall not apply to a
decision to grant or deny a proposal under this subsection. The denial of a
renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal
proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections (B)(1) through (5)
of this section.



   C.   City may not, upon the expiration of this franchise, or
otherwise, acquire an ownership interest in the system, or require a sale of
the system to any other person, unless city or such other person acquires the
ownership interest at not less than fair market value for the system as a
going concern without allocating a value to the franchise itself. (Ord. 9527
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3803)



5.60.050   Franchise territory.



   Any franchise shall be within all of the territorial limits of the
city, and within any area henceforth added to the territorial limits of the
city during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 3804)



5.60.060   FCC or California Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction.



   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state laws. Whenever the Federal Communications
Commission ("FCC") or Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") of the state of
California or any other federal or state agency shall now or hereafter
exercise any paramount jurisdiction over, and in conflict with, any specific
provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or
preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3805)



5.60.070   Franchise transfer.



   A.   Grantee shall not assign, or transfer control of, the franchise
without the prior consent of the council, which consent will not be
unreasonably denied. The council shall render its decision within
seventy-five (75) days from the date on which consent is requested. Any
attempt to assign the franchise without the consent of the council shall be
null and void. No such consent shall be required for an assignment: (1) to
any affiliate of and entirely owned or controlled by the grantee; (2) any
person controlling, controlled by or under common control with the grantee,
in each case as of the effective date of the existing franchise; or (3) in
trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an
indebtedness; provided, further, that any such person agrees to be bound by
the existing franchise.



   B.   The requirements of subsection (A) of this section shall apply
only to a transfer in the control of grantee. The word "control" as used
herein is limited to actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
Thus, in the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the
council shall be required where ownership or control of more than fifty-one
(51) percent of the voting stock is acquired by a person or group of persons
acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the
grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or
collectively. 



   C.   The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses
the legal, financial and technical qualifications to operate and maintain the
system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the
term of the franchise. If the transferee demonstrates that it possesses such
qualifications, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and
obligations of such franchise as in the public interest. The consent of the
grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed.



   D.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchisee or
its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation
of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its
designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the
cable communications system, in the event of a grantee default in its
financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit
a plan for such operation within thirty (30) days of assuming such control
that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over
the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the
system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its
discretion and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition
the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3806)



5.60.080   Geographical coverage.



   All residential areas within the franchise area will be provided with
access to service from the system unless a franchise provides otherwise in
any line extension policy contained therein. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 3807)



5.60.090   Nonexclusive franchise.



   A.   Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive;



   B.   If the city elects to grant an additional cable television
franchise in an area where a franchise has already been granted to a cable
television operator to any applicant that was not authorized to provide cable
television service within the city prior to the effective date of this
chapter, it shall do so only after a public hearing noticed pursuant to
Section 6066 of the Government Code, in a newspaper of general circulation as
defined in Section 6000 of the Government Code, where all of the following
have been considered:



   1.   Whether there will be significant positive or negative impacts
on the community being served;



   2.   Whether there will be an unreasonable adverse economic or
aesthetic impact upon public or private property within the area;



   3.   Whether there will be an unreasonable disruption or
inconvenience to existing users, or any adverse effect on future use, of
utility poles, public easements, and the public rights-of-way contrary to the
intent of Section 767.5 of the Public Utilities Code;



   4.   Whether the franchise applicant has the technical and financial
ability to perform;



   5.   Whether there is any impact on the franchising authority's
interest in having universal cable service;



   6.   Whether other societal interests generally considered by
franchising authorities will be met;



   7.   Whether the operation of an additional cable television system
in the community is economically feasible;



   8.   Such other additional matters, both procedural and substantive,
as the franchising authority may determine to be relevant.



   C.   Nothing in this section prevents the city from considering the
approval or denial of an additional cable service franchise in any area of
the city subject to compliance with subsection (E) of this section, or the
imposing of additional terms and conditions upon the granting of the
franchise, as the city determines is necessary or appropriate.



   D.   The city shall make a final determination as to whether to
grant the additional franchise within six months of the application date
unless the city can establish that the applicant has unreasonably delayed
proceedings designed to consider the matters set forth in subparagraphs (1)
to (8), inclusive, of subsection (B) of this section.



   E.   Any additional franchise granted to provide cable television
service in an area in which a franchise has already been granted and where an
existing cable operator is providing service or certifies to the franchising
authority that it is ready, willing and able to provide service, shall
require the franchisee to wire and serve the same geographical area within a
reasonable time and in a sequence which does not discriminate against lower
income or minority residents, and shall contain the same  educational, and
governmental access requirements that are set forth in the existing
franchise. This subsection does not apply where all existing cable operators
certify to the franchising authority that they do not intend to provide
service within a reasonable time to the area to be initially served by the
additional franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3808)



5.60.100   Renewals.



   The terms of Sections 5.60.110 through 5.60.180 shall not apply to
applications for renewal of a franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 3809)



5.60.110   Application required.



   Any person desiring a franchise for a cable television system shall
file an application with the city. A nonrefundable application fee
established by the city shall accompany the application to cover all costs
associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without
limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical
evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal
experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication
requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and
document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application
fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30)
days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs from the city.
In the event such application fee exceeds the amount of such costs, the city
shall refund the amount of the excess to the applicant within thirty (30)
days following completion of the proceedings relating to such application.
(Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3810)



5.60.120   Application contents.



   An application for a franchise for a cable television system shall
contain, where applicable:



   A.   Designation of specific area to be served by franchise;



   B.   Resume of prior history of applicant, including the expertise
of applicant in the cable television field; 



   C.   List of the partners, general and limited, if the applicant is
a partnership and a list of the persons and/or entities involved if the
applicant is a joint venture; 



   D.   List of the names and addresses of stockholders of applicant
and percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder. List shall
include all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or
more of its voting stock;



   E.   List of officers, directors and managing employees of
applicant, together with a description of education and business background
of each such person;



   F.   A current financial statement of applicant verified by a CPA
audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the city; 



   G.   Proposed construction schedule, providing for at least
thirty-three and one-third (33-1/3) percent construction per year for three
years;



   H.   Street map of area to be served showing the location of
proposed or existing head-end site (antenna site) and business office;



   I.   Legal description of area to be served; 



   J.   Proposed rates and charges to be charged subscribers;



   K.   Itemized electronic equipment to be used, channels to be
provided, pay TV, or additional services and type of converter;



   L.   Technical market survey of area and economic analysis including
number of homes, population, income bracket and percent of those requesting
and those projected or estimated to request service, if available, designed
to demonstrate how the proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related
needs and interests of the community;



   M.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;



   N.   A signed statement by an officer indicating whether any
principal, officer, director or managing employee: 



   1.   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral
turpitude (including, but not limited to, charges sustained before any
federal or state agency, or violation of any tax or securities law), or is
presently under any indictment, investigation or complaint charging any such
acts,



   2.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or



   3.   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative
proceeding arising out of or involving a cable television system; and



   O.   Any reasonable additional requirements or information that the
city deems to be applicable. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3811)



5.60.130   Setting for public hearing.



   A.   The council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit
and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and may
determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by
the city, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date
after which the same shall not be received, and may make any other
determinations and specify the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving
of such applications.



   B.   Upon receipt of any application for a franchise, the council
shall refer the same to the city manager, who shall prepare a report and make
his recommendations respecting such application.



   C.   The city clerk shall set applications for hearing at a time and
date approved by the city council. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code
§ 3812)



5.60.140   Notice of hearing.



   Not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, the city clerk
shall give notice to the applicant in writing of the time, date and place of
hearing. The city clerk shall serve such notice upon the applicant either by
first-class mail, postage-prepaid, or by personal delivery thereof to the
applicant. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3813)



5.60.150   Posting and publishing notice.



   The city clerk shall cause a notice to be posted in three places within
the area to be served stating the time, date and place of a hearing not less
than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The city clerk shall publish in
a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the area to be served
and pursuant to Section 6066 of the Government Code the same notice as is
required to be posted. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3814)



5.60.160   Comments by interested persons.



   Any person interested, any time after the filing of an application as
provided in this chapter, and prior to the hearing thereon, may file with the
city clerk written comments, protests, and/or suggestions, either for or
against the granting of the franchise or to suggest any terms and conditions
which should be included in the franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 3815)



5.60.170   Conduct of hearing.



   At the time and place set for the hearing or at the time and place to
which the hearing may be continued by the council, the council shall hear the
applicant, who may present any relevant evidence to show why the franchise
should be granted, why certain terms or conditions should be imposed or not
imposed on such franchise if granted, and also shall hear testimony or
statements of other persons who may attend the hearing. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3816)



5.60.180   Decision after hearing.



   Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the council
shall make a decision based on the evidence received at the hearing as to
whether or not the application should be granted, and, if granted, subject to
what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline
to grant any franchise. The council shall send a copy of its decision to the
applicant. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3817)



5.60.190   Minimum service standards.



   Minimum service standards and standards governing consumer protection
and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for
in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and grantee
shall comply with such standards in the operation of the cable television
system. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3818)



5.60.200   Franchise fee.



   After the franchise is granted, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a
franchise fee of up to the maximum amount permitted by law which might be a
percentage of gross revenues, in accordance with terms set forth in the
franchise agreement. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3819)



5.60.210   Bond.



   Grantee shall, at all times during the life of the franchise, keep on
file with the city council a bond running to the grantor in such amount
established in the franchise agreement with sureties to be approved by the
city council. The bond shall be available to grantor to satisfy an amount due
grantor from grantee which arise in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3820)



5.60.220   Construction requirements.



   A.   Grantee shall obtain required permits from the city before
commencing construction involving the opening or disturbance of any street or
public property. The city shall cooperate with the grantee and use its best
efforts in granting any permits required. Grantee shall arrange its lines,
cables and other appurtenances, on any street or public property, in such a
manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the usual and customary
use of said street or public property of any person. 



   B.   Methods of construction, installation, and maintenance of the
grantee's cable system shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code
to the extent that such code is consistent with local law affecting the
construction, installation, and maintenance of electric supply and
communication lines.



   C.   Any and all streets or public property which are disturbed or
damaged during the construction, operation or maintenance of the system shall
be promptly repaired by grantee, at its expense and to a condition reasonably
comparable to its condition prior to the disturbance or damage.



   D.   Grantee may cut or trim trees and vegetation interfering with
National Electrical Safety Code and other clearance requirements, so long as
grantee is in compliance with Chapter 12.24 of this code.



   E.   In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any
of grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to the
franchise, in order lawfully to move a large object, vehicle, building or
other structure over the streets of city, upon thirty (30) days prior notice
by city to grantee, grantee shall move at the expense of the person
requesting the temporary removal such of his facilities as may be required to
facilitate such movement.



   F.   Grantee shall at all times take reasonable precautions for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury
to the public, to employees of grantee, and to public or private property.



   G.   All lines, equipment, and facilities within the service area
shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition
and in good order and repair. 



   H.   In all other cases, grantee shall be eligible for relocation
compensation to the same extent as the grantor compensates any utility
companies. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3821)



5.60.230   Technical standards.



   A.   The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its
system in a manner consistent with FCC technical standards. In addition, the
grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the
results of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant
to FCC standards and requirements.



   B.   The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise,
to maintain FCC technical standards. Should the grantor find that the grantee
has failed to maintain FCC technical standards, and should the grantor
specifically enumerate those standards with which grantee is not in
compliance, the grantee shall make such improvements as are necessary to meet
those standards. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3822)



5.60.240   Rates.



   If during the term of the franchise federal law permits municipal
regulation of basic cable service rates, the city shall have the option, upon
proper notice to the company and an opportunity for the company to comment,
to regulate basic cable service rates, but only to the extent permitted by
federal law. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3823)



5.60.250   Indemnity.



   The grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the grantor, its
council, officers, officials, employees, agents, boards and commissions from
and against all liability, loss, damage, expense, costs (including without
limitation attorneys' fees and other costs and fees in litigation) of every
nature (whether in contract, tort or strict liability, including without
limitation personal injury, death at any time and property damage) arising
out of or in connection with the grantee's or any of its employees', agents'
or contractors' performance of work, or failure to comply with any of the
obligations, under this chapter or the franchise agreement, except such loss
or damage which is caused by the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the
grantor or its officials, employees or agents acting within the scope of
their employment or authority. The indemnity provisions of this section shall
be implemented pursuant to Section 3825 and the terms of the franchise
agreement; provided, that the grantee's obligations under this section shall
not be limited by any insurance provided or held by the grantee. (Ord. 9527
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3824)



5.60.260   Insurance.



   A.   On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee
shall obtain policies of liability, worker's compensation and property
insurance from companies admitted and authorized to transact business in
California by the Insurance Commissioner of California.



   B.   The policy of liability insurance shall: 



   1.   Be issued to grantee and name grantor, its officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds; 



   2.   Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury,
death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises
used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but
not limited to coverage for:



   a.   Negligent acts or omissions of grantee and its employees,
committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or



   b.   Use of motor vehicles;



   3.   Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general
liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount
provided for in the franchise agreement; such insurance policy shall be
subject to the review and approval of grantor's legal counsel;



   4.   Be noncancelable without thirty (30) days' prior written notice
thereof directed to grantor; and



   5.   Contain such other provisions as required by the franchise.



   C.   The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall:



   1.   Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the
California Insurance Commissioner;



   2.   Cover all employees of grantee who in the course and scope of
their employment are to conduct the franchise operations;



   3.   Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter
conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the state upon an injured
employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits; and



   4.   Contain such other provisions as required by the franchise.



   D.   Grantee shall file with the city clerk prior to commencement of
franchise operations either certified copies of these insurance policies or a
certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the
company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a
certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the
following information with respect to said policy:



   1.   The policy number;



   2.   The date upon which the policy will become effective and the
date upon which it will expire;



   3.   The names of the named insureds and any additional insured
required by this chapter or the franchise agreement;



   4.   The subject of the insurance; 



   5.   The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and



   6.   Amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.



   E.   Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until
grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section, or
with the specific insurance provisions that the grantor and grantee agreed to
in the franchise agreement. 



   F.   In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the
above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon
forty-eight (48) hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the
required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall
also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee
fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3825)



5.60.270   Records required.



   A.   Grantee shall at all times maintain:



   1.   A record of all formal written complaints received and
interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two
years; provided, that such complaints result in or require a service call, or
concern the conduct of an employee of the grantee while performing a service
call;



   2.   A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps
showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in
the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in
subscribers' homes;



   3.   A record of service calls, identifying the number, general
nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such
service calls shall be available to the grantor, upon request, within sixty
(60) days following the end of each calendar quarter in a form reasonably
acceptable to the grantor.



   B.   The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional
information, records and documents from time to time; provided, they
reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the
grantee's franchise agreement. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
3826)



5.60.280   Grantor's right to inspect.



   Upon prior written notice, but in no event more than twice in any
calendar year, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the grantor, of all franchise property and facilities,
together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated
within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise;
provided, they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this
chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement, subject (to the extent not
otherwise required by law) to grantor's written agreement to maintain
confidential, trade secret or proprietary information, and further subject to
grantee's right to protect information not subject to discovery under
standards of civil litigation. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
3827)



5.60.290   Plant performance report.



   Within thirty (30) days after request by grantor, grantee shall submit
an annual plant survey report with respect to the preceding calendar year
which shall be a complete survey of grantee's plant and a full report
thereon. The requirements of this provision shall be satisfied by grantee
providing copies of the system's most recent proof of performance reports
prepared in accordance with the FCC's technical standards. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3828)



5.60.300   Public reports.



   If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other
periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor
within forty-five (45) days of request by grantor. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part),
1995: prior code § 3829)



5.60.310   Reports.



   A.   All reports, filings, documents or responses required of the
grantee under this chapter or its franchise agreement shall be provided by
the grantee to the city within the period required therefor and shall contain
the information specified.



   B.   The willful refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any
of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a
material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided
to grantor within thirty (30) days after written request therefor, and may
subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available
to grantor under the franchise or otherwise.



   C.   Any materially false or misleading statement or
misrepresentation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report
required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a
material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies,
legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or
otherwise. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3830)



5.60.320   Notice of violation.



   The city shall provide grantee with a detailed written notice of any
franchise violation upon which it proposes to take action, and a ninety (90)
day period within which grantee may demonstrate that a violation does not
exist or to cure an alleged violation or, if the violation cannot be
corrected in ninety (90) days, to submit a plan satisfactory to the city to
correct the violation. In the event that the franchise violation involves one
that the city, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, believes to be
material, the time periods in Sections 5.60.320 and 5.60.330 shall be changed
from ninety (90) days to thirty (30) days. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 3831)



5.60.330   Default.



   If grantee fails to disprove or correct the violation within ninety
(90) days or, in the case of a violation which cannot be corrected in ninety
(90) days and grantee has not timely submitted a satisfactory plan, then city
may declare the grantee in default, which declaration must be in writing.
Grantee will not be deemed in default if it has notified grantor of a failure
or inability to cure and grantor fails to object within a reasonable time
after such notice. In the event that the city declares grantee in default,
the city shall have the right to institute legal proceedings to collect
damages from the date of the violation, or to exercise any other rights and
remedies afforded the city in law or equity; provided, however, that the city
may institute such legal proceedings only after the hearing has been held and
the written decision issued pursuant to Section 5.60.340 and the grantee opts
not to seek judicial review of the Section 5.60.340 written decision pursuant
to Section 5.60.350; and provided further that the city may institute
revocation proceedings against grantee only after declaration of default,
pursuant to Section 5.60.360 below and only on the grounds set forth therein.
(Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3832)



5.60.340   Hearing available to grantee.



   Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of a written declaration of
default from the city, grantee may request, in writing, a hearing before the
city or its agent, in a full public proceeding affording due process. Such
hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request
therefor and a decision rendered within fifteen (15) days after the
conclusion of the hearing. The time frame for decision may be extended only
upon a clear and convincing showing of good cause. Any decision shall be in
writing and shall be based upon written findings of fact. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3833)



5.60.350   Appeal of default.



   Grantee may seek judicial review of any determination of default by
city in accordance with Sections 1094.5 et seq. of the California Code of
Civil Procedure. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3834)



5.60.360   Revocation.



   The city may revoke the franchise only after a declaration of default
has been affirmed by either: (1) the failure of grantee to seek judicial
review of the determination of default by city in a timely fashion; or (2)
the affirmation of the decision of the city council to revoke the franchise,
after following the procedures set forth in Section 5.60.370, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, or upon the conclusion of any mutually agreed upon
alternative dispute resolution arising from the following circumstances:



   A.   Material misrepresentation by grantee to city in information
required to be provided under the franchise; or



   B.   Willful violation of any material term of the franchise, or any
applicable federal, state, or local laws, including this chapter, related to
the provision of cable services. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
3835)



5.60.370   Procedures governing revocation.



   A.   The city shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent
to revoke the franchise and the lawful grounds therefor. Such written notice
shall include the date, time, and place for the city council meeting where
the city will consider the revocation issue, and shall be given to the
grantee. Notice of the city council's meeting shall also be published by the
city at least once, ten days before such meeting in one newspaper of general
circulation within the city.



   B.   At the designated meeting, the council shall give the grantee
an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall
determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. Grantee may seek
judicial review of any adverse decision in the same manner as set forth in
Section 5.60.350.



   C.   The council may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action
which it deems appropriate to enforce the city's rights under the franchise
and this chapter in lieu of revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3836)



5.60.380   Unauthorized operations.



   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the
business of distributing to any persons in the service area any video
programming by means of a system unless a franchise therefor has first been
obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 9527
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3837)



5.60.390   Unauthorized use.



   A.   No person shall intercept, descramble, decode or receive or
assist in intercepting, descrambling, decoding or receiving any signals from
the system unless specifically authorized to do so by grantee. "Assist in
intercepting, descrambling, decoding or receiving" includes the manufacture
or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as
the case may be) for unauthorized reception of signals over a system.



   B.   No person shall tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires
or devices used with the system unless specifically authorized to do so by
grantee.



   C.   No person shall intentionally deprive grantee of lawful charge
for cable service.



   D.   No person shall resell grantee's cable service without
grantee's expressed written consent.



   E.   Grantee may bring an action in its own name to restrain or
enjoin a violation or threatened violation of this section and for damages
resulting from the violation. City shall not be a party to any such action.
Grantee shall be entitled to issuance of such an injunction upon a showing
that a violation has occurred or will occur, without the need for
demonstrating irreparable injury, inadequacy of legal remedies or probability
of recovery. The court shall award the greater of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or triple damages and reasonable attorneys' fees to grantee if
grantee prevails in an action hereunder.



   F.   In addition to any remedies available to grantee under
subsection (E) of this section, any person knowingly violating any provisions
of this section shall be guilty of an infraction and punishable by a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of violation.



   G.   If an unauthorized device designed to intercept, descramble or
decode a cable television signal is present on the premises or property
occupied and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used
the device to intercept, descramble or decode cable signals. If an
unauthorized cable connection is present on the premises or property occupied
and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the
connection to intercept cable signals. If equipment of grantee which has been
tampered with, changed, or modified is present on the premises or property
occupied by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the
equipment to intercept, descramble or decode cable signals.



   H.   Grantee is expressly reserved its applicable rights and
remedies available in law or in equity. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 3838)



5.60.400   Abandonment or removal of franchise property.



   A.   In the event that the use of any material portion of the system
is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, grantee shall
be deemed to have abandoned that portion of the system.



   B.   Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give
grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or
equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the
franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in
this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities and equipment
upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore the street to
its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were removed, as
near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and
places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without
materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other
utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect
and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way prior to and after
removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter
and the performance bond as provided herein shall continue in full force and
effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with
the terms and conditions of this section.



   C.   Upon abandonment of any portion of the system in place, the
grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an
instrument, satisfactory in form to the city attorney, transferring to the
grantor the ownership of the portion of the system.



   D.   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is
granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for
herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor
shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all
above ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and
public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall
not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days, or within such reasonable
additional period as may be required therefor.



   E.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground portion of the system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street
or public rights-of-way in which such portion of the system is located. The
grantee shall not be required to remove any portion of the system which has
been abandoned or deemed abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter unless it constitutes a substantial portion of the system. (Ord. 9527
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3839)



5.60.410   Receivership and foreclosure.



   A.   A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor,
cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a
receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the
business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or
other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120)
days, or unless: (1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one
hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied
with all material terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise
granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within said one
hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all material faults under the
franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is
satisfactory to the grantor; and (2) such receivers or trustees shall, within
said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the
court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees
assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation
of the franchise herein granted.



   B.   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
system, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination
upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the
franchise herein granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee
hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such
notice, unless: (1) grantor shall have approved the transfer of the
franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and (2) such
successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and
be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3840)



5.60.420   Waivers.



   The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the
franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the
grantor determines: (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; and (2)
that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the
grantee or the subscribers. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3841)



5.60.430   Rights of individuals.



   A.   Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. Grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal and state laws and
regulations, and all executive and administrative orders, relating to
nondiscrimination, including without limitation Section 51 of the California
Civil Code and Section 53066.2 of the Government Code.



   B.   Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment
opportunity requirements of the FCC and applicable state regulations, as now
written or as amended from time to time. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 3842)



5.60.440   Tenant rights.



   A.   Definitions.



   1.   "Cable operator" means each person franchised to provide cable
service over a cable system within the political jurisdiction in which the
subdivision is located.



   2.   "Developer" means each party responsible for the acquisition,
ownership, construction, management, or operation of a residential
subdivision.



   3.   "Easement" means the streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way,
easements and riser paths of any subdivision which are dedicated or to be
designated for public utility use, whether by formal instrument of dedication
or by actual use in the delivery of utility services to residents.



   4.   "Subdivision" means:



   a.   A real estate development;



   b.   A condominium, or cooperative, mobile home or multi-unit
apartment;



   c.   Any other multiple unit dwelling.



   B.   Cable Television Access to Subdivisions.



   1.   Each cable operator has the right to use the easements of any
subdivision for the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of a
cable television system and for the provision of cable services to
subscribers.



   2.   The developer of each subdivision for which a tentative map or
parcel map is required pursuant to Section 66426 of the Government Code shall
identify on the map land dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility and
cable television use so as to provide a franchised cable television operator
a path from which to extend cable television services to each residential
parcel in the subdivision.



   3.   Each developer shall assure that each cable operator is
provided timely access to:



   a.   Jointly-used trenches, at the time that the trenches are opened
for utility and/or cable television installation. Access shall be provided on
a cost shared basis, without discrimination among users;



   b.   Underground easements and all riser paths used for the
installation of utility and/or cable television facilities. Access shall be
provided prior to the paving or sealing of any pertinent road (if within the
road right-of-way) and shall be offered at all other locations no later than
the time of installation of telephone or cable television.



   4.   No developer shall unreasonably interfere with the free and
complete exercise of a cable operator's rights hereunder, or enter into any
arrangement with a third party to do so.



   C.   Procedures.



   1.   A developer shall assure delivery of reasonable advance notice
to each cable operator of intended subdivision construction; and timely
notice (within fourteen (14) days) of the issuance of work permits related to
use of subdivision easements by utilities or cable television.



   2.   A developer shall assure delivery to each cable operator of
thirty (30) days advance notice of the opening of joint-use trenches by
utilities and the use of underground easements and of riser paths by
utilities or cable television.



   3.   No request for any governmental approval or work permit
required for a subdivision shall be accepted unless accompanied by written
consent of each cable operator to the adequacy of arrangements under
subsection (2) of this subsection 5.60.440(C).



   4.   All notices sent to a cable operator hereunder shall be sent
registered mail, return receipt requested, to the general manager, system
manager, or to the address on file with the city. No developer may omit
notice without written confirmation from the city that there are no cable
operators with respect to that subdivision.



   5.   If a cable operator fails to install its conduit within a
shared trench within five working days of the date trenching is available, as
designated in the developer's notice, the cable operator shall be responsible
for all costs of reopening the trench. Separate trenches created by a cable
operator for a distribution plant shall be installed during any period of
installation by multiple cable operators, and as contiguous as reasonably
practicable to other utility trenches.



   D.   Residents' Choice of Cable Operator.



   1.   Each resident of a subdivision shall be provided with the
continuing option to receive cable service from any cable operator.



   2.   If a developer obtains or supplies cable service to residents
of a subdivision on a bulk basis, charges to residents for such services may
not be combined with any rent, fee, assessment or due. Charges for such
services must be separately stated, and may not be charged at less than the
developers' cost of supplying such service. If a resident in such a
development elects to receive service from a cable operator which is not
party to the bulk agreement, the developer shall make payment to that
operator of the unit charge attributable to that resident, and the pro rata
share of all other consideration provided to the party to the bulk agreement
for rendering cable service.



   3.   No developer shall enter into an agreement which has the
purpose or effect of interfering with a resident's or cable operator's free
and complete exercise of the rights hereunder, or enter into any arrangement
with a third party to do so.



   E.   Remedies. Any developer who violates this section shall be
subject to a stop work order; to forfeiture of any cable franchise held by
it, its affiliates, or by those with whom it has contractual arrangements;
and shall be liable to an aggrieved resident or cable operator for all costs
and expenses required to assure the rights afforded hereunder. (Ord. 9527 §
1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3843)



5.60.450   Poles.



   All poles and conduits installed within the city shall be made
available for attachment or use by grantee, at just and reasonable rates
applied to public utilities under the formula presently established in
Section 767.5 of the Public Utilities Code. If such poles or facilities are
not made so available, grantee may erect its own poles. (Ord. 9527 § 1
(part), 1995: prior code § 3844)



5.60.460   Possessory interest taxation.



   The city declares that as a result of this chapter and any franchise
issued pursuant hereto, a possessory interest subject to property taxation
may be created and any such property interest may be subject to property
taxation if it is created. The grantee, as the party in whom the possessory
interest will be vested, may be subject to the payment of property taxes
levied upon such an interest. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code §
3845)



5.60.470   Penalties.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and shall be subject to the following fines:



   1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the first offense;



   2.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon the second offense;



   3.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the third and each
subsequent offense.



   B.   If any violation be continued, each day's violation shall be
deemed a separate violation. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3846)



5.60.480   Separability.



   If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal
or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with
any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or
is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform
to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall
be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and
such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other
provisions hereof. (Ord. 9527 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 3847)



Chapter 5.64
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Sections:



Article 1. Applications and Permits



5.64.010   Purpose and intent.



5.64.020   Definitions.



5.64.030   Adult-oriented business regulatory permit.



5.64.040   Applications.



5.64.050   Investigation and action on application.



5.64.060   Permit denial.



5.64.070   Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.



5.64.080   Adult-oriented business performer permit.



5.64.090   Investigation and action on application.



5.64.100   Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory
permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.



5.64.110   Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.



Article 2. Facilities and Employees



5.64.120   Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.



5.64.130   Register and permit number of employees.



5.64.140   Display of permit and identification cards.



5.64.150   Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of
eighteen years prohibited.



Article 3. Miscellaneous Provisions



5.64.160   Inspection.



5.64.170   Regulations nonexclusive.



5.64.180   Employment of persons without permits unlawful.



5.64.190   Time limit for filing application for permit.



5.64.200   Severability.



Article 1. Applications and Permits



5.64.010   Purpose and intent.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses
in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect
of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.020   Definitions.



   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this
chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the
context that another meaning is intended:



   Adult Arcade. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Adult Cabaret. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Adult Hotel or Motel. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Adult Motion Picture Theater. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Adult-Oriented Business. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Adult-oriented business operator" means a person who supervises,
manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is
responsible for or in charge of the premises of and/or conduct and activities
related to an adult-oriented business.



   Adult Theater. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a
permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner,
officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent
of an adult-oriented business.



   Body Painting Studio. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Conviction" means a finding of guilty by a jury or court, or a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere.



   Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis Upon. Cross reference
Section 17.62.020.



   "Employee" means every person who is engaged in the operation or
conduct of any adult-oriented business whether as the permittee, associate,
agent, manager, employee, or representative and each and every other person
employed to work at or for such business.



   Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. Cross reference Section
17.62.020.



   "Figure model" means any persons who, for monetary or other
consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed,
sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.



   Modeling studio. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Nude, Nudity or a State of Nudity. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Operate an adult-oriented business" means the supervising, managing,
inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being
responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an
adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.



   "Permittee" means the person to whom an adult-oriented business
regulatory permit or an adult-oriented business performer permit is issued.



   Person. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Police Chief" means the police chief of the city of Visalia or the
authorized representatives thereof.



   Regularly Features or Regular and Substantial Course of Conduct. Cross
reference Section 17.62.020.



   Regular and Substantial Portion of its Business. Cross reference
Section 17.62.020.



   Semi-nude. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Sexual Encounter Establishment. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Specified Anatomical Areas. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   Specified Sexual Activities. Cross reference Section 17.62.020.



   "Video or other viewing area" means those areas in an adult arcade,
adult bookstore, or adult video store where customers can view live
performers, videos, motion pictures, slides, compact discs, computer
generated images, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished
and characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 9913 § 5
(part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.030   Adult-oriented business regulatory permit.



   A.   Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an
adult-oriented business in the city is required to file an application with
the police chief upon a form provided by the city, and shall pay a filing
fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to
time, which shall not be refundable.



   B.   An adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall be valid
only for the exact location specified in the permit and/or only for the exact
adult-oriented business for which the application was made. If an applicant
proposes to operate another adult-oriented business on the same site, the
applicant must apply for a different permit. Any change in the nature or
composition of the adult-oriented business from one type of adult-oriented
business use to another shall render the existing permit null and void. (Ord.
9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.040   Applications.



   A.   Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable,
except in accordance with Section 5.64.070. Therefore, all applications shall
include the following information:



   1.   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state
his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit
satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.



   2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the
partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any.



   3.   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall
provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and
capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate
agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.



   B.   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the
business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in
the business entity shall sign the application.



   C.   If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the
fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration
of the fictitious name.



   D.   A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which
the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented
business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors
of the adult-oriented business site.



   E.   The address to which notice of action on the application is to
be mailed.



   F.   The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other
persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by
Section 5.64.080 to obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit.



   G.   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the
adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches.



   H.   A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty
(30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof
to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (1) the property line of
any other adult-oriented business within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of
the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is
requested; and (2) the property lines of any church, school, park,
residential zone or use within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the primary
entrance of the adult-oriented business.



   I.   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries
of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system
required by Section 5.64.120C.



   J.   If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed
the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the
applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant
an extension of time of ten days or less to complete the application
properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed
ten days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The
time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the
period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.



   K.   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or
city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement
of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit. (Ord. 9913 § 5
(part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.050   Investigation and action on application.



   A.   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the
application and permit fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the
application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in
the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an
adult-oriented business regulatory permit.



   B.   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the completed
application, the police chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny
the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so
notify the applicant as follows:



   1.   The police chief shall write or stamp "Granted," "Denied" or
‘Temporary Permit Granted" on the application and date and sign such
notation.



   2.   If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to
the application a statement of the reasons for denial.



   3.   If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to
the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.



   4.   If a temporary permit is granted, the police chief shall
complete its investigation of the applicant within ninety (90) days after
receipt of a properly completed application and notify the applicant of
whether the permit will be granted or denied. The temporary permit shall be
valid until the application is granted or denied, unless revoked in
accordance with this section or Section 5.64.060 or 5.64.100.



   5.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any,
shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.



   C.   The police chief shall grant the application and issue the
adult-oriented business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed
business meets the locational criteria of Title 17, Chapter 17.62; and that
the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and
requirements of Section 5.64.120, unless the application is denied for one or
more of the reasons set forth in Section 5.64.060. The permittee shall post
the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.



   D.   If the police chief grants the application, grants a temporary
permit, or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application
within thirty (30) days after it is stamped as received, except as provided
in this section, the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented
business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with
the development and performance standards and requirements of Section
5.64.120. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.060   Permit denial.



   The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following
reasons:



   A.   The building, structure, equipment or location used by the
business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit does not
comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and
safety laws of the city and the state of California, or with the locational
or development and performance standards and requirements of these
regulations.



   B.   The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director,
officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult
business regulatory permit.



   C.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.



   D.   The required application fee has not been paid.



   E.   The adult-oriented business does not comply with the zoning
ordinance locational standards of Title 17, Chapter 17.62.



   Each adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall expire one year
from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only upon filing with the
police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit
fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be
made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When
made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of
the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as
provided herein for action upon applications for permits. (Ord. 9913 § 5
(part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.070   Transfer of adult-oriented business regulatory permits.



   A.   A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under
the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place
other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the
application for the permit.



   B.   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an
adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory
permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment
to the permit from the police chief stating that the transferee is now the
permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an
application with the police chief in accordance with Sections 5.64.040 and
5.64.050, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by
resolution of the city council, and the police chief determines in accordance
with Sections 5.64.040 and 5.64.050 that the transferee would be entitled to
the issuance of an original permit.



   C.   No permit may be transferred when the police chief has noticed
the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.



   D.   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.080   Adult-oriented business performer permit.



   A.   No person shall engage in or participate in any live
performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities for an adult-oriented business, without a valid
adult-oriented business performer permit issued by the city. All persons who
have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly
supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit
required by Section 5.64.040F, with the names of all performers required to
obtain an adult-oriented business performer permit, within thirty (30) days
of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such
changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business
regulatory permit.



   B.   The police chief shall grant, deny and renew adult business
employee permits.



   C.   The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided
by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn
permit application shall be filed with the police chief.



   D.   The completed application shall contain the following
information and be accompanied by the following documents:



   1.   The applicant's legal name and any other names (including
"stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant;



   2.   Age, date and place of birth;



   3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



   4.   Present residence address and telephone number;



   5.   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:



   a.   Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5,
264.1, 266, 266(a) through 266(k) inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288(a),
311 through 311.1 inclusive, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 647(a), 647(b) and
647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may
hereafter be amended or renumbered.



   b.   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of
California.



   6.   Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered
as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other
jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any
person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage
in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such
registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates
during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage
in prostitution;



   7.   State driver's license or identification number;



   8.   Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least
eighteen (18) years of age;



   9.   The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police
department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any
fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;



   10.   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a
permit, the applicant shall attach a copy of the permit to be renewed.



   E.   The completed application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by
resolution of the city council.



   F.   Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application
fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received
and promptly investigate the application.



   G.   If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed
the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the
applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not
more than ten days to complete the application properly. In addition, the
application may request an extension, not to exceed ten days, of the time for
the city manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or
denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is
granted an extension of time. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4
(part), 1998)



5.64.090   Investigation and action on application.



   A.   Within five days after receipt of the properly completed
application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application, or grant a
temporary permit, and so notify the applicant as follows:



   1.   The police chief shall write or stamp "Granted," "Denied" or
"Temporary Permit Granted" on the application and date and sign such notation.



   2.   If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to
the application a statement of the reasons for denial.



   3.   If the application is granted, whether temporarily or not, the
police chief shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business
employee permit.



   4.   If a temporary permit is granted, the police chief shall
complete its investigation of the applicant within ninety (90) days after
receipt of a properly completed application and notify the applicant of
whether the license will be granted or denied. The temporary license shall be
valid until the application is granted or denied, unless revoked in
accordance with this section, or Section 5.64.100.



   5.   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any,
shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.



   B.   The police chief shall grant the application and issue the
permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in subsection D of this section.



   C.   If the police chief grants the application, grants a temporary
permit, or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application
within five days after it is stamped as received, except as provided in this
section, the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the
license was sought.



   D.   The police chief shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:



   1.   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in
any report or document required to be filed with the application;



   2.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;



   3.   The adult-oriented business employee permit is to be used for
performing in a business prohibited by state or city law.



   4.   The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute.



   5.   The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses
enumerated in Section 5.64.080(D)(5)(a), or convicted of an offense outside
the state of California that would have constituted any of the described
offenses if committed within the state of California. A permit may be issued
to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred
more than five years prior to the date of the application.



   E.   Each adult-oriented business performer permit shall expire one
year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the
police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application
fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be
made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When
made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of
the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as
provided herein for applications for permits. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999:
Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.100   Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business regulatory
permits and adult-oriented business performer permits.



   An adult-oriented business regulatory permit or adult-oriented business
employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures
and standards of this section.



   A.   Upon a determination that grounds for permit revocation exist,
the police chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or
revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place
of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the
pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in
support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to
the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the
permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings
shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the police
chief, but at a minimum shall include the following:



   1.   All parties involved shall have a right to offer testimonial,
documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented
by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses.
Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.
Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the
convenience of a party or a witness. The police chief's decision may be
appealed in accordance with Section 5.64.110.



   B.   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his
permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of
the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or
an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an
adult-oriented business:



   1.   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the city.



   2.   The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder,
or manager of an adult-oriented business had knowingly allowed or permitted,
and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any
of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the
case of an adult-oriented business performer, the permittee has engaged in
one of the activities described below while on the premises of an
adult-oriented business:



   a.   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, or masturbation.



   b.   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful
solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or
masturbation openly occur.



   c.   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires
registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.



   d.   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or
prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315,
316, or 318 or Subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code.



   e.   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the
California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful
matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4.



   f.   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.



   g.   Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by
an appropriate city official.



   C.   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of
this section, if the police chief finds and determines that there are grounds
for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the police
chief shall impose one of the following:



   1.   A warning;



   2.   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed
six months;



   3.   Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord.
9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.110   Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation.



   After denial of an application for adult-oriented business regulatory
permit or an adult-oriented business performer permit, or after denial of
renewal of a permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant
or person to whom the permit was granted may seek review of such
administrative action by the city council by filing a written notice for an
appeal with the city clerk within ten days of such action. The city council
shall hear such appeal at its next succeeding regular meeting. If such an
appeal is taken from revocation of a permit, the revocation shall not be
effective until after a decision upholding the revocation has been made by
the city council.



   If the denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review the
applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. The
city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review. (Ord.
9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



Article 2. Facilities and Employees



5.64.120   Adult-oriented business development and performance standards.



   A.   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment
shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire
department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city.



   B.   No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from
any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such
establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises
shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any
exterior windows shall be covered with opaque at all times.



   C.   All off-street parking area and premises entries of the
adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and
to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall
be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.



   D.   The premises within which the adult-oriented business is
located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise
generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent
property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other
separate unit within the same building.



   E.   Except for those businesses also regulated by the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be
open for business only between the hours of ten a.m. and midnight on any
particular day.



   F.   The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be
clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under
eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said
notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community
development director or designee. No person under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.



   G.   All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which
patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the
management at all time.



   H.   Any adult-oriented business which is also an adult arcade,
shall comply with following provisions:



   1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may contain video surveillance equipment. If
the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the
manager's station.



   2.   The view areas shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted.



   3.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
one time.



   4.   The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall
be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such
rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to
allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such
booths or rooms.



   5.   Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand
idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the
common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively
engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for
purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent
places in and near the video booths.



   6.   The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all
video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily
secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such
booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary
controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or
revocation of the owner and operator's license to conduct the adult-oriented
business.



   I.   All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated
at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:



   1.   Bookstores and other retail establishments: twenty (20)
foot-candles.



   2.   Theaters and cabarets: five foot-candles, except during
performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles.



   3.   Arcades: ten foot-candles.



   4.   Motels or Hotels: twenty (20) foot-candles in public areas.



   5.   Modeling studios: twenty (20) foot-candles.



   J.   The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate
rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest
room(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the rest room(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be
free from any adult material. Rest rooms shall not contain television
monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or
reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not
apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or
rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such
as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide rest
room facilities to its patrons or the general public.



   K.   The following additional requirements shall pertain to
adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for
businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission:



   1.   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an
adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches
above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten
feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be
permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an
entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or
independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who with
or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live
entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business.



   2.   The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing
room facilities for entertainers that are exclusively dedicated to the
entertainers' use.



   3.   The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for
entertainers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.



   4.   The adult-oriented business shall provide access for
entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which are completely
separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically
feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot-wide
walk aisles for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage,
with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the
entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any
physical contact between patrons and entertainers.



   5.   No entertainer, before, during or after performances, shall
have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical
contact with any entertainer before, during or after performances by such
entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the
premises of the adult-oriented business.



   6.   Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be
maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons
required by this subsection.



   7.   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron.



   8.   No owner or other person with managerial control over an
adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any
person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live
showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage, with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female
breast with less than fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or
areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state (See
definition of "Nude, Nudity or State of Nudity"). This provision may not be
complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the
specified anatomical part required to be covered.



   L.   Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order
to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:



   1.   Adult-oriented business featuring live entertainment shall
provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open.
If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty-five (35)
persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.



   2.   Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be
required if it is determined by the police chief that their presence is
necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section
5.64.080(D)(5)(a) from occurring on the premises.



   3.   Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations
of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these
regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be
readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly
licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state
law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a
door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant
of the manager's station while acting as a security guard.



   The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed
conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and
failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation
of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part),
1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.130   Register and permit number of employees.



   Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on
the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for
inspection during regular business hours by any police office or health
officer of the city. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part),
1998)



5.64.140   Display of permit and identification cards.



   A.   Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during
business hours that permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may
be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.



   B.   The police chief shall provide each adult-oriented business
performer required to have a permit pursuant to the chapter, with an
identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit
number of such performer.



   C.   An adult-oriented business performer shall have such card
available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the
premises of the adult-oriented business. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord.
9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.150   Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of
eighteen years prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in
charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for
which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least eighteen
(18) years of age.



   B.   It is unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in
charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within
the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least eighteen (18)
years of age. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



Article 3. Miscellaneous Provisions



5.64.160   Inspection.



   An applicant or permittee shall allow representatives of the police
department, Tulare County health department, planning division, or other city
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development and
performance standards applicable to an adult-oriented business, at any time
it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operated an
adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of
the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.170   Regulations nonexclusive.



   The provisions of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses are
not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the city council of the city. (Ord. 9913 § 5
(part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.180   Employment of persons without permits unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge
of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is
not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business performer
permit. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.190   Time limit for filing application for permit.



   All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore
issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons
required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer
permit, must apply for and obtain such a permit within ninety (90) days of
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Failure to do
so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business, or the continued
performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 9913 § 5 (part), 1999:
Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



5.64.200   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause,
or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council
declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact than
any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 9913
§ 5 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 4 (part), 1998)



Chapter 5.68
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Sections:



5.68.010   Declaration of purpose and intent.



5.68.020   Definitions.



5.68.030   Administration.



5.68.040   Certifications required.



5.68.050   Massage establishment owner background check required.



5.68.060   Additional requirements.



5.68.070   Display of permit.



5.68.080   Massage establishment—Massage technician certificates
required.



5.68.090   Prohibited conduct.



5.68.100   Facilities and operations.



5.68.110   Exceptions.



5.68.120   Public nuisance abatement.



5.68.130   Revocation.



5.68.140   Enforcement and penalties.



5.68.150   Appeal.



5.68.010   Declaration of purpose and intent.



   A.   This chapter establishes permitting standards intended to
comply with California law and establish health and safety guidelines for
massage establishments.



   B.   This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance
will not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations
that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal services
businesses including, without limitation, all zoning applications; business
license regulations; building, fire, electrical, and plumbing codes; and
health and safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or
personal services businesses.



   C.   This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows
only state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate
within the city.  This chapter is not intended to regulate massages that are
not part of a business occupation.  This chapter is also intended to allow a
transitional period for certain existing massage practitioners to continue
practicing while they obtain state certification before December 31, 2013,
and to coordinate the timing of the city's business license renewals with the
state massage certification process.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.020   Definitions.



   Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the
following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used
in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the
meaning set forth elsewhere in the Visalia Municipal Code, the California
Business and Professions Code, or the California Government Code.



   "California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)" means the California
Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to California Business and
Professions Code § 4500.5(a).



   "Certified massage practitioner" means a person who is currently
certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage
for compensation.



   "Certified massage therapist" means a person who is currently certified
as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for
compensation.



   "City" means the city of Visalia.



   "Police chief" means the police chief of the city of Visalia or the
authorized representatives thereof.



   "Massage" means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic,
oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations. 
(Exclusions to this chapter are also described in Section 5.68.110.  This
chapter is not intended to regulate massages that not part of a business
occupation.)



   "Massage establishment" means and includes any business enterprise or
establishment, parlor, or any room, place or institution within a business
establishment where massage is given or administered by a massage technician
as a paid service.



   "Massage technician" means any person, who gives, performs or
administers to another person a massage for any form of consideration.



   "Out-call massage service" means any business that provides, refers or
otherwise facilitates massage for any consideration at a nonfixed location.



   "Person" means and includes person(s), firms, corporations,
partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group.



   "Recognized school" means a school of massage, recognized by the state
of California which: (i) teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and
work of massage; and (ii) requires a residence course of study to be given
and completed before the student is furnished with a diploma or certificate
of learning or completion; and (iii) has been approved by the state of
California Consumer Affairs Bureau pursuant to Education Code § 94915, or,
if said school is not located in California, has complied with the standards
commensurate with those specified in said § 94915, or a school of equal or
greater training that is approved by the corresponding agency in another
state, or accredited by an agency recognized by the United States Department
of Education.



   "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following
human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola.



   "Specified sexual activities" means and includes all of the following:



   A.   Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas;



   B.   Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;



   C.   Masturbation; or



   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
specified sexual activity listed in this definition.



   "Unrecognized school" means any school of massage that does not meet
the definition of "recognized school" but teaches or purports to teach the
theory, ethics, practice, profession or work of massage.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.030   Administration.



   The chief of police is authorized to administer this chapter and to
promulgate administrative policies and procedures required to implement the
regulations set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.040   Certifications required.



   A.   Massage establishment. It is unlawful for any person to own,
operate or maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians
employed by the massage establishment hold a current, valid certification
from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist or qualify
under the limited exceptions described in this chapter.



   B.   Massage technician. It is unlawful for any person to engage in,
or carry on, the business or activities of a massage technician without a
certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist
or qualify under the limited exceptions described in this chapter.



   C.   Out-call massage service. It is unlawful for any person to own,
operate, or maintain, an off-premise massage service in the city unless all
massage technicians employed by the off-premises massage service hold a
current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage
practitioner or certified massage therapist or qualify under the limited
exceptions described in this chapter.



   D.   The city recognizes that some massage therapists and massage
practitioners currently practicing in Visalia may not meet the current
requirements set forth by the CAMTC due to changes in educational or other
requirements particularly changes in requirements concerning hours of
schooling although the person has been in practice for a significant
period.  The city will therefore allow such persons that were working within
Visalia prior to the passage of this chapter under this "grandfather
exception" without certification from the CAMTC if the requirements stated
below are met. 



   The person seeking this exemption must show to the satisfaction of the
city police department that he or she worked as a massage therapist or
massage practitioner in the city prior to July 1, 2012, which is after the
effective date of this chapter.  The person must also provide evidence to
the city that he or she has certification or proof of training in the field
from a school or another entity comparable to the CAMTC and has been working
as a massage therapist or massage practitioner for a period of at least five
(5) years.  Finally, the person must provide evidence that they attempted to
obtain certification from the CAMTC but were denied and provide the reasons
for the denial to show despite their existing training and experience they
were not able to qualify for certification from CAMTC. 



   Persons that are granted an exemption from the CAMTC certification
requirement by the city will still be required to meet all other terms of
this chapter including but not limited to the background check required of
massage establishment owners that are not certified by the CAMTC.  All
persons under this exemption will be required to display, in the same manner
this chapter requires the display of CAMTC certification, a separate
statement from the city to show that the person has met the requirements of
this exemption.  This exemption must be renewed annually and the city may
establish a non-refundable fee to recover costs associated with such annual
renewals.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.050   Massage establishment owner background check required.



   A.   Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring
to operate a massage establishment, that will own five percent (5%) or more
of the massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage
practitioner or certified massage therapist, (meaning certified by the CAMTC)
must make an application to the chief of police for an investigation of the
applicant's background and history.  A fee to recover costs of the
background check must accompany the submission of each application.  An
annual nonrefundable renewal fee may also be charged to defray associated
costs of investigation, inspection and enforcement.



   B.   Each applicant for a background check must submit the following
information:



   1.   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.



   2.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant.



   3.   Driver's license number and Social Security number.



   4.   The proposed address of the massage establishment.



   5.   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the
three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the
inclusive dates for such address.



   6.   Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18)
years of age.



   7.   Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair.



   8.   Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by
two (2) inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the
application.



   9.   Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application.



   10.   The business license or permit history of the applicant,
including whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by
any agency or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had
any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the
reason(s) for the revocation.



   11.   All criminal convictions for any of the offenses set forth in
this chapter, and a statement of the dates and places of such convictions.



   12.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
must be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or
charter, together with the state and date of incorporation and names and
residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each
stockholder holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the
corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application must set
forth the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including
the limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it must
furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the
county clerk. If one (1) or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of
this section pertaining to corporate applicants will apply. The applicant
corporation or partnership must designate one (1) of its officers or general
partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such person must
complete and sign all application forms required of any individual applicant
under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee will be charged.



   13.   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real
property upon or in which the massage establishment is to be operated, and a
copy of the lease or rental agreement. If the applicant is not the legal
owner of the property, a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the
property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property
is required for each massage establishment permit location.



   14.   The full true names and other names used, the present
addresses and telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and Social
Security numbers, and state certificates from the CAMTC or transitional
licenses for all massage technicians who will be working as employees or
independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location. The
applicant must provide the chief of police with any changes in the massage
technicians that work at the massage establishment during the permit period
within ten (10) working days of each change.



   15.   The chief of police may require the applicant to furnish
fingerprints when needed for the purpose of verifying identification.



   16.   Such other identification and information as may be required
by the chief of police in order to verify the information to be included in
the application.



   C.   The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60)
days, in which to investigate the information on the application. During the
investigation of the background information, a city representative including,
without limitation, a member of the police department, fire department,
building and safety division, planning division, or any authorized
representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular
business hours, the proposed place of business to determine whether it
conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the
inspection, the city representative must inform the chief of police in
writing of the findings of the inspection.  Background clearance will be
issued, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, to any
applicant who has furnished all of the information required by this section
in the application for such license, provided all of the following apply:



   1.   The applicant has not made a material false statement in the
application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees
or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location
possesses certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage
therapist;



   2.   The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant
which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, or
holders of five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's stock, has not,
within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the
following offenses: Penal Code §§ 243.4; 261; 266a through 266j; 267; 314
to 316; 318; or 647(a, b, d); any offense requiring registration under Penal
Code § 290 or Health and Safety Code § 11590; or any felony offense
involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation,
furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and
Safety Code §§ 11054 to 11058, as amended; or any offense in another state
which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one (1) or
more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use
of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving
theft, embezzlement or moral turpitude;



   3.   The applicant, if an individual, is at least eighteen (18)
years of age; 



   4.   The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage
establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or
similar type of license or permit suspended within one (1) year or revoked
within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances
or that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.060   Additional requirements.



   Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage
establishment owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the
city, including, without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing
codes.



   Hours of operation.  Massage establishments shall only offer massage
services between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and no patrons for
massage services shall be allowed on the premises after 10:00 p.m. or before
7:00 a.m. Pacific Standard Time.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.070   Display of permit.



   Any owner of a massage establishment or off-premise massage service
must display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently
in a conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city
representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted.



   For off-premise massage services, massage workers must also carry a
copy of their CAMTC certificate and display it to customers upon request.



   Any persons operating under the limited exception described in Section
5.68.040(D) must display the statement from the city documenting their
exemption from the CAMTC certification prominently in a conspicuous place
capable of being viewed by customers or city representatives, or carry it
with them for off-premise massage services.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.080   Massage technician certificates required.



   It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off-site massage
services to allow any person to perform massage that is not a certified
massage therapist, a certified massage practitioner, or has obtained one (1)
of exceptions described in this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.090    Prohibited conduct.



   A.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee
working in a massage establishment or for an out-call massage service, or
customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in
any specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage
establishment or the off-premise massage location.



   B.   It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of
a massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence
of any patron, customer, or guest.



   C.   In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for
any massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make
intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any
customer, patron or guest.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.100   Facilities and operations.



   A.   It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless
the massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following
minimum requirements:



   1.   Signs. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance
identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however,
that all such signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this
code.



   2.   Disinfection of instruments.  Instruments used for massage
must be disinfected before each use.  Where instruments for massage are
employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available
during all hours of operation.



   3.   Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times.



   4.   Linen storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage
of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and
stored in a separate container until laundered.



   5.   Sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and
vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment
must be kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.



   6.   Clean linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be
provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or
linens is permitted.



   7.   Compliance with laws. The premises to be used must at all times
comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations.



   B.   A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians,
and copies of their current CAMTC certifications and massage technician
business licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection at all
times during regular business hours.



   C.   Each person present in any area of the massage establishment
outside the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the public must
be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist or the
massage establishment owner.



   D.   The permits and certifications required by this chapter must be
displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.110   Exceptions.



   This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals,
and no CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:



   1.   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their
profession in the state of California.



   2.   Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp
massage, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business and Professions Code
§§ 7301, et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits.



   3.   Persons employed or working at a licensed athletic facility.



   4.   Medical facilities in which massage is performed as prescribed
treatment only on patients of the medical facility.



   5.   Nurses who are registered or certified as such under the laws
of the state of California.



   6.   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in
the state of California, or provide professional services in lawful
compliance with Corporations Code § 13401(a).



   7.   Recognized schools of massage.



   8.   Businesses where a massage is performed while the person sits
in a chair, such as head and neck massage, foot massage, or as part of a
manicure or pedicure, and performed in public view or in a open common room.



   9.   Massage establishments or out-call massage services that are
operating pursuant to a duly issued city business license that is issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall have until December 31,
2013 to meet the state certification requirement described in Section
5.68.040 and any posting of such requirements detailed in other provisions.



   10.   This chapter is not intended to regulate massages that are not
part of a business occupation.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.120   Public nuisance abatement.



   Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to
the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city
attorney is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or
criminal proceedings, to commence an action or proceeding for abatement,
removal or enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by
law. The city attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate
or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from
operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.130   Revocation.



   A.   Grounds for revocation. The police chief or city attorney may
revoke approvals issued under this chapter for one (1) or more of the
following grounds:



   1.   Fraud or deceit. That the applicant practiced fraud or deceit
in obtaining an approval under this chapter;



   2.   Violation of chapter. That the massage establishment owner,
operator, massage technician, or its employee violated a provision or
provisions of this chapter;



   3.   Criminal conviction. That the massage establishment owner,
operator, massage technician, or its employee has been convicted in a court
of competent jurisdiction of any offense described in this chapter;



   4.   Improperly maintained facilities. That the facilities and
operations of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this
chapter and that the owner or operator has failed to promptly remedy any
deficiency of which they have been notified. For purposes of this subsection,
"notice" means notice given personally, or by leaving notice at the massage
establishment premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address designated by the massage technician or establishment in accordance
with this chapter;



   5.   Employment of uncertified technicians. That the massage
establishment has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to
perform massage in the massage establishment;



   6.   Error. That the approval was issued in error;



   7.   Civil penalties. Assessment of three (3) or more civil
penalties as provided by this chapter during any six (6) month period; or



   8.   Prohibited conduct. A massage establishment owner, operator,
massage technician, or its employee or agent has been found to have engaged
in prohibited conduct in violation of this chapter.



   9.   Notice of revocation. Upon a determination on the grounds to
revoke an approval under this chapter, the police chief or city attorney must
cause a notice of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid
mail, to the address designated by the massage technician or establishment
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.140   Enforcement and penalties.



   A.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is liable in
a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to $500 per
violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorneys' fees and
costs incurred by the city attorney in any civil proceeding filed to enforce
this chapter.  Each day that a violation continues may be considered a new
and subsequent offense.



   B.   Alternatively the city may choose to enforce violations through
the administrative code enforcement process described in Chapter 1.13 of the
Visalia Municipal Code, with violations being punishable with a $100 fine for
the first violation, a $200 fine for the second violation, and a $500 fine
for the third and subsequent violations.  Each day that a violation
continues may be considered a new and subsequent offense.



   C.   Enforcing this chapter through civil action may be filed as an
alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the
violation to be knowing or willful. A civil or administrative action cannot
be filed if the person is being criminally prosecuted.



   D.   The city attorney may settle any civil enforcement before or
after to the filing of a civil action by imposing a civil penalty in an
amount not exceeding the potential civil liability, including attorneys'
fees, set forth in this section. If such civil penalty is paid in full, the
city attorney can agree not to file civil or criminal actions or, if action
has already been filed, may dismiss such action. Imposition of all civil
penalties is public record.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



5.68.150   Appeal.



   After denial of an application for a massage establishment regulatory
permit (the term permit includes the "grandfather exception" to CAMTC
certification described in Section 5.68.040), or after denial of renewal of a
permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to
whom the permit was granted may appeal the decision to the city manager, or
designee, by filing a written notice with the city clerk within ten (10)
business days from the receipt of the notice of denial. The city manager or
representative shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) business
days from the receipt of the notice by the city clerk. The decision of the
city manager, or designee, following the hearing shall be final and
conclusive.  There is no appeal to the City Council.  If the denial,
suspension or revocation is affirmed on review the applicant or permittee may
seek judicial review of such administrative action pursuant to California
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5. The time for filing such action is
governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1.



(Ord. 2012-05 § 2 (part), 2012)



Chapter 5.72
SIDEWALK VENDOR REGULATIONS



Sections:



   5.72.010   Declaration of purpose and intent.



   5.72.020   Definitions.



   5.72.030   Compliance required.



   5.72.040   Application process.



   5.72.050   Sidewalk vending requirements.



   5.72.060   Specific requirements for stationary sidewalk vendors.



   5.72.070   Specific requirements for roaming sidewalk vendors.



   5.72.080   Penalties for violation.



   5.72.090   Special provisions concerning administrative fines.



5.72.010   Declaration of purpose and intent.



   This chapter is for the purpose of establishing sidewalk vendor
regulations that provides entrepreneurship opportunities while ensuring that
the sale of food and merchandise within the public right-of-way is conducted
in a manner that safeguards the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public.



   This chapter is not intended to apply to temporary/itinerant vendors,
mobile food vendors that operate motorized vehicles or trailers registered
with the California Department of Motor Vehicles, door-to door
solicitors/peddlers, persons conducting yard sales at their residence, or
special event vendors that sell merchandise at special events under an
agreement with the organizer of that specific special event. These types of
vendors are permitted under separate sections of the Visalia Municipal Code
and are not subject to the requirements of this chapter.



   This chapter is not intended to limit, restrict, or apply to protected
rights of speech or expression in public right-of-ways, including but not
limited to, passing out pamphlets or protesting in the public right-of-way.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.020   Definitions.



   When used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from context, the words stated in this section shall have the following
meanings:



   "Business tax certificate" means a business tax certificate as is
required by Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 5.04. Sidewalk vendors are
required to obtain both a business tax certificate and a sidewalk vendor
permit to operate.



   "Food" is defined as any type of edible substance or beverage.



   "Person" one or more natural persons, individuals, group businesses,
business trusts, companies, corporations, joint ventures, joint stock
companies, partnerships, entities, associations, clubs, or organizations
whether engaged in business, either for profit or nonprofit.



   "Public right-of-way vendor encroachment permit" a specific part of the
sidewalk vendor permit required for stationary sidewalk vendors which
describes the specific site location used by the stationary vendor, what the
stationary vendor will be placing in the public right-of-way, the area that
the stationary vendor is required to keep free from debris and trash, and an
acknowledgment by the stationary vendor that they are subject to closure if
the city requires the use of the space for a municipal purpose.



   "Mobile cart" means a piece of equipment used for vending, which is
mobile, has no motorized wheels and is capable of being propelled by a single
person. A mobile cart can include but is not limited to pushcarts, pedal
driven carts, wagons, or other types of nonmotorized conveyances.



   "Public right-of-way" means areas or properties owned or held by the
City of Visalia that are open to the general public for pedestrian travel and
public parks.



   "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place
to place and stops only to complete a transaction. A roaming sidewalk vendor
does not include a peddler or solicitor that makes uninvited entry onto
private property for the purpose of selling goods or services or
requesting/collecting donations.



   "Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a
pushcart, stand, display, pedal driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other
nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or
other pedestrian path. As described in this chapter sidewalk vendors can be
classified as roaming vendors or stationary vendors.



   "Sidewalk vendor permit" is the permit issued by the City of Visalia
under this chapter and required for a sidewalk vendor to operate within the
city limits. This type of permit is not the same permit required for
door-to-door peddlers/solicitors, mobile food venders (motorized vehicles)
temporary business/itinerant vendor, or special event vendors that are
permitted/licensed under separate provisions of the Visalia Municipal Code.
Sidewalk vendors are required to obtain both a business tax certificate and a
sidewalk vendor permit to operate.



   "Special event" means a parade, march, procession, pageant, review,
ceremony, festival, assembly, or exhibition consisting of persons, animals or
vehicles, or a combination thereof which is conducted in, or would impact,
any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way, or other property owned or controlled by the city that required
or involved the issuance of a permit for such usage by the city.



   "Stationary cart" means equipment used for vending which has no
motorized wheels and is not otherwise mobile once it has been transported and
is set in a location for vending. This includes folding tables. The term
stationary does not include trailers that can be pulled by a motorized
vehicle and licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles; this type of
equipment shall be considered a mobile food vendor and is subject to separate
provisions of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a
fixed location. This does not include restaurants or businesses at fixed
locations that, pursuant to applicable rules and regulations for food safety
and right-of-way encroachment, set up temporary outdoor sales locations at
their locations.



   "Vend" or "Vending" to sell, offer for sale, expose, or display for
sale, solicit offers to purchase, or to barter food or merchandise.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.030   Compliance required.



   No person is permitted to operate as a sidewalk vendor within the City
of Visalia without obtaining a sidewalk vendor permit. If a sidewalk vendor
intends to sell food, then in addition to the business permit required under
this chapter, the person must obtain all applicable licenses required to
safely sell and serve food as required by state and local law. Copies of all
required permits and licenses must be carried by the sidewalk vendor at all
times either on the person of the vendor or attached to the mobile cart and
be presented upon request.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.040   Application process.



   The City of Visalia shall prepare an application form for a sidewalk
vendor permit. City may charge a fee based on the costs of the application.
Sidewalk vendors must annually renew their sidewalk vendor permit and the
business tax certificate must be renewed and paid separately from the
sidewalk vendor permit. The form shall require the following items:



   A.   The name and current mailing address of the person requesting
the sidewalk vendor permit. If the person is an agent of an individual,
company, partnership, or corporation, then the person must submit the name
and business address of the principal. As part of the sidewalk vendor permit
the person must also obtain a business tax certificate from the City of
Visalia.



   B.   Submit valid identification for the person to be issued and
that will be responsible for the sidewalk vendor permit. Valid identification
shall be a California driver's license or identification number, or a
taxpayer identification number, a social security number is not required for
valid identification. Any social security number collected shall not be
available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be
disclosed except as required to administer the applicable permit/license or
comply with state law or applicable court order.



   C.   A description of the merchandise that will be offered for sale
or exchange.



   D.   All sidewalk vendor applicants must submit with the sidewalk
vendor permit application, copies of insurance certificates, listing the City
of Visalia as additional insured that meet the same insurance requirements
for encroachment permits to operate within the City of Visalia public
right-of-way.



   E.   If the applicant intends to be a stationary sidewalk vendor,
then the applicant as part of obtaining the sidewalk vendor permit shall
apply for a public right-of-way vendor encroachment permit, which is part of
the sidewalk vendor permit issued to stationary sidewalk vendors and not a
separate permit. This requires the submission of the following:



   1.   A proposed site plan showing the planned location and what will
be utilized by the stationary vendor in the public right-of-way as the
stationary cart. City may reject stationary vendor site plans that do not
allow adequate space for pedestrian access.



   2.   The proposed area around the stationary cart that the
stationary sidewalk vendor will be responsible for maintaining from trash and
debris due to their vending operation.



   3.   An acknowledgment from the stationary sidewalk vendor that they
are not permitted to permanently install anything within the public
right-of-way.



   4.   Stationary vendors must acknowledge that they have no permanent
rights to utilize public property and are subject to temporary or permanent
closure if the city requires the use of the right-of-way for a municipal
purpose, which includes but is not limited to usage of the space by persons
holding valid rights under franchises, or if another permitted use, other
than another sidewalk vendor, requires the space on a temporary basis.



   5.   The community development director or that person's designee
shall review the public right-of-way vendor encroachment permit application
prior to issuance and may require modifications of specific site proposals to
meet objective health, safety, or public welfare concerns.



   6.   Any stationary vendor seeking to utilize park property will
also be subject to review by the parks and recreation department director, or
that person's designee. Vendor permit applications are subject to denial if
the proposed location would interfere with the public's use and enjoyment of
natural resources or recreational opportunities, such as blocking equipment,
sports fields, or walkways. Vendor permit applications may also be denied if
necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity that
unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character of the park,
which may include limiting the total number of vendors allowed in a park.



   7.   Stationary vendors must acknowledge that if they seek to
utilize private property and not the public right-of-way then they shall be
subject to separate applicable rules regarding usage of the private property
and subject to all applicable zoning requirements concerning usage of private
property.



   F.   If the applicant intends to be a roaming sidewalk vendor, then
the applicant shall include the proposed areas of the city that the vendor
intends to operate within. Roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted on
private property without the written permission of the property owner.
Roaming vendors seeking to utilize park property will also be subject to
review by the parks and recreation department director, or that person's
designee, and vending in certain parks or park locations may be denied or
restricted if necessary to prevent an undue concentration of commercial
activity that unreasonably interferes with the scenic and natural character
of the park, which may include limiting the total number of roaming vendors
that are allowed in a specific park.



   G.   The seller's permit (issued by the California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration) number, if required, for the person requesting the
sidewalk vendor permit.



   H.   If the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, then the person
must submit proof that they have completed all requirements for selling food
as required by the Tulare County Environmental Health Department prior to
being issued a sidewalk vendor permit from the City of Visalia. In order to
avoid potential risks to the health, safety, and welfare of the public it is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance for a sidewalk vendor to sell food
without complying with all required food safety and licensing requirements
that are required by state and local law.



   I.   The application must be signed by person requesting the
sidewalk vendor permit and certifying that to that person's knowledge and
belief the information contained on the form is true.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.050   Sidewalk vending requirements.



   The following requirements apply to both stationary and roaming
sidewalk vendors:



   A.   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within one thousand feet (1000')
from any permitted certified farmers' market or a permitted swap meet during
the operating hours of that certified farmers' market or swap meet. A
"certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance with
Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and
Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. A
"swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business
and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.



   B.   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within one thousand feet (1000')
from any special event that is operating pursuant to a permit issued by the
City of Visalia. This prohibition shall only be in effect during the duration
of the special event permit and does not apply to sidewalk vendors that are
selling food or merchandise with the permission of the special event
applicant and are specified as part of the special event permit. The special
event applicant must provide the city with the locations of stationary
sidewalk vendors and the routes of roaming sidewalk vendors that will be
permitted by the special event applicant prior to the issuance of a special
event permit. Roaming sidewalk vendors during special events must carry a
copy of the permission from the special events applicant with them at all
times during the special event.



   C.   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within one thousand feet (1000')
from the exterior boundary of any property used or occupied by any high
school, junior high or elementary school for the period of one hour before
the school is in session, while the school is in session and one hour after
the school day ends. This provision does not apply if the vendor is present
at the invitation of the school.



   D.   Sidewalk vending on trails or parkways that are operated by the
City of Visalia for pedestrian/bicycle usage is prohibited in order to ensure
the public's use and enjoyment of the natural resources and recreational
opportunities provided by these trails. Prohibiting sidewalk vending on these
trails is intended to prevent an undue concentration of commercial activity
in areas designated as recreational open space and not otherwise intended for
commercial uses. In addition, sidewalk vending would block the usage of the
trail and unreasonably interfere with the scenic and natural character of the
trail areas.



   E.   In recognition that many nonprofit recreational leagues operate
concession stands as primary fundraising for such leagues, which provide
recreational opportunities to the public, sidewalk vendors, roaming or
stationary, are prohibited within one thousand feet (1000') of any events put
on by nonprofit recreational leagues that are operating concession stands as
fundraising sources.



   F.   Sidewalk vendors must, at all times during operations on a
public sidewalk or pedestrian path, maintain a minimum width of five feet
(5') of unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrian traffic and must also meet all
other requirements for pedestrian travel that are required pursuant to the
Americans with Disabilities Act or other access standards for persons with
disabilities. Sidewalk vendors may not be located within five feet (5') of
any pedestrian ramp, driveways, trash cans within the public right-of-way,
drinking fountains, push buttons for traffic signals, bus stops, or other
right-of-way element that requires pedestrian access. If any lines of
customers block or interfere with any pedestrian ramp, driveways, trash cans
within the public right-of-way, drinking fountains, push buttons for traffic
signals, bus stops, or other right-of-way element that requires pedestrian
access then the sidewalk vendor must relocate to another sidewalk location to
avoid such interference.



      This rule is to provide adequate space for disability access
within the public right-of-way. This rule shall not apply to a roaming
sidewalk vendor making a sale to a bona fide purchaser during the allotted
time period, although the vendor shall make all reasonable efforts to comply
with requests from pedestrians to move out of the way as soon as possible and
not obstruct the sidewalk. Failure by a sidewalk vendor to move or cease
business when they are not providing the minimum width of unobstructed
sidewalk for pedestrian traffic shall be violation of this chapter.



      In areas where the street contains striped parking stalls, (for
the purposes of this chapter, striped parking stalls refer to individually
parked spaces for vehicles that are grouped to maximize available space, not
vehicle parking spaces that are parallel with a sidewalk, even when such
parallel parking spaces are marked) with sidewalk vendors must maintain a
minimum width of five feet (5') of unobstructed sidewalk from the curb to
allow for persons or passengers exiting or entering the vehicles parked in
such stalls sufficient space for directly accessing the sidewalk from the
vehicle and not be required to travel in the street to reach the sidewalk.



   G.   Sidewalk vending is prohibited within ten feet (10') from
entrances of businesses and bus stops to prevent obstructing access and to
allow pedestrians adequate space in the public right-of-way to reach
destinations.



   H.   The city council may, by resolution adopted during a public
meeting, prohibit sidewalk vending in specific areas within the city limits
upon a finding that sidewalk vending should be prohibited in such areas due
to health, safety, or welfare concerns. Such findings may include, but are
not limited to, situations involving areas with both substantial vehicle
traffic and substantial pedestrian traffic in locations presenting risks of
pedestrians improperly crossing streets or entering the street when sidewalks
are blocked. If any such resolutions are adopted, then the locations of
prohibited vending shall be indicated and provided to sidewalk vendor permit
applicants.



   I.   Sidewalk vendors must maintain sanitary conditions and carry a
trash container so customers can deposit waste from sold merchandise or
wrappers.



   J.   Hours of sidewalk vending shall be the same as other businesses
that are operating in the vending area. For sidewalk vendors operating in a
park, then the hours shall be the same hours of operation as the park.



   K.   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within streets,
medians, crosswalks (although roaming vendors may cross in such areas as
other pedestrians) or other areas that are marked closed to pedestrian
traffic.



   L.   Sidewalk vendors are subject to all other applicable rules,
regulations, and ordinances.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.060   Specific requirements for stationary sidewalk vendors.



   In addition to the rules applicable to all sidewalk vendors the
following rules shall specifically apply to stationary sidewalk vendors:



   A.   Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in all areas zoned
exclusively for residential use.



   B.   Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited within one thousand
feet (1000') of any city park area during the hours of operation of a
concession operator that has signed a contract with the City of Visalia for
exclusive sale of food or merchandise by that concession operator.



   C.   Stationary carts that utilize cook tops in the public
right-of-way must conform with all applicable rules and regulations imposed
by the Tulare County Department of Environmental Health, California Fire
Code, and all other applicable state laws and regulations.



   D.   Stationary sidewalk vendors may not be located within ten feet
(10') feet of an intersection to maintain sufficient lines of sight for
vehicles approaching intersections to see pedestrians and other vehicles.



   E.   Stationary vendors must keep the areas immediately adjacent to
their location free from trash and debris caused by their operation and are
subject to suspension or loss of their permit if they fail to keep the area
adjacent to their location free trash and debris caused by their operation.
Applicable areas may be indicated in the public right-of-way vendor
encroachment portion of the sidewalk vendor permit issued to stationary
vendor.



   F.   Stationary vendors located in park areas must completely pack
and remove all items brought into the park at the end of each day, and upon
request by park personnel must close and remove all items if the location of
the vendor interferes with park maintenance activities.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.070   Specific requirements for roaming sidewalk vendors.



   In addition to the rules applicable to all sidewalk vendors, the
following rules shall specifically apply to roaming sidewalk vendors:



   A.   Roaming sidewalk vendors shall remain mobile and may not stand
or park at any specific location place for more than ten minutes, unless the
vendor is otherwise stopped for a personal break, or as necessary to complete
a transaction(s) at the request of a bona fide purchaser(s) that approached
the roaming vendor while stopped.



   B.   Roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted to knock on doors of
homes or businesses to vend under a sidewalk vendor permit. Such attempts at
peddling or soliciting shall be considered door to door sales and require a
separate type of business permit under the Visalia Municipal Code.



   C.   Sidewalk vendor permits issued by the City of Visalia only
allow for vending on publicly owned right-of-ways, as limited by this
chapter. Roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted on private property
without the permission of the property owner and must meet all underlying
zoning requirements to operate on private property.



   D.   Roaming sidewalk vendors are permitted in areas zoned
exclusively for residential use but hours of operation are limited to between
the hours of nine a.m. and one hour prior to sunset or seven p.m., whichever
is earlier.



   E.   In order to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of
pedestrians, mobile carts used by roaming sidewalk vendors are not permitted
to be utilized as a cook top for food preparation when the food being
prepared requires the cooking or heating of food in order for it to be
consumed.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.080   Penalties for violation.



   A violation of this chapter is punishable as follows:



   A.   For the first violation by an administrative fine not exceeding
one hundred dollars.



   B.   For the second violation within a twelve-month period, by a
fine not exceeding two hundred dollars.



   C.   For the third or subsequent violations within a twelve-month
period, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars.



   Persons cited more than three of more violations within a twelve-month
period may also be subject to suspensions, permit modifications, permit
revocation, or other forms of abatement actions by the city that are
otherwise permitted by state and local law.



   Operating as a sidewalk vendor without applicable permits/licenses,
either from the City of Visalia or applicable food safety/handling permits
from the Office of the Tulare County Environmental Health, is subject to a
separate administrative fine schedule as follows:



   A.   For the first violation by an administrative fine not exceeding
two hundred and fifty dollars.



   B.   For the second violation within a twelve-month period by an
administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars.



   C.   For the third violation within a twelve-month period by an
administrative fine not exceeding one-thousand dollars.



   Violations of this chapter are not punishable as an infraction or
misdemeanor and persons alleged to violate this chapter shall not be subject
to arrest.



   This section does not prevent code enforcement personnel from taking
immediate action, such as seizing items, to abate unsafe and dangerous
conditions to the public, which include but are not limited to vendors
selling food without proper licensing.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



5.72.090   Special provisions concerning administrative fines.



   Persons cited for violating this chapter may request an administrative
appeal hearing as permitted by Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 1.13. In
addition to the standard administrative appeal procedure persons cited under
this chapter shall be notified that they have the right to request an ability
to pay determination by the hearing officer if they are found to be in
violation after the appeal hearing or if the person does not dispute the
violation and solely requests an ability to pay determination. The City of
Visalia shall charge no administrative appeal fee for an ability to pay
determination hearing. The hearing officer for an ability to pay appeal
hearing may be designated by the City Manager.



   The hearing officer, when considering ability to pay, shall consider
whether the person cited meets the criteria set forth in Government Code
Section 68632, subsection (a) or (b), or other provision concerning the
waiver of court fees and costs. If the criteria of either of these
subsections are met, then hearing officer shall reduce the fine to twenty
percent (20%) of the amount imposed under this chapter.



(Ord. 2019-05 § 3 (part), 2019)



Title 6
ANIMALS



Chapters:



6.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



6.08   ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY



6.12   DOGS AND CATS



6.16   DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS



6.20   RABIES



6.24   IMPOUNDMENT



6.28   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS



Chapter 6.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Sections:



6.04.010   Definitions.



6.04.020   Poundmaster.



6.04.030   Records.



6.04.040   Visalia city animal shelter.



6.04.050   Impounding animals.



6.04.060   Right to enter premises.



6.04.070   Interference with duties.



6.04.080   Duties of animal control officer.



6.04.090   Authority of animal control officer.



6.04.100   Authorization for Valley Oak SPCA employees to enforce animal
control ordinance.



6.04.110   Penalties.



6.04.010   Definitions.



   As used in this title, the following terms are defined:



   "Altered" for a female, means having been spayed; for a male means
having been neutered.



   "Animal" means any living vertebrate member of the animal kingdom,
excluding man.



   "Animal control officer" means any person designated by the state of
California, city, or Tulare County as a law enforcement officer who is
qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state.



   "Animal shelter" means any facility operated by a humane society, or
municipal agency, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this title or state law.



   "At large" means off the premises of the person owning or having the
possession, charge, custody, or control of the animal and not under the
immediate control of a person by means of an enclosure, leash, rope, or other
means of immediate effective physical control.



   "Auction" means any place or facility where animals are regularly
bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this
title. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.



   "Breeder" means any person, persons or business who breeds one or more
litters of dogs and/or cats in one year for sale or profit.



   "Cat" means any member of the feline family, wild and domesticated, and
shall be intended to mean both male and female.



   "Circus" means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for
public entertainment.



   "Commercial animal establishment" means any pet shop, grooming shop,
auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibit, or boarding kennel.



   "Dog" means any member of the canine family, wild or domesticated, and
shall be intended to mean both male and female.



   "Domestic animals" means animals such as are habituated to live in or
about the habitations of persons or such as to contribute to the support of a
family or the wealth of the community.



   "Exotic animal" means any animal, either wild or domesticated belonging
by nature or origin to another part of the world.



   "Fowl" means any chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea, pigeon, swan,
peacock or other fowl.



   "Impoundment" means the taking up and confinement of any animal in an
animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or other facility.



   "Kennel" means any premises, wherein any person keeps five or more dogs
and/or cats over four months of age except pet shops for noncommercial
purposes.



   "Litter" means two or more offspring from the same female dog or cat.



   "Livestock" means any large animal kept or raised for use, pleasure or
profit.



   "Owner" means any person, partnership, firm or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be
harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.



   "Performing animal exhibition" means any spectacle, display, act, or
event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.



   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, joint
venture or entity.



   "Pet" means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   "Pet shop" means any person, partnership, firm or corporation whether
operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except
for licensed kennels, that buy, sell, or board any species of animal.



   "Poundmaster" means the party appointed by the city council. That
person may be the party with whom the city has contracted for the performance
of pound services.



   "Premises" means a house, other dwelling, a yard or other area or an
automobile so enclosed as to prevent a dog from escaping.



   "Private property" means that property of which a person or persons has
the exclusive right of disposition.



   "Public nuisance" means any animal or animals which:



   1.   Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles;



   2.   Attacks other animals;



   3.   Trespasses on school grounds;



   4.   Is repeatedly at large;



   5.   Damages private or public property;



   6.   Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive or untimely fashion.



   "Public place" means any park, public building, playground, street,
road, alleyway, or any other place open to general public.



   "Restraint" means a leash not in excess of eight feet, a tethered lead,
or a fenced enclosure which keeps the animal under the control of a
responsible person or within the real property limits of its owner.



   "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment maintained and operated
by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.



   "Vicious animal" means any animal, wild or domesticated, that attacks
or bites any person or animal upon any public or private property within the
city.



   "Wild animal" means any nondomesticated animal living in a feral state.
(Prior code § 4580)



6.04.020   Poundmaster.



   The office of poundmaster is established.  The poundmaster shall be
appointed by the city council, and may be either a person, firm, association,
or corporation. The poundmaster shall serve for such period of time and shall
receive such compensation as shall be established by the city council by
ordinance, resolution or by contract. If an association or corporation is
appointed as poundmaster, each officer and employee authorized by such
association or corporation to perform duties under this title shall be deemed
to be a poundmaster and shall have all of the rights and duties of the
poundmaster which are set forth in this title. (Prior code § 4581)



6.04.030   Records.



   The poundmaster shall keep a record of every animal impounded pursuant
to this title which shall include a description of the animal, the date of
receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or
purchasing, and the fees, charges and proceeds of sales received on account
of said animal, and such additional records as may be required by the city
council from time to time. (Prior code § 4582)



6.04.040   Visalia city animal shelter.



   There shall be provided by the city council, or by the poundmaster upon
such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon by the poundmaster
and the city council, a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely
hold all animals to be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this title,
and said building or enclosure shall be known and designated as the "Visalia
City Animal Shelter." (Prior code § 4583)



6.04.050   Impounding animals.



   The poundmaster shall take up, impound and safely keep any dog which is
found running at large contrary to the provisions of this title within the
incorporated territory of the city. (Prior code § 4584)



6.04.060   Right to enter premises.



   The poundmaster is authorized to enter upon any premises for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 4585)



6.04.070   Interference with duties.



   It is unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or interfere with the
poundmaster in the performance of his official duties. (Prior code § 4586)



6.04.080   Duties of animal control officer.



   The duties of the animal control officer shall be as follows:



   A.   To take up and impound any dog or other animals, (except cats),
found to be running at large, staked, tied or being herded or pastured in any
public place within the city or upon the premises of any person other than
the owner of such dog or other animal;



   B.   To make a complete registry of impounded dogs and cats, showing
in detail in the case of each animal, the date of receipt, the breed, color,
and sex of such animal, and if licensed, the number of such license and the
name and address of owners;



   C.   To notify by mail the owner of any animal, bearing
identification, impounded by the animal control officer, stating that such
animal is confined at the Visalia City Animal Shelter, and specify the amount
necessary to reclaim or redeem the same and the period which the animal will
be held before destroying or otherwise disposing of the same. (Prior code §
4587)



6.04.090   Authority of animal control officer.



   A.   Each animal control officer shall have and is vested with the
authority of a public officer. The animal control officers may, in the
performance of their duties, enter upon any property pursuant to law, to
ascertain if any of the provisions of this title or any state laws relating
to disease, care, treatment or cruelty to animals are being violated. Each
animal control officer may issue citations for the violation of the
provisions of this title, any state law, or city ordinance in the manner
prescribed by the ordinance, and remove animals from said premises if they
deem necessary. The authority to issue citations in the manner prescribed by
the city shall be alternative to any other authority provided by law.



   B.   Any animal control officer of the city shall have police powers
in the enforcement of this title and no person shall interfere with, hinder,
molest or abuse any animal control officer of the city in the exercise of
such powers.



   C.   In the performance of duties for the control of animals, the
animal control officer shall have the authority to employ the use of the
tranquilizer gun or other animal control devices in common use within the
state of California. (Prior code § 4588)



6.04.100   Authorization for Valley Oak SPCA employees to enforce animal
control ordinance.



   Pursuant to Civil Code Section 607(g), employees of the Valley Oak SPCA
are authorized to enforce any and all provisions of this title relating to
the control of animals and are given all powers and authorities as if they
were animal control officers of the city. Such authority includes the right
to issue notices to appear in court and to take formal citizen complaints on
behalf of the city. The authority of such employees is limited to the
corporate limits of the city. (Prior code § 4633)



6.04.110   Penalties.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision
of this title shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, subject to penalties
in accordance with Section 1.12.010. (Ord. 9605 §§ 19, 20 (part), 1996:
prior code § 4644)



Chapter 6.08
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY



Sections:



6.08.010   Animal care.



6.08.020   Restraint of animals.



6.08.030   Public nuisance.



6.08.040   Interference with highways.



6.08.050   Animals and fowl at large.



6.08.060   Biting dogs.



6.08.070   Keeping of bees unlawful.



6.08.080   Bees--Public nuisance.



6.08.090   Disposal of dead animals.



6.08.100   Animal waste.



6.08.110   Guide dogs.



6.08.120   Abandonment.



6.08.130   Police canine units--Protection of.



6.08.140   Construction.



6.08.010   Animal care.



   It is unlawful for the owners or persons having custody of any animal
to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or
control, any cruel acts upon said animal. Cruel acts are defined as follows:



   A.   To place, leave or expose, making accessible to animals, any
poisonous substance;



   B.   To have, keep, or harbor any animal which is infected with any
dangerous or incurable or painfully crippling condition, except as
hereinafter provided. All such diseased or crippled animals with an incurable
ailment taken into custody of the city shall be transferred to the
poundmaster for impoundment. This section shall not apply to animals within
veterinary hospitals or under the care of a veterinarian, or having been
diagnosed with any common, incurable disease where impoundment or quarantine
is not recommended by a doctor of veterinary medicine;



   C.   To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in their
charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with food, drink, shade or
weatherproof housing facilities, or to carry any animal in or upon any
vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner;



   D.   To willfully, or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, tease,
torture, beat with a stick, chain, club or other object, mutilate, burn,
scald with any substance, over-drive or otherwise cruelly set upon any
animal, except that a reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious
or trespassing animals;



   E.   To hobble livestock or other animals by means of chains which
are composed of tempered or other permanent wire links;



   F.   To drive or work any animal in a cruel manner when such animal
is unfit for such work;



   G.   To promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on or attend
any game, exhibition, contest, or fight in which one or more animals are
engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming or destroying
themselves or any other animal or person;



   H.   No person or business shall give away any live vertebrate
animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or
other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer
such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby
the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade;



   I.   No person shall keep upon any premises, any animals, including
any fowl or household pets in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or
unsanitary condition. (Prior code § 4589)



6.08.020   Restraint of animals.



   A.   Any person owning or having charge, custody, care or control of
any animal (except cats) kept or harbored in the city shall confine such
animal exclusively upon such owner's premises, except when otherwise properly
restrained as hereinafter provided.



   B.   No person shall allow or permit any animal (except cats) to run
at large, or be pastured, herded, staked, or tied in or on any public alley,
street sidewalk, vacant lot, school grounds, or other public place belonging
to or under the control of the city or in such a way as to trespass in any
manner upon any of the aforesaid public places.



   C.   No person shall permit any animal (except cats) to be at large
or to go or be upon the premises owned or occupied by any other person in the
city without said person's consent.



   D.   All dogs shall be kept under restraint at all times, otherwise
they will be classed as running at large.



   E.   Any animal (except cats) permitted to be at large or
trespassing upon private premises or public property in violation of this
section shall be deemed prima facie to be under the control of owner and is
declared to be a nuisance and menace to public health and safety, and shall
be seized and impounded as provided in this title.



   F.   No owners shall fail to exercise proper care and control of
their animals, (except cats) to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
Excessive continuous or untimely barking, or other noise, molesting
passersby, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals,
trespassing upon private property in such manner as to damage property, shall
be deemed a nuisance.



   G.   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come
into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.



   H.   No persons shall keep or permit to be kept on their premises
any wild, exotic, or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes,
whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as
to apply to a zoological garden, commercial animal establishment, theatrical
exhibit or circus as defined in Section 6.04.010, except that no theatrical
exhibit or act shall be held in which animals are encouraged to perform
through the use of chemical, electrical, or mechanical devices.



   I.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a
pet. (Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996; prior code § 4623)



6.08.030   Public nuisance.



   It is declared a public nuisance for any animal, except cats, to run at
large or to be on property other than that of the owner of the animal,
without the property owner's consent.



   A.   Wherever any animal control officer or peace officer finds a
public nuisance to exist within the meaning of this chapter, they shall
notify the owner of the animal by registered mail that the owner shall either
abate said nuisance within ten days or show cause why said nuisance should
not be summarily abated.



   B.   If said nuisance is not abated and no show of cause is made,
the animal control officer may then issue a citation to the owner of the
animal or may impound the animal which is creating the nuisance. Any animal
so impounded shall be taken to the Visalia City Animal Shelter. (Prior code
§ 4624)



6.08.040   Interference with highways.



   It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit the dog to
habitually or repeatedly attack pedestrians, cyclists, vehicles or other
users of the public highways. (Prior code § 4625)



6.08.050   Animals and fowl at large.



   In addition to household pets, no person shall allow or permit any
other animals or fowl, except cats, to run at large upon any public street or
place, or to trespass upon the property of another. This provision shall not
be construed as permitting the running at large of any household pets who are
restricted by the provisions of this title, or by any law applicable thereto.
(Prior code § 4626)



6.08.060   Biting dogs.



   It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any dog, cat or
other animal owned, harbored or controlled by him, to inflict upon any human
being a bite that penetrates the skin while the person bitten is on any
public place, or legally upon any private property. The person bitten may
request the animal control officer to initiate criminal proceedings against
such other person by submitting a signed, written complaint. (Prior code §
4627)



6.08.070   Keeping of bees unlawful.



   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any individual or entity to
bring, have, keep, or maintain, within the city, at any time between the
first day of June and the first day of October, in any year, any swarm or
swarms, colony or colonies of honey bees. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code § 6750)



6.08.080   Bees--Public nuisance.



   Any swarm or swarms, colony or colonies of honey bees so brought, had,
kept or maintained, within the city at any time between the first day of June
and the first day of October in any year, shall constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2017-07 § 2, 2017: Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6751)



6.08.090   Disposal of dead animals.



   A.   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, removal
and disposal of dead animals from public property will be done by the animal
control officer.



   B.   Removal and disposal of dead animals from private property
within the city will be done upon request of the owner, occupant or resident
of the property. The fee for this service shall be set by resolution of the
city council. The owner or person in charge of any dead animal shall pay the
fee. The animal control officer shall not be required to remove and dispose
of dead dogs from state highways or from state property or federal property
within the city.



   C.   Upon learning that the body of a dead animal has not been
disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner the animal control officer shall
remove and dispose of said carcass immediately. (Prior code § 4628)



6.08.100   Animal waste.



   The owners of any animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by their animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, or
private property. (Prior code § 4629)



6.08.110   Guide dogs.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no guide dog
trained to aide the blind, deaf or disabled shall be confined, impounded, or
killed in the absence of evidence that such dog has been exposed to rabies
unless the master of such dog:



   A.   Fails to keep the dog safely confined to the premises of the
master; or



   B.   Fails to keep the dog available for examination at all
reasonable times; or



   C.   Fails to keep the dog vaccinated against rabies; or



   D.   Fails to keep the dog licensed. (Prior code § 4630)



6.08.120   Abandonment.



   It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the city. In
addition to any fines imposed by law, any person violating this section shall
bear full costs and expenses incurred by the city in the care of said
abandoned animal and shall reimburse to the city all said costs as determined
by the department of finance. (Prior code § 4631)



6.08.130   Police canine units--Protection of.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture,
tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog
used by the city police department, or any other law enforcement agency while
engaged in mutual aid assistance to this city, or the designated handlers of
such animals, while any such dog is in the performance of the functions or
duties of the police department or other law enforcement agency, or to
willfully interfere with or obstruct any such dog while it is being used in
the performance of any of the duties or functions of the department or other
law enforcement agency. (Prior code § 5250)



6.08.140   Construction.



   No provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any act
made unlawful by any general law of the state of California, but said chapter
is intended to be supplemental thereto. (Prior code § 5251)



Chapter 6.12
DOGS AND CATS



Sections:



6.12.010   Limitation of number of cats and dogs.



6.12.020   Excessive noise.



6.12.030   License required.



6.12.040   Licensing exceptions.



6.12.050   Issuance of license and tag.



6.12.060   Licenses--Original license--Time limits.



6.12.070   Vaccination requirement for licenser.



6.12.080   Term of license.



6.12.090   License fees--Dogs or cats.



6.12.100   License fee exemption.



6.12.110   Delinquent penalties.



6.12.120   Extension of time--Dogs or cats too ill to be vaccinated.



6.12.130   Replacing lost or stolen tags.



6.12.140   License transferable.



6.12.150   Affixing license tag.



6.12.160   Improper affixing of tags.



6.12.170   Removal of tag.



6.12.180   Display of tag.



6.12.190   Licensing impounded dogs.



6.12.200   Spay/neuter compliance for shelter animals.



6.12.010   Limitation of number of cats and dogs.



   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain upon his premises within the
city more than a total of four cats and/or dogs combined over the age of four
months unless said person shall obtain a kennel permit in addition to
obtaining a license for each dog or cat over four months of age and shall, if
kenneling dogs and cats for commercial purposes, comply with the commercial
animal establishment requirements of this title, or unless said person comes
within one of the following conditions:



   A.   Upon reasonable showing of necessity to the animal control
officer, a person may be permitted to keep a fifth cat or dog for a period of
time not to exceed thirty (30) days;



   B.   A person who had on or before the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this title five or more licensed dogs and/or cats in
the city shall be required to obtain a yearly kennel permit. Requirement of
this permit shall not be effective until January 1, 1994. A kennel permit
shall allow no more than ten dogs and/or cats combined, to be kept, harbored
or maintained upon a persons' premises within the incorporated area of the
city subject to approval of the poundmaster. The kennel permit fee shall be
set by resolution of the city council.



   C.   The permit will be for a calendar year, or any part thereof in
which the permit is required, with the permit fee due and payable on January
1st of each year. (Prior code § 4590)



6.12.020   Excessive noise.



   It is unlawful for any owner of a dog to kept in the city, which dog
shall by loud or excessive barking, howling, whining or making any other
noise disturb the comfort or quiet of any neighborhood or any person;
provided, that said owner has been made aware of the disturbance created by
the dog. (Prior code § 4591)



6.12.030   License required.



   Every owner of a dog or cat within the incorporated area of the city,
shall secure a license from the poundmaster for each such dog or cat over
four months of age within the time limits set forth in this chapter. It is
unlawful for any owner to fail to secure said license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4592)



6.12.040   Licensing exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter requiring the licensing of dogs and cats
shall not apply to the following:



   A.   A license need not be secured for a dog or cat which is
temporarily brought into the incorporated area of the city by a nonresident.
If the dog or cat remains in the city for a period longer than thirty (30)
days, it must wear a current license tag from its' place of residence;



   B.   Dogs or cats brought into the incorporated area of the city
exclusively for the purpose of entering the animal in any show or exhibition,
and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition;



   C.   Dogs or cats on sale in duly licensed pet shops, or commercial
animal establishments;



   D.   Dogs or cats under the ownership, custody, or control of the
owner of a commercial animal establishment duly licensed under the provisions
of Chapter 6.28, or his duly authorized employee or agent when such dogs or
cats are removed from the premises for any reason, shall wear an
identification tag attached to their collar, which shall bear the name and
address of the licensed operation. A dog or cat bearing such identification
shall be treated in all respects as any other dog or cat in the event of its
escape and subsequent impoundment. (Prior code § 4593)



6.12.050   Issuance of license and tag.



   A.   Application for a license required by this chapter shall be
filed with the poundmaster, on a form prescribed by the poundmaster. Upon
payment of the required fee and upon compliance with the other requirements
of this chapter, the poundmaster shall issue a license. The license form
shall contain a brief description of the dog or cat including the name, age,
sex, color and breed of the dog or cat, and if the animal is altered or
unaltered, and the name and address of the owner. The license shall contain a
serial number, the expiration date of the license and such other information
as the poundmaster may determine. The poundmaster shall keep a copy of the
license form on file in their office and the license form shall be open to
public inspection. With each license issued, the poundmaster shall also issue
a tag made of some durable material. Said tag shall bear the words "City of
Visalia," serial number of the license, and such other information as the
poundmaster may determine. Tags issued for animals exempted from vaccination
under Section 6.12.120 shall bear a distinguishing mark.



   B.   Any person procuring an animal license without a valid rabies
vaccination for reason of redeeming an impounded animal or to clear a
citation shall make payment to the poundmaster of those fees provided in this
chapter, as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. A
rabies vaccination must be obtained for the animal and proof of such
vaccination shall be sent to the poundmaster within thirty (30) days of the
purchase of the license before the license tag is issued. If rabies
vaccination has not been completed within this period of time, a delinquent
penalty shall be paid to the poundmaster before the license tag is issued and
the animal may be subject to impoundment by the poundmaster until proof of
rabies vaccination is provided to the poundmaster. (Ord. 9605 § 20 (part),
1996: prior code § 4594)



6.12.060   Licenses--Original license--Time limits.



   A.   An owner of a dog or cat shall secure a license for their dog
or cat within thirty (30) days after they acquire ownership of the dog or
cat. However, if a dog or cat is less than four months of age when the owner
acquires it, the owner shall secure a license for the dog or cat within
thirty (30) days after the animal reaches four months of age.



   B.   Any person who enters the city intending to reside in the city
beyond a period of thirty (30) days, and who has brought a dog or cat with
them from outside the city, shall secure a license for the dog or cat within
thirty (30) days after the person first enters the city. (Prior code § 4595)



6.12.070   Vaccination requirement for licenser.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having the
care, custody or possession of any dog or cat over the age of four (4) months
to keep or maintain such animal in any place in the city, or except as
provided in Section 6.12.120, unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated as
provided herein.



   B.   The poundmaster shall not issue a license for a dog or cat
unless the owner of the dog or cat presents for filing a certificate signed
by a veterinarian showing that said dog or cat has been vaccinated against
rabies which indicates that the period of time elapsing from the date of the
vaccination to the date of expiration of the license does not exceed
thirty-six (36) months in the case of vaccination with the live virus rabies
vaccine or eighteen (18) months in the case of vaccination with killed virus
rabies vaccine, as those types of vaccines are defined in Section 2606 et
seq., Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. Animals over one year
of age that have had a previous vaccine, may be vaccinated for thirty-six
(36) months. During any period when the County of Tulare is designated as a
rabies area pursuant to Sections 1900-1921 of the Health and Safety Code of
the State of California, no killed virus vaccine shall be used other than
vaccine of bovine nerve tissue origin.



   C.   The vaccination shall be performed by a duly licensed
veterinarian, and after vaccinating any dog or cat owned by a resident of
Visalia, shall sign a certificate in triplicate containing the following
information:



   1.   The type of vaccination used;



   2.   The date of the vaccination;



   3.   The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat;



   4.   The manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used;



   5.   The name and address of the owner of the dog or cat;



   6.   Name of the animal;



   7.   If spayed or neutered and the date.



   D.   The veterinarian shall immediately present two copies of the
original vaccination certificate, containing two copies, to the owner of the
dog or cat, and shall deliver within thirty (30) days, the third copy to the
poundmaster. (Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4596)



6.12.080   Term of license.



   Dog and cat licenses shall be issued on each succeeding anniversary
date of the original license. A license shall expire one year from the date
of issue, except when the performance of the rabies vaccination expires prior
to that date. A new license anniversary date will begin upon renewal of the
rabies vaccination. (Prior code § 4597)



6.12.090   License fees--Dogs or cats.



   The poundmaster shall collect a fee for dog and cat licensing.



   A.   This subsection applies only to dogs or cats which have not
been spayed or neutered.



   1.   The annual license fee for each dog or cat so described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be set by resolution of the city council
on an annual basis in an amount to be recommended by the poundmaster.



   2.   The owner of an unaltered dog or cat will have the option of
paying the altered license fee if they place a deposit for the estimated cost
of spaying or neutering with the poundmaster at the time they obtain a
license. This deposit shall be forfeited if the operation is not performed
within thirty (30) days, unless an extension of time is granted by the
poundmaster.



   B.   This subsection applies only to dogs or cats which have been
spayed or neutered, or which are unable to bear or produce offspring for
physical or medical reasons.



   1.   A certificate from a licensed veterinarian that the dog or cat
comes within one of the provisions in subsection (B) of this section shall
accompany the license form along with the fees set forth in this section.



   2.   The annual license fee for each dog or cat so described in
subsection (B) of this section shall be set by resolution of the city council
on an annual basis in an amount to be recommended by the poundmaster. (Prior
code § 4598)



6.12.100   License fee exemption.



   A.   Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, no charge
shall be made for licenses issued for the following:



   1.   Dogs trained to aide blind, deaf or disabled;



   2.   Dogs used by any governmental agency for the purpose of law
enforcement;



   3.   All dogs raised and/or trained for the above purposes.



   B.   Proof of such use or training shall be provided by the
applicant at the time of license application in a form satisfactory to the
poundmaster. (Prior code § 4599)



6.12.110   Delinquent penalties.



   In addition to any fees described in this chapter, the poundmaster
shall collect a delinquent penalty in an amount set by resolution of the city
council on an annual basis to be recommended by the pound-master, under the
following circumstances:



   A.   A license is not renewed within thirty (30) days of the
expiration date;



   B.   Puppies or kittens are not licensed within thirty (30) days
after reaching four months of age;



   C.   Any dog or cat brought into this city, except those temporarily
located in the city as described in Section 6.12.040, which is not licensed
within thirty (30) days;



   D.   A person acquiring possession of a dog or cat over four months
of age does not license it within thirty (30) days of taking possession.
(Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4600)



6.12.120   Extension of time--Dogs or cats too ill to be vaccinated.



   A.   If a dog or cat is too ill to be vaccinated against rabies at
the time that the time limits set forth in Sections 6.12.050 or 6.12.060
expire, then the date for securing the dog or cat license is extended until
thirty (30) days after the date on which the animal is well enough to be
vaccinated, and no delinquent penalties shall be charged for issuance of the
animal license during said thirty (30) day period.  However, an extension of
time shall not be granted pursuant to this section unless the application for
the license is accompanied by a certificate signed by a veterinarian setting
forth facts which show that the dog or cat comes within the provisions of
this section.



   B.   The poundmaster shall not license any dog or cat if the owner
presents a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, issued within the
preceding sixty (60) days, stating that in their opinion, the rabies
vaccination would be likely to seriously injure the dog or cat. Any dog or
cat so excepted from rabies vaccination shall be restricted to the house or
enclosed property of the owner or person in possession of the animal except
when held under control or restraint by such person. Any violation thereof by
the owner or person in possession of such dog or cat is unlawful. (Ord. 9605
§ 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4601)



6.12.130   Replacing lost or stolen tags.



   Whenever a tag issued for the then current year has been stolen or
lost, the owner of the animal for which the tag was issued may, upon the
payment of a fee in an amount which shall be set by resolution of the city
council, obtain a replacement tag for the animal. Fees for replacement tags
shall be set on an annual basis upon recommended by the poundmaster. (Prior
code § 4602)



6.12.140   License transferable.



   The license and tag issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred
when the ownership of the dog or cat is transferred. The new owner or the
previous owner of the dog or cat shall notify the poundmaster in writing of
the change in ownership of the dog or cat, and the name and address of the
new owner. If such written notice is not given, the poundmaster shall send
all required notices concerning said dog or cat to the person whose name and
address are on file with the poundmaster. (Prior code § 4603)



6.12.150   Affixing license tag.



   A current license tag issued pursuant to this chapter shall be securely
fastened to a collar or harness which must be worn at all times. (Prior code
§ 4604)



6.12.160   Improper affixing of tags.



   It is unlawful for any person to attach a license tag required by this
chapter to the collar of any animal except the animal for which it was
issued. (Prior code § 4605)



6.12.170   Removal of tag.



   It is unlawful for any person to remove from a dog or cat, without
authority from the owner, and except in cases of medical emergency involving
that animal, any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a
license tag or to remove such tag therefrom. (Prior code § 4606)



6.12.180   Display of tag.



   It is unlawful for any person to refuse to show the poundmaster, any
animal control officer, or any peace officer, on request, the license
certificate and the tag for any dog or cat kept or remaining within their
home or upon any enclosed premises under their immediate control. (Prior code
§ 4607)



6.12.190   Licensing impounded dogs.



   A.   The poundmaster shall not release an unlicensed animal to its
owner or sell an unlicensed animal to any person who resides in the city,
unless the owner or purchaser, respectively, secures the required license,
and pays any fees and penalties required.



   B.   The poundmaster shall not release to the owner or purchaser any
dog whose license has been revoked after a hearing pursuant to Section
6.16.010 to 6.16.090 unless the owner or purchaser shows proof that he or she
has enrolled the dog in a class to retrain the dog or proof that he or she is
qualified to retrain the dog and the owner or purchaser signs an agreement
that, until the dog is retrained as evidenced by a certificate of successful
completion of the training program, it will be securely confined when not
under the immediate control of a responsible attendant and that he or she
will secure the required license within ten days after he or she is given
possession of the dog. It is unlawful for the owner or purchaser to not keep
the dog securely confined as agreed and to fail to secure said license with
said ten day period and any dog which is not so confined or for which said
license is not secured within the required ten day period shall be
immediately impounded by the poundmaster and, without further notice,
humanely killed or sold to a person willing to comply with the above
requirements for retraining and confinement of the dog. (Ord. 9605 § 20
(part), 1996: prior code § 4608)



6.12.200   Spay/neuter compliance for shelter animals.



   A.   A spay or neuter deposit will be required upon the purchase of
any unaltered dog or cat from the City of Visalia Animal Shelter pursuant to
Food and Agriculture Code 30503. The deposit will be applied to the spay or
neuter surgery of the animal.



   B.   Any dog or cat sold from the city of Visalia Animal Shelter
shall be spayed or neutered within thirty (30) days of adoption for female
animals over six months of age, for male animals over eight months of age.
For animals less than six months old, they shall be spayed or neutered within
thirty (30) days of reaching six months of age for females and within thirty
(30) days of reaching eight months of age for males. An extension of time to
perform surgery may be granted by the poundmaster if a veterinarian provides
a medical determination that the surgery cannot be performed as scheduled and
must be postponed. (Prior code § 4656)



Chapter 6.16
DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS



Sections:



6.16.010   Keeping dangerous/vicious animals.



6.16.020   Definitions.



6.16.030   Procedure to determine if an animal is dangerous/vicious.



6.16.040   Impound notice.



6.16.050   Conduct of hearing.



6.16.060   Hearing decision.



6.16.070   Disposition of a dangerous/vicious animal.



6.16.080   Finding of improper or negligent training, handling or
maintenance.



6.16.090   Violations for maintaining a dangerous/vicious animal.



6.16.010   Keeping dangerous/vicious animals.



   It is unlawful for a person to keep a dangerous/vicious animal as the
term is defined in Section 6.16.020. Any animal which has been found to be
dangerous or vicious pursuant to the ordinance code of the city, or of this
county, or any other county or city pursuant to any state statute, shall be
conclusively presumed to be dangerous or vicious. (Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part),
2004: Prior code § 4635)



6.16.020   Definitions.



   Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, such terms will
have the following meanings:



   "Animal control officer" means poundmaster.



   "Business day" means Monday through Saturday, excluding official state
holidays.



   "Dangerous/vicious animal" means an animal determined by the animal
control officer to have attacked, bitten or caused injury to any human or
other animal.



   "Hearing officer" means any person appointed by the city manager to
preside over the administrative hearing provided for in this chapter. (Ord.
2004-22 § 2 (part), 2004: Prior code § 4636)



6.16.030   Procedure to determine if an animal is dangerous/vicious.



   A.   The animal control officer shall declare any animal to be
dangerous or vicious whenever the animal control officer has received
evidence that the animal has attacked, bitten or caused injury to any human
or other animal. Upon such declaration, the animal control officer shall have
the authority to impound the animal pursuant to Chapter 12.



   B.   If the animal declared to be dangerous or vicious pursuant to
subsection (A) is wearing a license tag, the animal control officer shall
notify the licensed owner within two (2) business days of impoundment that
the animal has been declared dangerous or vicious. The notice shall also
include the following:



   1.   A statement of the facts upon which the declaration was based;



   2.   Notification that the owner has a right to an administrative
hearing to review the animal control officer's determination pursuant to
Section 6.16.050;



   3.   Notification that, unless a request for an appeal before the
hearing officer is received within five (5) business days of impoundment, the
animal will be disposed of pursuant to Section 6.16.070; and



   4.   A copy of the text of Chapter 6.16 and Chapter 6.24. No such
notice is required if the animal is not wearing a license tag. The notice, if
required by this section, shall be delivered to the animal's owner personally
or posted in a conspicuous location at the owner's known address or the
address provided in the license application.



   C.   The owner of an animal declared to be dangerous or vicious
pursuant to subsection (A) and impounded pursuant to Section 6.24.030 may,
within five (5) business days of impoundment, request a hearing by the
hearing officer to review the animal control officer's determination that the
animal is dangerous or vicious.



   D.   When a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection (C) of this
section, the animal control officer shall set a date and time for such a
hearing and send a notice thereof by regular mail at least five (5) business
days before such date to the owner at the address set forth on his or her
request and shall also notify the victim and the hearing officer. The date of
such hearing shall not be more than ten (10) business days after the animal
control officer's receipt of the request of hearing.  (Ord. 2004-22 § 2
(part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4637)



6.16.040   Impound notice.



   Within two business days after an animal which is wearing a license tag
is impounded, the animal control officer shall mail a notice of the
impounding to the owner of the animal at the address shown on the application
for the license which is on file in the office of the poundmaster, and advise
the owner of the procedure whereby he may regain custody of the animal. A fee
shall be paid by the owner to the city anytime that the animal control
officer transports an animal to Visalia City Animal Shelter. A fee for
boarding the animal shall also be charged. The fees shall be determined by
city resolution based upon the cost of providing the service. (Prior code §
4638)



6.16.050   Conduct of hearing.



   A.   A hearing requested in accordance with Section 6.16.030, or
held pursuant to Section 6.16.080(D) shall be conducted before the hearing
officer. The animal control officer shall send notice of this hearing to any
victims bitten, attacked or injured by the animal, and to any known witness
of such bite, attack, or injury.



   B.   The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be
represented by a licensed attorney at law. The hearing officer shall hear all
pertinent evidence offered by all interested persons. The technical rules of
evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, except that the hearing
officer's decision may not be based wholly on hearsay evidence. The owner and
the animal control officer shall each have the right to call and examine
witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any
matter relevant to the issues at the hearing even though the matter was not
covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which
party first called him orher to testify, and to rebut the evidence against
him or her. If the owner does not testify on his or her behalf, he or she may
be called and examined as if under cross-examination, except where criminal
charges under Sections 6.04.110 or 6.16.090 are pending against the owner or
if it is possible that such charges may be brought against the owner. All
persons testifying shall be recorded, either through audio recorder or
through a shorthand reporter, at the hearing officer's option, and persons so
testifying shall be informed of such recording. The hearing officer shall
keep a log of the testimony and documentary evidence received during the
hearing, and the documentary evidence submitted to the hearing officer shall
be retained by the animal control officer until all appeal periods have
elapsed.



   C.   Any animal which has attacked, bitten or caused injury to a
human being or other animal is presumed to be dangerous or vicious and the
burden is on the owner to present evidence that the animal is not dangerous
or vicious.



   D.   In making a determination that an animal is or is not dangerous
or vicious, evidence of the following shall be considered (not in any
specific order of preference):



   1.   Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting or causing
injury to a human being or other animal; however, the lack of any such
history shall not be the sole grounds for a determination that the animal is
not dangerous or vicious;



   2.   The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of
victims involved;



   3.   The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;



   4.   The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack
or injury;



   5.   The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;



   6.   Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being
trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or
fighting;



   7.   Whether the animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or
unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or
other animals;



   8.   Whether the animal can be effectively trained to change its
temperament or behavior;



   9.   The manner in which the animal has been maintained by its owner
or custodian;



   10.   Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the
animal, including but not limited to evidence that animal's license had been
revoked on a prior occasion pursuant to Section 6.16.060(B), and the owner
was required to partake in training pursuant to Section 6.16.080, or meet
other obligations of probation; and



   11.    Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the
owner or custodian to protect the public safety in the future if the animal
is permitted to remain in the city. (Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord.
9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4639)



6.16.060   Hearing decision.



   A.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may
determine:



   1.   That the animal is not a dangerous or vicious animal and should
be returned to its owner;



   2.   That the evidence presented at the hearing is insufficient to
determine that the animal is or is not dangerous or vicious, but there is
sufficient evidence to determine that the attack, bite or injury was the
result of improper or negligent training, handling or maintenance and that
the license should be revoked and proper training of the owner and dog be
required pursuant to the probationary provisions of Section 6.16.080;



   3.   That the animal is a dangerous or vicious animal and it should
be humanely destroyed no sooner than the tenth (10th) business day following
the mailing of notice of the hearing officer's decision, pursuant to Section
6.16.070(C).



   B.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and
shall be delivered personally to the owner or mailed to him or her by regular
mail at the address appearing on the request for hearing. A copy of the
decision shall be mailed to the animal control officer. If the decision
concludes that the animal is dangerous or vicious, the decision shall include
the following notification:



   "This decision is final. The animal's owner may seek judicial review of
this decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the Tulare County
Superior Court, pursuant to Visalia Municipal Code Section 6.16.060(C) and
California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. If you file such an
action, you must also notify the animal control officer in writing. If no
such petition is filed and no written notice is received by the animal
control officer within ten (10) business days of the date this decision is
mailed to you, the animal control officer will order the destruction of the
animal in a humane manner."



   C.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be considered the
final decision. The animal's owner may seek judicial review of the hearing
officer's decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate with the Tulare
County Superior Court, pursuant to the applicable provisions of California
Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord.
9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4640)



6.16.070   Disposition of a dangerous/vicious animal.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep
any animal declared to be dangerous or vicious.



   B.   Any animal declared to be dangerous or vicious, if not already
impounded, shall be immediately surrendered to the animal control officer,
and it is the duty of the animal control officer to take up and impound any
such animal.



   C.   Any animal declared to be dangerous or vicious shall be
humanely destroyed. The animal control officer shall sign an order
authorizing the destruction of the animal immediately upon occurrence of any
of the following:



   1.   Expiration of five (5) business days from the date of
impoundment without receipt by the animal control officer of a request for
appeal pursuant to Section 6.16.030(C);



   2.   Expiration of ten (10) business days from the mailing of a
hearing officer's decision that the animal is dangerous pursuant to Section
6.16.060(A)(3), unless the owner has filed an action with the county superior
court seeking judicial review pursuant to Section 1.16.060(C);



   3.   Expiration of ten (10) business days following the entry of an
order by the County superior court upholding the decision of a hearing
officer that the animal is dangerous or vicious. (Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part),
2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4641)



6.16.080   Finding of improper or negligent training, handling or
maintenance.



   If it is determined that the animal is not dangerous or vicious, but
that the bite, attack or injury was the result of improper or negligent
training, handling or maintenance, then the following conditions will be
enforced:



   A.    Training will be required of the owner and the animal, and the
hearing officer, in consultation with the animal control officer, shall set a
probationary period and shall set the terms and conditions of the training
and other tasks to be completed by the owner during such period;



   B.    The current license will be revoked and a "provisional" dog
license will be issued during the probationary period;



   C.    After submission of evidence to the animal control officer of
successful completion of the probationary period, the dog shall be issued a
current city dog license.



   D.    Any violation of the probation terms set forth by the hearing
officer will result in immediate impoundment. Within ten (10) business days
of such impoundment, the animal control officer shall set a hearing with the
hearing officer for the purpose of making a new determination whether the
animal is dangerous or vicious, and shall notify the animal's owner of such
hearing. All of the evidence of the previous hearing or hearings as well as
new evidence regarding the violation of the probation terms shall be
considered by the hearing officer. The hearing shall be conducted in the
manner specified in Section 6.16.050. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer may either establish new probation terms or determine that
the animal isdangerous or vicious, in which case the hearing office shall
give the owner a written determination pursuant to Section 6.16.060 (A)(3).
(Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part), 2004: Prior code § 4642)



6.16.090   Violations for maintaining a dangerous/vicious animal.



   In any case wherein an animal attacks, bites or injures  a human being
or another animal, then such act shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation. Any person whose animal attacks, bites or injures a human being or
attacks another animal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to
penalties in accordance with Section 1.12.010.



(Ord. 2004-22 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code §
4643)



Chapter 6.20
RABIES



Sections:



6.20.010   Application of chapter.



6.20.020   Animal showing signs of rabies.



6.20.030   Isolation of rabid animals and clinically suspected rabid
animals.



6.20.040   Animals biting persons.



6.20.050   Animals in contact with rabid animals.



6.20.060   Violation of quarantine.



6.20.010   Application of chapter.



   This chapter shall be in effect only at those times when the county of
Tulare is not designated as a rabies area pursuant to Sections 1900--1921 of
the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. During those periods
when the county of Tulare is designated as a rabies area, the provisions of
said Sections 1900--1921 of the Health and Safety Code, and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, are applicable rather than the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 4645)



6.20.020   Animal showing signs of rabies.



   Whenever the owner of an animal observes or learns that such animal
shows symptoms of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable
suspicion that it may have rabies, such person shall immediately notify the
county health officer. Said person shall thereafter allow the health officer
or their representative to make an inspection or examination of said animal.
(Prior code § 4646)



6.20.030   Isolation of rabid animals and clinically suspected rabid
animals.



   The owner of any rabid animal or clinically suspected rabid animal
shall isolate the animal in strict confinement under proper care and under
the observation of a veterinarian, in a pound, veterinary hospital, or other
adequate facility in a manner approved by the health officer, and said animal
shall not be killed or released from confinement for at least ten days after
the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies and until the health officer gives
written authorization for the release of the animal, with the exception that
such animal may be sacrificed with the permission of the health officer for
the purpose of a laboratory examination for rabies using the fluorescent
rabies antibody test in an approved public health laboratory. (Prior code §
4647)



6.20.040   Animals biting persons.



   Whenever the owner of an animal has knowledge that such animal has
bitten any person, the owner shall immediately report that fact to the county
health officer and report the name and address of the person bitten and the
time and place that such person was bitten. Upon order of the county health
officer, the owner shall quarantine the animal for the period of time
specified in Section 2606 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code
with regard to rabies areas, and shall allow the health officer or his
representative to make inspections and examinations of the animal from time
to time during such period. The county health officer shall quarantine said
animal upon the premises of the owner. However, if the owner of the animal so
desires, the county health officer shall place the animal in quarantine in a
veterinary hospital, at the expense of the owner, in lieu of quarantine of
the animal on the premises of the owner. Quarantine shall be made by written
notice delivered to the owner of said animal stating that the  animal is
quarantined and the instructions to be followed. If the quarantine is upon
the premises of the owner of the animal, the animal shall be confined within
a locked enclosure so constructed that the animal cannot escape or have
contact with any other animal or human being other than the person
responsible for its care or, at the discretion of the health officer, the
animal may be kept under restraint by leash in charge of a responsible
person, or under such restrictions as the health officer may prescribe. Said
animal shall be kept in quarantine until the health officer gives written
authorization for the release of the animal from quarantine. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions, such animal may be sacrificed with the permission
of the health officer for the purpose of a laboratory examination for rabies
using the fluorescent rabies antibody test in an approved public health
laboratory. (Prior code § 4648)



6.20.050   Animals in contact with rabid animals.



   Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a
known rabid or suspected rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a
rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined by the owner in a place
and manner approved by the health officer, for a period of six months or
destroyed; provided, however, that the following alternatives are permitted
in the case of dogs and cats:  If the dog or cat has been vaccinated against
rabies within three years but not less than thirty (30) days with a live
virus vaccine, or within one year but not less than thirty (30) days with a
killed virus vaccine, as those types of vaccines are defined in Section 2606
et seq., of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code, the dog or cat
may be revaccinated in a manner approved by the health officer and
quarantined in a place and manner approved by the health officer for a period
of thirty (30) days. The provisions of Section 6.20.010 concerning quarantine
shall also apply to the quarantine of animals pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4649)



6.20.060   Violation of quarantine.



   When any animal is quarantined by the county health officer, it is
unlawful for the owner of the animal to violate the quarantine by removing
said animal from the premises where it is quarantined, allowing it to run at
large, destroying it without authorization from the health officer,
concealing it from the health officer, or disobeying any of the quarantine
restrictions which have been imposed by the health officer. (Prior code §
4650)



Chapter 6.24
IMPOUNDMENT



Sections:



6.24.010   Impounding dogs without tags.



6.24.020   Impounding dogs with tags.



6.24.030   Impounding biting or attacking animals.



6.24.040   Violation of quarantine.



6.24.050   Notice to owner of impounded licensed animal.



6.24.060   Redemption of impounded animals.



6.24.070   Fees for impounding and keeping animals.



6.24.080   Sale and destruction of impounded animals wearing tags.



6.24.090   Sale and destruction of impounded animals not wearing tags.



6.24.100   Sale of impounded animals--Receipts.



6.24.110   Duty of poundmaster to accept stray and/or abandoned dogs and
cats.



6.24.120   Dogs and cats at large--Private property.



6.24.130   Delivery of dogs and cats to poundmaster by private persons.



6.24.140   Care of animals while impounded.



6.24.010   Impounding dogs without tags.



   The poundmaster, any animal control officer, and any peace officer,
shall impound dogs which are not wearing the required license tag and which
are found running at large within the incorporated area of the city. When
such a dog is taken up by a peace officer, they shall deliver the animal to
the poundmaster. All such dogs shall be impounded in the Visalia City Animal
Shelter. (Prior code § 4609)



6.24.020   Impounding dogs with tags.



   The poundmaster, any animal control officer, and any peace officer,
shall impound dogs which are wearing the required license tag and which are
found running at large within the incorporated area of the city, if the
officer is unable to locate or notify the owner prior to impoundment of the
dog. When such a dog is taken up by a peace officer or the animal control
officer, they shall deliver the animal to the poundmaster. All such dogs
shall be impounded in the Visalia City Animal Shelter. (Prior code § 4610)



6.24.030   Impounding biting or attacking animals.



   A.    The poundmaster, any animal control officer, and any peace
officer, shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound a dog or
other animal where there is evidence it has attacked, bitten or injured any
human being or other animal. The poundmaster may enter and inspect private
property to enforce the provisions of this section, provided such entry or
inspection is conducted in a manner consistent with state and federal
constitutional provisions. It is unlawful for any person to fail to surrender
to the poundmaster, any animal control officer, or any peace officer, upon
demand, a dog or other animal which is being impounded pursuant to this
section.



   B.    Any dog or other animal impounded pursuant to this section may
be permanently identified by the poundmaster by means of photo identification
and license number prior to release from impound or confinement.



   C.    The animal control officer and the owner of the animal
impounded pursuant to this section, in addition to complying with this
chapter and Chapter 6.16 shall also observe the provisions of Chapter 6.20
(pertaining to quarantine of animals suspected of being rabid). (Ord. 2004-22
§ 3 (part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4611)



6.24.040   Violation of quarantine.



   It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog, cat, animal
or household pet owned, harbored or controlled by them to violate any written
quarantine notice. Any person who violates such written notice shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 4612)



6.24.050   Notice to owner of impounded licensed animal.



   Within two (2) business days after an animal which is wearing a license
tag is impounded under this chapter, the poundmaster shall mail a notice of
the impounding to the owner at the address shown on the application for the
license which is on file with the poundmaster, and advise the owner of the
procedure whereby he or she may apply to regain custody of the animal. The
owner of an animal declared vicious or dangerous pursuant to Section 6.16.030
shall be notified pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16. (Ord. 2004-22 §
3 (part), 2004: Prior code § 4613)



6.24.060   Redemption of impounded animals.



   A.    The owner of any animal impounded, other than pursuant to
Section 6.24.030 and Chapter 6.16, may, except as otherwise provided by law,
redeem the animal at any time prior to its sale or destruction, and must do
so in compliance with subsection (C) below.



   B.    The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to Section 6.24.030
may redeem the animal only upon written determination by a hearing officer,
pursuant to Chapter 6.16, that the animal is not dangerous or vicious, or
upon failure of the animal control officer to establish a hearing date
pursuant to Section 6.16.030(D). In either case, the owner of the animal must
apply for redemption in compliance with subsection (C) below.



   C.    A person desiring to redeem an animal shall deliver to the
poundmaster an application for redemption and a statement in a form
prescribed by the poundmaster which shall contain a description of the animal
to be redeemed, the name and address of the claimant, and the statement that
he or she is the owner of the animal to be redeemed. If the poundmaster
determines that the animal may be redeemed pursuant to Subsection (A) or (B)
above, the poundmaster shall issue to such person a written statement
containing the name and address of the claimant, a description of the animal
redeemed, the date on which the animal was impounded, and the accrued fees in
accordance with Section 6.16.040, and said statement shall serve as a
certificate of redemption and receipt for the fees paid. (Ord. 2004-22 § 3
(part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code § 4614)



6.24.070   Fees for impounding and keeping animals.



   The owner of an animal which has been impounded shall pay to the
poundmaster an impounding fee as set by resolution of the city council in an
amount to be recommended by the poundmaster. (Prior code § 4615)



6.24.080   Sale and destruction of impounded animals wearing tags.



   A.   Unless an animal wearing a license tag has been redeemed within
six (6) business days after being impounded or unless it is being held
pending a hearing pursuant to Chapter 6.16, it may be sold by the poundmaster
or killed by the poundmaster in a humane manner. But no animal which has been
declared a dangerous animal pursuant to Chapter 6.16 shall be sold pursuant
to this section nor shall any dog, cat or other animal which has been
impounded pursuant to Section 6.16. and subsequently found not dangerous but
improperly trained, handled or maintained be sold except to a person who is
willing to properly train, handle and maintain the dog, cat or other animal,
as determined by the poundmaster.



   B.   If the owner of an animal gives permission in writing to do so,
the animal may be sold or destroyed at any time after it is delivered to the
animal shelter, provided that no animal held pursuant to Chapter 6.16 shall
be sold even with the permission of the owner.



(Ord. 2004-22 § 3 (part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996: prior code §
4616)



6.24.090   Sale and destruction of impounded animals not wearing tags.



   A.   Unless an animal which is not wearing a license tag has been
redeemed within four (4) business days after being impounded or unless it
isbeing held pending a hearing pursuant to Chapter 6.16, it may be sold to
the public or killed in a humane manner by the poundmaster. But no animal
which has been declared a dangerous animal pursuant to Chapter 6.16 shall be
sold pursuant to this section nor shall any dog, cat or other animal which
has been impounded pursuant to Section 6.16 and subsequently found not
dangerous but improperly trained, handled or maintained be sold except to a
person who is willing to properly train, handle and maintain the dog, cat or
other animal, as determined by the poundmaster.



   B.   If the owner of an animal gives permission in writing to do so,
the animal may be sold or destroyed in accordance with subsection (A) of this
section at any time after it is delivered to the animal shelter, provided
that no animal held pursuant to Chapter 6.16 shall be sold even with the
permission of the owner. (Ord. 2004-22 § 3 (part), 2004: Ord. 9605 § 20
(part), 1996: prior code § 4617)



6.24.100   Sale of impounded animals--Receipts.



   When a dog, cat or other animal is sold by the poundmaster pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the poundmaster shall deliver to the
purchaser of said dog, cat or other animal, a statement in writing containing
a description of the animal, the date of sale, and the amount of the purchase
price. All sales shall convey a good and valid title to the purchaser, and
the previous owner of the animal shall thereafter be barred from all right to
recover said animal. (Prior code § 4618)



6.24.110   Duty of poundmaster to accept stray and/or abandoned dogs and
cats.



   It shall be the duty of the poundmaster to receive and impound from the
public all dogs and cats believed to be stray and/or abandoned by their
owners, located within the city. (Prior code § 4619)



6.24.120   Dogs and cats at large--Private property.



   Any dog or cat found at large on any private property in the city may
be taken up by the owner or possessor of the property and delivered to the
poundmaster. (Prior code § 4620)



6.24.130   Delivery of dogs and cats to poundmaster by private persons.



   Every person taking up any dog or cat under the provisions of this
title and every person finding any lost, stray or abandoned dog or cat shall
within  twenty-four (24) hours thereafter, give notice thereof to the
poundmaster and every such person in whose custody such dog or cat may, in
the meantime be placed, may surrender such animal to the poundmaster without
fee or charge. (Prior code § 4621)



6.24.140   Care of animals while impounded.



   The poundmaster shall provide all animals in its custody with proper
food and water, and shall give them all necessary care and attention. The
poundmaster shall charge a fee at the time an impounded animal is redeemed by
its owner or person having custody, or may charge these fees at such time an
unclaimed animal is sold. (Prior code § 4622)



Chapter 6.28
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS



Sections:



6.28.010   Commercial animal establishments.



6.28.020   Permit requirements.



6.28.030   Kennel permit.



6.28.040   Breeder permit.



6.28.050   Breeder advertising.



6.28.060   Reporting of dog/cat records.



6.28.010   Commercial animal establishments.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or
association to erect, establish, maintain any commercial animal establishment
or pet shop without first obtaining a business license from the city. After
inspection and approval of the conditions of the commercial animal
establishment by the pound-master the required business license may be issued
by the city. Such license shall be issued pursuant to city licensing
regulations; provided, any inspection by the poundmaster at any time does not
reveal a violation of the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Every person within the city who owns, conducts, manages, or
operates any commercial animal establishment for which a city business
license or special use permit is required shall comply with each of the
following conditions:



   1.   Housing facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be
maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict
entrance of other animals;



   2.   All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;



   3.   All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and 
wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective
animals require;



   4.   Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and
maintained as to prevent escape of animals;



   5.   All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public
from the animals and animals from the public;



   6.   Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained
shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating
and cooling shall be provided as required according to the physical needs of
the animals;



   7.   All animal rooms, cages, and runs shall be of sufficient size
to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein;



   8.   All animal runs shall be of concrete and provided with adequate
drainage into an approved sewer or individual sewer disposal installation;



   9.   All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for an
examination and treatment if so ordered by the animal control officer;



   10.   Every violation of applicable regulation shall be corrected
within reasonable time to be specified by the animal control officer;



   11.   Commercial animal establishments shall comply with all other
applicable Visalia codes and ordinances;



   12.   All commercial animal establishments may be inspected from
time to time by an animal control officer to investigate any complaints of
violations of the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   Failure of the applicant for said license or special use permit
to comply with any one of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause
for the denial of any business license, whether original or renewal and/or
the issuance of a citation for violations pursuant to provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 4634)



6.28.020   Permit requirements.



   A.   Application for all kennel or breeder permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed with the poundmaster on a form prescribed by the
pound-master. Fees charged for these permits shall be set annually by
resolution of city council as recommended by the poundmaster. The kennel and
breeder permits shall be issued for the calendar year or any part thereof and
are effective from January 1st of each year and expire on December 31st of
that same year. The full amount of the permit fee shall be paid even though
the permit is issued for only a portion of a permit year. Renewal and payment
of the permit is due and payable on January 1st of each year. The poundmaster
shall collect a delinquent penalty in an amount equal to the amount as
established for license penalties.



   B.   The failure to obtain the appropriate permit is punishable as
an infraction as set forth herein.



   C.   Any or all of the permits within this code may be immediately
suspended for any violations of the conditions for commercial animal
establishments pursuant to Section 6.28.010. (Ord. 9605 § 20 (part), 1996:
prior code § 4651)



6.28.030   Kennel permit.



   It is unlawful for any person(s) to own, maintain, or harbor, any more
than four dogs and/or cats combined within the city limits without first
obtaining a kennel permit from the poundmaster. The issuance of the permit
shall be at the discretion of the poundmaster who shall take into
consideration the manner in which the animals are housed, sanitation and
noise factors, as well as animal control regulations. (Prior code § 4652)



6.28.040   Breeder permit.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to breed one or more litters of
dogs and/or cats in one year for sale or profit or to advertise for the
sale/adoption of such animals without first obtaining a breeder permit.



   B.   The fees for a breeder permit shall be set by resolution of the
city council and must be submitted to the poundmaster for the breeding of
dogs or cats that produce one or more litters in a year, as well as
advertising for the sale of dogs and cats within the city limits. Breeding
permit requirements are as follows:



   1.   No offspring can be sold/adopted until eight weeks of age;



   2.   No offspring can be sold/adopted until vaccinated against
common diseases;



   3.   The breeder permit holder must display the permit number when
advertising the animals for sale/adoption. (Prior code § 4653)



6.28.050   Breeder advertising.



   It is unlawful for any person to advertise for the sale/adoption of a
litter of dogs or cats in the city without including in the advertisement a
city breeder permit number. A litter shall be defined as two or more
offspring from the same female dog or cat. (Prior code § 4654)



6.28.060   Reporting of dog/cat records.



   Every commercial animal establishment holder of a breeder permit,
holder of a kennel permit and others who sell/adopt animals for consideration
must keep permanent records of all dogs/cats sold/adopted and forward such
information on a monthly basis to the poundmaster for licensing and
confirmation of rabies vaccination. (Prior code § 4655)



Title 7
RESERVED



Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY



Chapters:



8.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS



8.08   ALARM SYSTEMS



8.12   AMBULANCE SERVICES



8.16   AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS



8.20   CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE



8.24   FIREWORKS



8.28   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



8.29   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MANAGEMENT



8.30   DISPOSAL OF HOME-GENERATED SHARPS



8.32   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



8.36   NOISE



8.40   NUISANCES



8.44   OPEN BURNING



8.46   EXPOSURE OF MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS



8.48   SMOKING



8.52   SWIMMING POOLS



8.56   WEEDS AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



8.60   PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICE FEES



8.64   PUBLIC USE/CONSUMPTION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA



8.66   AUTHORITY TO REGULATE RETENTION AND DESTRUCTION OF ROUTINE VIDEO
MONITORING RECORDS



8.70   ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS



Chapter 8.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



8.04.010   County health officer to enforce.



8.04.010   County health officer to enforce.



   Consent is given that the county health officer of the county of Tulare
shall enforce and observe in the city, all orders, quarantine regulations and
rules prescribed by the state Department of Public Health, all statutes of
the state of California, and all ordinances of the county of Tulare relating
to the public health, all of which orders, regulations, rules, statutes and
ordinances are declared to be effective within the city. (Prior code § 4000)



Chapter 8.08
ALARM SYSTEMS



Sections:



8.08.010   Purpose.



8.08.020   Definitions.



8.08.030   Alarm requirements and provisions.



8.08.040   Service charge for false alarms.



8.08.050   Billing.



8.08.060   Appeals.



8.08.070   Permits and exemptions.



8.08.080   Police response suspended.



8.08.090   Severability.



8.08.100   Enforcement provisions.



8.08.110   Penalties.



8.08.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing fire,
burglary, robbery and panic alarm systems within the city; to reduce false
fire and police alarms; to require alarm system permits; and to provide the
authority to establish service charges. (Prior code § 4500)



8.08.020   Definitions.



   For purpose of this chapter certain terms are defined as follows:



   “Alarm agent” means an employee of an alarm company operator who
does not respond to activated alarms, but whose duties include altering,
installing, maintaining, monitoring, moving, repairing, replacing, or
servicing an alarm system.



   “Alarm company operator” means any person licensed as an alarm
company operator by the California Bureau of Collection and Investigative
Services, pursuant to the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 11.6 of the
Business and Professions Code and doing business as such within the limits of
the city.



   “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is
designed or used for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire or panic
condition within a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others to
the commission of an unlawful act, fire or hazard within a building,
structure or facility, or both; which emits a sound or transmits a signal or
message when actuated; and which is designed to elicit a response from the
police department or the fire emergency management department. Alarm systems
include, but are not limited to, direct-dial telephone devices, audible
alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to
register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the
protected building, structure or facility are not included within this
definition. 



   “Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of fire
or the commission of a burglary, robbery or panic condition; and when
actuated, generates an audible sound on the premises. 



   “Automatic dialing device” means any alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the
existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to
detect.



   “Emergency response personnel” means any person employed with
either the police department or fire and emergency management department of
the city.



   “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system through false
reporting of an emergency, mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation or negligence of the subscriber or his employees or agents;
provided, such actuating necessitates a response from emergency response
personnel. The term false alarm shall not include alarms caused by
hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, trouble alarms, or other conditions that
are clearly beyond the control of the alarm user.



   “Panic alarm” means a manually operated switch or button that sends
an alarm that an emergency police response is necessary to a premise and a
telephone call is impractical or unavailable to the alarm user. 



   “Permittee” means any individual, firm, company, corporation,
partnership, fraternal association, association, the United States of
America, the state of California, a political subdivision, governmental
agency or other public or municipal corporation that owns, leases, or
otherwise obtains an alarm system, and has purchased a valid alarm permit
from the city.



   “Permit year” means that time period from July 1st to June 30th of
each fiscal year that an alarm permit is issued and made valid. 



   “Person” means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, fraternal association, association, organization, the United
States of America, the state of California, a political subdivision,
governmental agency or other public or municipal corporation.



   “Proprietary system” means an alarm system sounding and/or
recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within
the protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the
subscriber of the protected premises. If a proprietary system includes a
signal line  connected directly or by means of an automatic dialing device
to a central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an alarm system
as defined in this chapter.



   “Responding alarm agent” means any person other than authorized
emergency response personnel who responds to alarms or who is in uniform and
on duty for the purpose of responding to an alarm.



   “Subscriber” means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, fraternal association, association, organization, the United
States of America, the state of California, a political subdivision,
governmental agency or other public or municipal corporation that purchases,
leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for
the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system. (Prior code § 4501)



8.08.030   Alarm requirements and provisions.



   A.   Audible Alarm Requirements.



   1.   Every audible alarm installed shall have a timing device which
automatically shuts off the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes (residential
areas) and thirty (30) minutes (commercial/retail areas) after it is
activated. 



   2.   All audible alarms not containing such timing devices, which
were installed prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this
chapter shall be required to have such a device installed within ninety (90)
days of the effective date of this chapter.



   3.   No persons shall install or maintain any audible alarm or other
alarm system enunciator which, upon activation, emits a sound similar to
sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. Systems
containing such sirens in existence and registered with the police department
as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are
exempted.



   B.   Power Supply. An alarm system shall be supplied with an
uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or
interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm
system. The power supply must be capable of at least four hours of
operation. 



   C.   Testing Alarm. Permittees shall notify the police department
communications office and provide the dispatcher with the alarm permit number
and such other information as may be required prior to any service, test,
repair, maintenance, adjustment, alterations or installations which might
activate a false alarm. 



   D.   Alarm System, Automatic Calling Devices. It is unlawful for any
person to use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or
operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or to install any
alarm system that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically
or by other automatic means, initiate a call and deliver a recorded message
to any telephone number terminating in the police department or the fire and
emergency management department of the city.



   E.   Alarm System, Panic Alarms. Panic status alarms are prohibited
from all locations except residences. 



   F.   Alarm System Maintenance. Each subscriber and/or permittee
shall maintain each alarm system in good working order, providing the
necessary service to prevent false alarms, to prevent malfunctions and to use
reasonable care in preventing malicious reporting of false fires or tampering
with the alarm system. (Prior code § 4508)



8.08.040   Service charge for false alarms.



   A service charge payable to the appropriate enforcement authority
(police department and/or fire and emergency management department of the
city), shall be assessed to a subscriber whose alarm system generates a false
alarm. The service charge shall be in an amount as designated by resolution
of the city council. (Prior code § 4504)



8.08.050   Billing.



   The enforcement authority shall cause to be issued an invoice for the
service charges accrued. Such bill shall be due and payable within fifteen
(15) days after the billing date. Failure to pay after sixty (60) days from
the billing date shall result in an additional ten percent late charge per
each response invoice. Unpaid bills may be referred to a collection process
after ninety (90) days delinquency or be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code as amended and shall
thereafter be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. (Prior code §
4505)



8.08.060   Appeals.



   In order to prevent or lessen the unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulties in exceptional cases where it is difficult or impossible to
comply with the strict letter of this chapter, the permittee or his
designated agent shall have the option to apply for an exemption from any
provisions of this chapter, to the city manager or designee. The city manager
or designee shall exercise those powers on these matters in such a way that
the public welfare is secured, and substantial justice done most nearly in
accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. (Prior code § 4506)



8.08.070   Permits and exemptions.



   It shall constitute a violation of Section 8.08.110 for any subscriber
to use, install or cause to be used or installed any alarm system upon any
premises under his control within the city without having an alarm system
permit therefore. An alarm system permittee shall comply with the following
conditions: 



   A.   Permit Application. A permit application required under this
chapter shall be filed with the enforcement authorities or their designees.
Separate applications for police alarm systems and fire alarm systems shall
be filed. The enforcement authorities shall prescribe the form of the
applications and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act
upon the permit applications. 



   B.   Alarm Company Responsibility. Any alarm company operator or
alarm agent shall, prior to the installation of an alarm system, provide the
person using the alarm with a city-provided alarm permit application form.



   C.   Renewal of Permit. Permittees are required to file an
application for renewal, together with the applicable fee within sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration of their existing permit.



   D.   Permit Issuance. Upon the filing and approval of the
application specifying the requirements as set forth by the enforcement
authority, a permit may be issued. Said permit, when issued, shall be valid
for the fiscal year. 



   E.   Permit Denial. The enforcement authority may deny the
application for alarm permit for any of the following reasons:



   1.   The application for permit does not contain all information
required by the enforcement authority;



   2.   The information is not submitted on the required application
form;



   3.   The submission of any false or misleading information on the
application;



   4.   The proposed alarm does not meet the standards set forth in
this chapter;



   5.   Any other valid reason determined to present a potential health
or safety hazard to the city, its residents and/or emergency response
personnel.



   F.   Permit Fee. The enforcement authority may establish such fee
requirements as deemed necessary for the purpose of offsetting the reasonable
administrative or investigative costs for original and renewal permits. 



   G.   Permit--Correction of Information. Whenever any change occurs
relating to the written information required by the permit application, the
permittee shall give written notice of such change to the enforcement
authority or designee within twenty (20) days. 



   H.   Permit--Separate Permit Required. A separate alarm permit shall
be required for each premises on which an alarm system is used or installed. 



   I.   Exemption. The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to
audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, recreational
vehicles or household smoke alarms not monitored by emergency response
personnel or an alarm agent. (Prior code § 4507)



8.08.080   Police response suspended.



   A.   The police department may suspend their alarm response to a
given address under the following conditions: 



   1.   If the alarm location's responsible party refuses to purchase
an alarm permit;



   2.   If the alarm location's responsible party refuses to pay their
false alarm response fee;



   3.   If a permitted alarm location has a responsible party that
intentionally reports or causes to report a false alarm, knowing that such an
alarm is false;



   4.   If a permitted alarm location has an extensive history of false
alarms and demonstrates no concern to correct the condition, as determined by
the chief of police or his designee. 



   B.   The decision not to respond to an alarm shall only be made
after the alarm location's responsible party has been given an opportunity
for a hearing with the chief of police, or his designee, as to why police
response should not be discontinued. Such decision may be appealed pursuant
to Section 8.08.060. (Prior code § 4510)



8.08.090   Severability.



   A.   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions
of this chapter are severable.



   B.   The city shall be under no duty or obligation to a subscriber
or to any other person by reason of the provision of this chapter or the
exercise of privileges of a subscriber hereunder, including but not limited
to any defects in any alarm system or any delays in transmission or response
to any alarm.



   C.   It is unlawful and punishable as provided in Section 8.08.110
for any person to engage in the alarm business within the city without having
first obtained a business license from the licensing authority. 



   D.   Alarm company operators must have filed with the state
Department of Consumer Affairs and be in compliance with all provisions
regarding the licensing of alarm agents and responding alarm agents. (Prior
code § 4509)



8.08.100   Enforcement provisions.



   The enforcing authorities are directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The enforcement authority for burglary, robbery
or panic alarm systems shall be the police department. The enforcement
authority for fire alarm systems shall be the fire and emergency management
department of the city. (Prior code § 4502)



8.08.110   Penalties.



   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, to install, cause to
be installed, use, actuate, or maintain any alarm system contrary to or in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the
classification of a violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time
an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial
court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the
charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction pursuant to Section 19(c)
of the California Penal Code.



   A.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year.



   B.   Any person convicted of any infraction of this chapter shall be
punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for the second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation of
this chapter within one year.



   C.   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new
and separate offense. (Prior code § 4503)



Chapter 8.12
AMBULANCE SERVICES



Sections:



8.12.010   Definitions.



8.12.020   Unlawful to operate without a permit.



8.12.030   Services may be provided.



8.12.040   Applicability.



8.12.050   Violations.



8.12.010   Definitions.



   Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions
shall govern the construction of this chapter:



   “Ambulance” means any vehicle certified by the California Highway
Patrol that is specifically constructed, modified, equipped, designed and
used and operated for transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or
otherwise incapacitated persons.



   “Convalescent transport vehicle” means any vehicle that is
specifically constructed, modified, equipped, designed and used and operated
for transporting patients not requiring emergency services.



   “Licensee” means any person or business entity having a valid
license issued by the county of Tulare to operate an ambulance and/or
convalescent transport vehicle within a defined area of the county of Tulare.



   “Patient” means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, convalescent or
otherwise incapacitated person.



   “Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, trust or estate.



   “Service area” means the geographic area in the county of Tulare in
which a licensee is licensed by Tulare County to provide ambulance and/or
convalescent transport service. (Prior code § 4525)



8.12.020   Unlawful to operate without a permit.



   It is unlawful for any person, either as an owner, agent, employee, or
otherwise, to operate, conduct or otherwise be engaged in the business of
providing ambulance services or convalescent transport services in the city,
or to transport patients in the city by means of an ambulance or convalescent
transport vehicle or to operate the same upon the public streets within the
city, without having a license or permit issued by the county of Tulare
authorizing the licensee or permittee to provide such services within the
service area of the county of Tulare, within which the city is located.
(Prior code § 4526)



8.12.030   Services may be provided.



   Any licensee of the county of Tulare may provide ambulance or
convalescent transport services within the city under the following
circumstances:



   A.   Upon request by any person, public safety agency, or other
licensee, when an ambulance or convalescent transport vehicle licensed by the
county of Tulare for the service area in which the city is located, is not
immediately available;



   B.   To provide ambulance or convalescent transport service to any
person from a point outside the city to a point inside the city;



   C.   To provide return ambulance or convalescent transport service
to any person who initially used the licensee's services for transportation
to a destination inside the city from a point outside the city;



   D.   To provide standby ambulance or convalescent transport services
on a contract basis for special events of limited duration, including, but
not limited to circuses, carnivals, outdoor festivals, fairs, rodeos, and
athletic events. (Prior code § 4527)



8.12.040   Applicability.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following:



   A.   Any person or organization providing ambulance or convalescent
transport services on a nonprofit volunteer basis;



   B.   Ambulance or convalescent transport services supplied by a
political subdivision of the state of California or the United States;



   C.   Ambulance or convalescent transport service from a location
outside the county of Tulare, regardless of destination;



   D.   Any ambulance or convalescent transport service during any
state of war emergency, state of emergency, or local emergency, as those
terms are defined in the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior
code § 4528)



8.12.050   Violations.



   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter which are
declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be
punishable as provided in the Municipal Code of the city.



Chapter 8.16
AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS



Sections:



8.16.010   Purpose.



8.16.020   General.



8.16.030   Approvals.



8.16.040   Definitions.



8.16.050   Stricter requirements.



8.16.060   Testing, inspection and installation.



8.16.070   Maintenance.



8.16.080   Penalties.



8.16.090   Validity.



8.16.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to specify when automatic
fire-extinguishing systems are required and the requirements pertaining to
their design, installation, maintenance and operation. (Prior code § 4550)
(Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.020   General.



   A.   All automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be required and
installed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the most recently
adopted edition of the California Building Code ("CBC") and the California
Fire Code ("CFC") as published by the International Conference of Building
Officials (I.C.B.O.), Whittier, California.



   B.   Exception.



   1.   The standard shall be the appropriate National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) pamphlet and shall be the edition that corresponds with
the most recently adopted CBC and CFC. (Prior code § 4551) (Ord. 2011-06, §
2 (part), 2011)



8.16.030   Approvals.



   All automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be approved by the
building department and the fire department and shall be subject to such
periodic tests as may be required by the authority having jurisdiction. The
location of all fire department hose connections shall be approved by the
fire department. (Prior code § 4552) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.040   Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter "Automatic fire-extinguishing system"
means an approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects
a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the
area of a fire. (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.050   Stricter requirements.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abrogating stricter
requirements for automatic fire-extinguishing systems where required by the
CBC or the CFC. (Prior code § 4560) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.060   Testing, inspection and installation.



   A.   Automatic fire-extinguishing system plans, installation,
inspection, testing and maintenance shall comply with the applicable National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) pamphlets.



   B.   Automatic fire-extinguishing system plan checks shall be
completed and approved prior to any framing inspection.



   C.   A pressure test shall be conducted prior to covering the
automatic fire-extinguishing system with any material, e.g., insulation, dry
wall, etc. (Prior code § 4562) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.070   Maintenance.



   The installing contractor shall provide the owner with:



   A.   Instruction charts describing the operation and proper
maintenance of the sprinkler devices;



   B.   A current publication of NFPA 13A, Inspection, Testing and
Maintenance of Sprinkler Systems. (Prior code § 4563) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2
(part), 2011)



8.16.080   Penalties.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the city attorney or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as
charged by the city attorney, punishable by a fine of not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
by imprisonment for not less than five days nor more than six months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. (Prior code § 4564) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



8.16.090   Validity.



   If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby. (Prior code § 4565) (Ord. 2011-06, § 2 (part), 2011)



Chapter 8.20
CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE



Sections:



8.20.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Fire Code.



8.20.020   Establishment authority and responsibilities.



8.20.030   Definitions.



8.20.040   Establishment of limits of storage of flammable liquids in
outside aboveground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.



8.20.050   Modifications.



8.20.060   Alternative materials and methods.



8.20.070   Appeals.



8.20.080   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require
permits.



8.20.090   Capacity of tank trucks.



8.20.100   Special permits.



8.20.110   Penalties.



8.20.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Fire Code.



   A.   There is adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous
materials or explosion, that certain document, not less than one copy is
filed in the office of the Fire Department and one in the office of the
Building Division of City of Visalia, being marked and designated as the
California Fire Code, 2016 edition published by the International Code
Council, including Appendix Chapters 4 (Special Detailed requirements Based
on Use and Occupancy), B (Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings), C (Fire
Hydrant Locations and Distribution), D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), H
(Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory
Statement (HMIS) Instructions), and I (Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant
Conditions), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Visalia, in the State of California
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of Visalia are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed this section 8.20.010.



   B.   All further references shall be to the 2016 California Fire
Code, in Subsection 101.1 of the, the term “City of Visalia” shall be
inserted.



   C.   Subsection 104.3.1.1. Warrant cost recovery, is added to read
as follows:



   104.3.1.1 Warrant cost recovery. Cost to the City of Visalia for
obtaining an Inspection Warrant is the responsibility of the property owner
and steps to recover the costs will be taken, up to and including a lien
against the property. Recovery costs may include staff time, legal fees, and
court fees.



   D.   Subsection 108.1 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows:



   108.1 Appeals. See local Ordinance, Appeals Section 8.20.080.



   E.   Subsection 108.2. and 108.3. shall be deleted in their entirety.



   F.   Subsection 109.4. Change: Violation penalties, is amended to
read as follows:



   109.4 Violations penalties. Persons who shall violate a prevision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or a permit or
certificate used under provision of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, infraction or both. Penalties shall be as prescribed in local
Ordinance Section 1.12.010. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.



   G.   Subsection 109.5. Cost of abatement, is added to read as
follows:



   109.5 Cost of abatement. Cost of abatement is the responsibility of the
property owner and steps to recover the costs will be taken, up to and
including a lien against the property. Property owners shall be notified of
any action taken as soon as possible. Recovery costs may include staff time,
contractor’s costs, legal fees and any and all cost associated with the
abatement.



   H.   Subsection 111.4. Change: Failure to comply, is amended to read
as follows:



   111.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable to a fine prescribed in local Ordinance Section 1.12.010.



   I.   Subsection 113.6. Added: Visalia Fire Department Fee Schedule,
is added to read as follows:



   113.6 Visalia Fire Department Fee Schedule. The Fire Chief may
establish a schedule of fees, as approved by the City Council, to be charged
and collected for plan checking, required inspections services, and for the
issuance of permits pursuant to Section 105 of this Code. In addition, this
schedule may include a fire service Cost Recovery fee to be charged to any
person, firm, corporation or business that through negligence, violation of
the law or as a result of carelessness is responsible for the cause of any
fire service response to the scene of such an incident. A copy of the fee
schedule shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and the Office of the
Fire Department and shall be available for public inspection.



   J.   Subsection 105.6.32 Exception, is amended to read as follows:



   105.6.32 Exception: Recreational Fires, see Visalia Municipal Code
Ordinance, Open Burning, Section 8.44.010.



   K.   Subsection C103.4 Buildings provided with a fire sprinkler
system, is added to read as follows:



   C103.4 Buildings provided with a fire sprinkler system. Any newly
constructed building provided with a NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R fire sprinkler
system shall provide a fire hydrant within fifty (50) feet of the fire
department connection. Where an existing building is retrofitted with a NFPA
13 or NFPA 13R fire sprinkler system a fire hydrant shall be provided within
seventy-five (75) feet of the fire department connection.



   C103.4.1 An additional twenty-five (25) feet of distance between a fire
hydrant and the fire department connection (FDC) may be granted by the Fire
Marshal when a fire sprinkler system Density is designed with an additional
25%.



   Exceptions: The additional twenty-five (25) feet of distance between a
fire hydrant and the fire department connection (FDC) shall not be permitted
for Pipe scheduled and ESFR sprinkler systems.



   L.   Subsection D107.1 Exception 1. One- or two-family residential
developments shall be deleted in its entirety.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 2013-11, § 2, 2013)



8.20.020   Establishment authority and responsibilities.



   A.   The fire marshal under the authority of the fire chief is
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of the California Fire Code and
shall have the authority to render interpretations of the code, and to adopt
policies, procedures, rules and regulations in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures,
rules and regulations shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
the code and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for in the code.



   B.   The fire marshal may authorize fire inspectors and other
members of the fire department as deemed necessary to enforce the provisions
of the fire code.



   C.   A report of the fire prevention division shall be made annually
to the city manager. The fire marshal under the authority of the fire chief
shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his/her judgment.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 2013-11, § 2, 2013: Prior code § 4401)



8.20.030   Definitions.



   Fire Code Official. Whenever the term “fire code official” is used
in the California Fire Code, it means fire marshal of the fire department.



   Municipality. Whenever the term “municipality” is used in the
California Fire Code, it means the City of Visalia. 



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 2013-11, § 2, 2013: Prior code § 4402)



8.20.040   Establishment of limits of storage of flammable liquids in
outside aboveground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.



   The limits referring to storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases in the
California Fire Code is to be restricted shall be regulated by the city
zoning ordinance. Where the zoning ordinance is silent about the permitted or
conditional use the omission shall be considered prima facie evidence of
clear intent to prohibit the act. 



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code §§ 4403, 4404)



8.20.050   Modifications.



   Where there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this code, the fire marshal shall have the authority to grant
modifications for individual cases, provided the fire marshal shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of the code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire
safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be
recorded and entered in the files of the department of fire prevention. 



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.20.060   Alternative materials and methods.



   The fire marshal shall have power to approve alternative materials and
methods where he or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of the California Fire Code. Where
the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved,
the fire marshal shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the
alternative was not approved. 



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Ord. 2013-11, § 2, 2013: Prior code § 4406)



8.20.070   Appeals.



   Whenever the fire marshal and or chief of the fire department
disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it
is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true
intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal and or chief of the
fire department to the city manager within thirty (30) days from the date of
the decision. 



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code § 4407)



8.20.080   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require
permits.



   A.   The city manager, the chief of the fire department, fire
marshal and the chief building official shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any
new materials, processes or occupancy, which shall require permits, in
addition to those now enumerated in said code.



   B.   The fire chief shall post such list in conspicuous place in
his/her office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code § 4408)



8.20.090   Capacity of tank trucks.



   The capacity of compartments of tank trucks used in the delivery of
Class I flammable liquids in retail lots and for retail purposes within the
city shall be limited to one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallons.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code § 4450)



8.20.100   Special permits.



   The chief of the fire department may, at his discretion, issue special
permits for the entrance into the city of tank trucks of greater than one
thousand two hundred (1,200) gallon compartment capacity for the purpose of
making delivery of Class I flammable liquids to retail distribution stations,
but not otherwise; provided, such permits shall be restricted to deliveries
at locations where unusual hazards will not be created by such larger
capacity trucks; provided, that no such tank trucks, carrying Class I
flammable liquid, shall be parked or left unattended on any street, highway,
avenue or alley of the city.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code § 4451)



8.20.110   Penalties.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted
or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specification or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified
by the city attorney or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time
fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as
determined by the city attorney, or shall be assessed administrative
penalties pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.13 of the Visalia Municipal
Code. These penalties may accrue and each day the property is not in
compliance shall be considered another violation.



(Ord. 2016-27 § 2 (part), 2016: Prior code § 4409)



Chapter 8.24
FIREWORKS



Sections:



Article 1.  Regulation of Fireworks



8.24.005   Purpose.



8.24.010   Definitions.



8.24.020   Permits.



8.24.030   Applicants for pyrotechnic public display permits.



8.24.035   Applicants for permit to sell safe and sane fireworks.



8.24.040   Permits for pyrotechnic displays.



8.24.050   Permits for retailers of safe and sane fireworks.



8.24.060   Regulations.



8.24.070   Fireworks stand construction.



8.24.075   Storage of safe and sane fireworks.



8.24.080   Revocation of permit.



8.24.090   Appeal of decision on permit for retailers of safe and sane
fireworks.



Article 2.  Imposition of Administrative Fines and Penalties for Dangerous
Fireworks



8.24.100   Purpose.



8.24.110   Issuance of administrative citations.



8.24.120   Administrative fines.



8.24.130   Right to an administrative hearing.



8.24.140   Administrative hearing procedures.



8.24.150   Administrative hearing—mitigating factors.



Article 1.  Regulation of Fireworks



8.24.005   Purpose.



   This article is intended to regulate activities related to the
permitting, use, and sale of fireworks within the City of Visalia.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.010   Definitions.



   Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context, the words set out in this section shall have the
following meanings:



   “Active list” means the current list of eligible organizations that
qualify for the opportunity to obtain a permit to sell safe and sane
fireworks with in the city.



   “Citation” means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this
chapter to remedy a violation.



   “Citee” means any person served with an administrative citation
charging him or her as a responsible person for violation.



   “City” means the City of Visalia.



   “Code” means the Visalia Municipal Code.



   “Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)” means any employee or agent of the
City of Visalia authorized to enforce any provision of this code.



   “Dangerous fireworks” means any fireworks specified as such in the
State Fireworks Law, currently the California Health and Safety Code Sections
12500 et seq. and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous
by the State Fire Marshal.



   “Eligible organization” means any local nonprofit organization
whose principal place of business is located in the city of Visalia and which
is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of Internal
Revenue Code Section 501(C) (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10), or (19).



   Organizations authorized to sell safe and sane fireworks prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, must have their principal place of business
located within the boundaries of the Visalia Unified School District.



   “Hearing officer” means the person appointed by the City Manager to
serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings hereunder.



   “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation,
organization or association of any nature whatsoever.



   “Responsible person” means a person who causes a code violation to
occur ow allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or
failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a
violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. If the
responsible person is a juvenile then the parent or guardian who has physical
custody of the juvenile at the time of the code violation shall be considered
a responsible person. There is a rebuttable presumption that (1) the record
owner of a residential parcel, as shown on the county’s latest equalized
property taxes assessment rolls, (2) a lessee of a residential parcel, and
(3) the organizer of any event located on public property that requires a
“special events permit,” has control over the property and notice of any
violation existing on the property. For purposes of this chapter, there may
be more than one responsible person for a violation.



   “Safe and sane fireworks” means any fireworks which do not come
within the definition of “dangerous fireworks.” (Health and Safety Code
Section 12529)   “Stand” means any building, booth, counter, or other
structure of a temporary nature used in the sale or offering for sale of
fireworks pursuant to a permit duly issued.



   “Vendors” means any agency that sells safe and sane fireworks to
retailers (eligible organization).  All vendors shall comply with all
sections of the city’s municipal codes, Title 19, California Fire Code, and
all other State Fire Marshals regulations.



   “Violation” or “violates” refers to any violation of any
provision of this code as well as means the failure to comply with any
additional requirement imposed on any “special events permit,” license
and/or approval issued to a person under or pursuant to a city ordinance.



   “Waiting list” means a list of organizations waiting, as to be
placed on the Active List.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 §
2 (part), 1999)



8.24.020   Permits.



   The fire prevention division of the fire department may, upon due
application, issue a permit to an eligible organization for the following:



   A.   Pyrotechnic display or displays of fireworks in the public
parks or other suitable open place;



   B.   Retailers of safe and sane fireworks.



   1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or
expose for sale within the city any fireworks in violation of this chapter or
without having a valid permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



   2.   Permits to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be issued by the
fire department, upon applications therefor, only to nonprofit eligible
organizations and only after those organizations have met all the applicable
requirements set forth in this chapter.



   3.   Any eligible organization desiring to sell safe and sane
fireworks in the city shall make application to be placed on the waiting list
at the fire department. Priority will be given new applications filed with
the chief of the fire department accompanied by a twenty-five dollar ($25.00)
deposit to be returned when approval is given, and on the basis of date
filed, which shall be recorded on the waiting list. The waiting list will be
kept at the City of Visalia Fire Administration Office for the review upon
request by organizations located within the City of Visalia.



   4.   The application for placement on the priority list shall be
signed by a bona fide officer of the eligible organization, wherein the
officer, on behalf of the organization and its agents, agrees to abide by
state law and administrative regulations and all the stipulations of this
code, if permission to operate a fireworks stand be granted to the
organization.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.030   Applicants for pyrotechnic public display permits.



   The applicants for such permits shall comply with and be governed by
the provisions set forth in Title 19, California Administrative Code,
Sub-Chapter 6, Article 6.



(Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.035   Applicants for permit to sell safe and sane fireworks.



   Applicants for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks must be an
eligible organization as defined in Section 8.24.010.



   A.   There shall not be more than one retail stand for each
permittee. No organization shall submit more than one application. 
Submittal or more than one application shall be grounds for denial of all
applications.



   B.   New applicants for retailer permits will be accepted and
approval will be granted only when an established organization now eligible
to engage in the business discontinues their operation, or the population
ratio of one stand per five thousand (5,000) population allows the addition
of one or more stands. There are currently twenty-nine (29) non-profit groups
selling fireworks in the City of Visalia. An additional booth shall be added
for every increase of five thousand (5,000) over the current population of
one hundred and twenty-five thousand (125,000) as demonstrated in Appendix C
to Ordinance 2010-19.



   C.   Priority will be given to new organizations on the priority
list who have filed with the chief of the fire department accompanied by a
twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) deposit to be returned when approval is given,
and on the basis of date filed, as recorded on the priority list.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.040   Permits for pyrotechnic displays.



   The applicants for such permits shall comply with and be governed by
the provisions set forth in Title 19, California Administrative Code,
Sub-Chapter 6, Article 6.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.050   Permits for retailers of safe and sane fireworks.



   All applications for permit to sell at retail safe and sane fireworks
shall comply with and be governed by the provisions set forth in Title 19,
California Administrative Code, Sub-Chapter 6, Article 5, and in addition
shall be governed by the following.



   A.   Applications for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks by
eligible organizations shall be made on forms to be furnished by the Fire
Chief or his/her designee, shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the
applicant and shall require the following information and documents:



   1.   The application for permit shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of the nonprofit organization for which application is made;
evidence of tax exempt status pursuant to provisions of the Internal Revenue
Code cited in Section 8.24.010 (definition of eligible organization); and the
name and address of its officers. The application shall also contain the
location of the proposed fireworks sales, and the method and location of
fireworks storage. The application shall be signed by a bona fide officer of
the eligible organization, wherein the officer, on behalf of the organization
and its agents, agrees to abide by state law and administrative regulations
and all the stipulations of this code.



   2.   A dimensioned site plan (not to scale) containing all of the
following;



   a.   Drawing that indicates all areas within one hundred (100) feet
of the proposed fireworks stand.



   b.   Drawing that indicates all areas within one hundred (100) feet
of the proposed and storage container cited in Section 8.24.075. Storage
containers shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any building or structure.
For alternative storage locations see Section 8.24.075 (H) and (I).



   c.   Drawing that indicates all adjacent buildings, property lines;
ignitable materials, grass or vegetation is not within thirty (30) feet of
the fireworks stand.



   d.   Drawing that indicates any gasoline pump or distribution point
is at least one hundred (100) feet  from the fireworks stand.



   e.   Drawing that indicates the fireworks stand location is a least
ten (10) feet from any public roadway, or public sidewalk.



   f.   Drawing that shows all utilities, curb cuts and/or driveways
and identifying the nearest fire hydrants.



   g.   Drawings shall show all tarps or canopies, without prior
approval tarps or canopies will not be permitted.



   h.   Satellite drawings with dimensional overlay are an acceptable
alternative to traditional drawings.



   3.   A written authorization from the owner of the location or
person in lawful possession thereof, if other than the applicant, for the
locating of the business upon his or her property. Written authorization must
be notarized within the same year of the application.



   4.   Prior to issuance of a permit, the eligible organization shall
submit a certificate of insurance for general liability in an amount no less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined bodily injury and property
damage for each occurrence. This insurance shall name the city of Visalia,
its officers, agents, elected officials, employees and volunteers as
additional insureds. This insurance shall be primary with respect to any
insurance or self-insurance programs maintained by the city. The certificate
must specify the time, location, and dated to be covered by the policy. The
applicant shall save, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers,
agents, elected officials, employees and volunteers from all claims, demands,
damages, judgments, costs or expenses that may at any time arise from or is
any way related to any work performed by the applicant. The certificate must
be provided to the fire department no later than May 1st of the subject year
or such other time as the Fire Chief may allow.



   5.   A fifty-dollar ($50.00) fee must be deposited with the city.
Upon approval of the permit, the fee will become a clean-up surety to be
forfeited to the city in the event the permittee fails to remove said stand,
equipment and rubbish from the premises upon which the stand is located
before twelve noon on July 15th of the year for which said permit is granted,
to be retained by the city until such time the permit is either revoked by
the city or the applicant discontinues their operation.



   6.   A copy of the organization's State Fire Marshal's license to
sell safe and sane fireworks shall be included with the application.



   7.   Approval from the public works department of the city that
operation of the fireworks stand at the proposed location will not present
any substantial hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



   B.   During the application process there will be important
timelines set to insure that the applications for permit to sell safe and
sane fireworks are completed and accurate before issuing. The firework
vendors are responsible for submitting all application to the city, and
insuring that the organizations that they represent are prepared for the
process. The timelines and process for submitting an application for a permit
to sell safe and sane fireworks is as follows;



   1.   Within the first week of January the fire department will send
a letter of congratulations to the organizations that were awarded the
opportunity to participate in the application process to sell safe and sane
fireworks within the city in accordance with Section 8.24.050.



   2.   The organizations that received the congratulations letter from
the fire department shall contact a state approved fireworks vendor to start
the application process.



   3.   Completed applications shall be returned to the fire department
by appointment only, no later than last full week in April of each year. All
appointments must be made in advance by the firework vender of the
organizations choosing.



   4.   Changes and or corrections to the applications must be
submitted by appointment only, for an additional operational permit fee, on
the fourth (4th) Thursday in the month of May. No documents or applications
will be accepted after 5:00 pm. If there is any incorrect or missing
documentation after this date and time the permit will be denied. 



   5.   Unforeseen changes after the fourth (4th) Thursday in the month
of May must be evaluated by the Fire Chief. The evaluation is to determine if
the situation classifies as unforeseen defined in Section 8.24.010, and also
to determine if the city has an adequate amount of time to process the
application. If changes to the permit are granted, the organization will be
required to pay an additional operational permit fee.



   6.   A representative from each non-profit organization shall attend
a firework safety meeting that has been approved by the Visalia Fire
Department.  The firework safety meeting shall have all safety material
approved and attendance must be verified by the Visalia Fire Department.



   C.   When all the application requirements have been completed, and
the fireworks stand location has been approved, the fire department shall
authorize erection of a fireworks stand and shall authorize the city finance
department to collect the permit fee from the qualified organization by
completing Part 1 of the permit form. Each qualified organization shall pay
for a current operational permit pursuant to the California Fire Code. The
permit shall be for only one stand per eligible organization. Upon receipt of
payment, finance department and the applicant shall complete Part 2 of the
permit and forward it to the fire department for delivery as stated below.



   D.   Permits will be effective and Part 3 completed only when
delivered by the fire department to the organization after fire departments,
or its representative's, final inspection of the stand shows compliance with
all requirements of this chapter. Permits may be issued with conditions to
ensure that the business will be operated in a safe and legal manner, will
not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood and will not constitute
an undue burden on city resources. The permit shall then be posted in a
conspicuous place within the stand during the hours the stand is in operation.



   E.   If any organization which, in the previous year, obtained and
held a fireworks permit fails to apply promptly or does not successfully
complete the application process by May 1st the organization will be removed
from the fire permit active list and must reapply to go on the waiting list.
The next existing eligible organization at the top of the waiting list kept
by the fire department shall be notified and given the opportunity to apply
for a firework permit the following year.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.060   Regulations.



   A.   Those fireworks which are classified as “dangerous
fireworks” under Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code are
prohibited, except that such fireworks as are defined and classified as
“safe and sane fireworks” in Section 12529 of the California Health and
Safety Code may be displayed, sold and used pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and not otherwise.



   B.   No permit holder shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any other sound device including any loudspeaker, radio or
amplifying system where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, alleys, parks or
other public places.



   C.   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
nontransferable, and shall be valid only as to the applicant and location
provided on the application for such permit, or as set forth in Section
8.24.020. If an organization on the active list splits into two individual
groups, the group that retained the 501 (c)(3)-(19) Non-profit Federal Tax ID
number on record that matches the previously approved permit will be eligible
to retain their fireworks permit. The group that does not retain the 501
(c)(3) - (19) shall apply to be placed on the fire departments waiting list.
In the instance where neither group retained the 501 (c)(3) - (19) Non-profit
Federal Tax ID number then neither group will be eligible for the firework
permit and both organizations must apply to be placed on the waiting list.



   D.   Except as expressly permitted by and in accordance with the
provisions of this code, the sale, offer to sell, advertising or display of
merchandise on any street or sidewalk in the city is prohibited.



   E.   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted
only from a temporary fireworks stand and the sale from any other building or
structure is prohibited.



   F.   No fireworks stand shall be located within one hundred feet of
any gasoline storage or gasoline pump or any garage or within forty (40) feet
of any other building, or within six hundred (600) feet of any other
fireworks stand.



   G.   No stand shall be placed closer than twenty (20) feet to a side
or rear property line nor closer than forty (40) feet to any other building
or structure or closer than ten (10) feet from any public roadway, public
sidewalk, unless waived by the building and fire authorities.



   H.   Fireworks stands will be allowed only on property in the city
which has commercial or industrial zoning. Public safety, ingress, egress,
and adequate parking will be additional factors considered by the fire
department before approving any site for fireworks sales.



   I.   A twenty (20) foot area surrounding the fireworks stand and
fireworks storage container must be kept clear of empty boxes, trash and
debris.



   J.   If a toilet is not immediately available during all open or
sale hours of the fireworks stand, then an approved chemical one must be
provided.



   K.   Each stand shall be provided with not less than two 2-A 10
BC-type fire extinguishers, underwriter approved, in good working order, with
an up-to-date inspection tag indicating that the fire extinguisher has been
serviced within the past year and easily accessible for use in case of fire.



   L.   No person shall light, or cause or permit to be lighted, any
fireworks or any other article or material within any such stand, or within
fifty (50) feet thereof.



   M.   No smoking shall be allowed in any stand or within fifty (50)
feet thereof. “No Smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed.



   N.   All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the
location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty (20) feet
surrounding the stand.



   O.   There shall be at least one adult in attendance during the open
or sale hours of the fireworks stand. No minor under the age of eighteen (18)
shall be permitted in a stand.



   P.   All permits must be posted in a conspicuous place.



   Q.   Fireworks shall be sold only between the hours of nine a.m. and
eleven p.m. daily from June 29th through July 4th.



   R.   Permittee shall strictly comply with all provisions of the
State Fireworks Law (Sections 12500 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code).



   S.   Generators and all other fuel fired equipment may not be
operated within twenty (20) feet of a firework stand.  All electrical wiring
shall comply with Section (D).



   T.   Night security personnel accommodations shall not be closer
than twenty-five (25) feet from the fireworks stand.



   U.   No fireworks shall be placed in any fireworks stand until a
permit for such stand has been issued by the city. Permits are not valid
until an inspection of the stand has been conducted and permit has been sign
by fire personnel.



   V.   Any person who receives a notice to correct any violation of
these regulations or any other condition of the permit, and who fails to
correct such violation within the time prescribed in the notice, may be
assessed a fee not exceeding the city's cost of reinspection in accordance
with Section 8.24.050(B) of this code.



   W.   There shall be allowed one fireworks stand for every five
thousand (5,000) population in the city. City population shall be based on
annual population figures provided to the state of California by the city as
of January 1st of each year.



   X.   Each application shall contain a description of the site
desired. Applicant must obtain permission of the owner.



   Y.   Vehicles may not be parked within ten (10) feet of a fireworks
stand. Provide cones or blockage to indicate a "NO PARKING" area within ten
(10) feet of the fireworks stand.



   Z.    Fireworks signs, each application shall contain a description
of all desired signage. All signage must be approved during application
process. 



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.070   Fireworks stand construction.



   All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only
from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building
or structure is prohibited.



   A.   Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the
building code of the city except that the building official, or his/her
designee, shall have authority to require that stands be constructed in a
manner which will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons.



   B.   Each stand must have at least two exits. The maximum fireworks
stand length shall be no longer than thirty two (32) feet, and the floor area
shall not exceed three hundred twenty (320) square feet.



   C.   The front of all fireworks stands shall be completely enclosed
from the counter to the roof with hardware wire cloth. Openings to permit
delivery of merchandise to prospective customers shall not be larger than
twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches.



   D.   All electrical wiring, including that from the power source,
shall be installed to the satisfaction of the building inspector. Electrical
connections shall be at least twelve (12) feet above ground when subject to
foot traffic and sixteen (16) feet when subject to automobile traffic.



   E.   All tarps or canopies shall be shown on site plan drawing for
approval. Without prior approval tarps or canopies will not be permitted.



   F.   The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary
location by twelve noon on July 15th, and all accompanying litter shall be
cleared from said location on or before said time.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010: Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.075     Storage of safe and sane fireworks.



   All organizations applying for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks
shall submit drawing indicating the location of the firework storage, the
container in which the fireworks will be stored within, and must comply with
the following.



   A.    No person or persons shall store safe and sane fireworks
within the city without going through the permit process detailed in this
Chapter 8.24.  Additionally, the non-profit organization will release the
City of Visalia from liability by signing a hold harmless agreement in the
form as established by Appendix B to Ordinance 2010-19.



   B.   Storage of fireworks in residential neighborhoods is prohibited.



   C.   All storage of safe and sane fireworks shall be located at the
approved retail sales location. For alternative storage locations see Section
8.24.075 (H) and (I).



   D.   All fireworks being stored at a retail location must be stored
in a metal container (metal cargo style containers) approved by the Fire
Chief or designee only, at a distance of no less than thirty (30) feet from
the fireworks stand and all other buildings or structures in a form as
established by Appendix A to Ordinance 2010-19.  For alternative storage
containers see Section 8.24.075 (H) and (I). 



   E.   Non-profit organizations are responsible for providing their
own security plan for all storage of fireworks located within the city
limits. 



   F.   An orange placard shall be located on all visible sides of
storage unit. The orange placard must be a minimum of eight (8) inches by
eight (8) inches in size.



   G.   Storage of fireworks in trucks or vans will be permitted during
hours of sale only. The truck or van carrying or storing the fireworks shall
be removed from the sales area and all fireworks must be placed in the
pre-approved storage container located in its pre-approved location.



   H.   The fire code official is authorized to approve an alternative
storage method where the Fire Chief finds that the proposed method is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter,
and that the method offered is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this chapter in it effectiveness to provide safety to the citizens of the
city and the emergency personnel that may respond if there was a fire.



   I.   All alternative storage methods must be submitted in writing
and approved by the Fire Chief prior to the fireworks application deadline
cited in Section 8.24.050(B)(3).



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010)



8.24.080   Revocation of permit.



   Any violation of this chapter or other city ordinances, or the terms
and conditions of the permit, or state law or administrative regulations, or
safety rules of the fire department shall be grounds for immediate revocation
of the permit. All officers, agents, and employees of the eligible
organization shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010:  Ord. 9921 § 2 (part), 1999)



8.24.090   Appeal of decision on permit for retailers of safe and sane
fireworks.



   A.   Should any applicant be dissatisfied with the decision of the
Fire Chief or his/her designee not to grant a permit or to revoke a permit,
then said applicant may, no later than ten days after notice of such decision
is deposited in the United States mail addressed to the applicant or
permittee at the address provided on the application, make written objection
to the City Manager setting forth the grounds for dissatisfaction, whereupon
the City Manager shall hear said objections at a scheduled meeting no later
than three weeks following the filing of the objection with the City Clerk.
The applicant shall be given written notice no less than three days prior to
said hearing. The City Manager may, upon said hearing, sustain, suspend or
overrule the decision of the Fire Chief or his/her designee, which decision
shall be final and conclusive.



   B.   Pending the hearing before the city manager, the decision of
the Fire Chief or his/her designee shall remain in full force and effect and
any reversal thereof by the City Manager shall not be retroactive but shall
take effect as of the date of the city manager’s decision.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2010-19 § 1 (part), 2010:  Ord. 9921
§ 2 (part), 1999)



Article 2.  Imposition of Administrative Fines and Penalties for Dangerous
Fireworks



8.24.100   Purpose.



   A.   This article authorizes the imposition of administrative fines
or penalties on any person who violates any provision of this chapter.  Its
purpose is to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this
chapter for the benefit and protection of the entire community. Said
administrative fines are imposed under authority of Government Code Section
53069.4, Health and Safety Code Section 12557, and the police power of the
city.



   B.   The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be
performed at the discretion of the officials of the City of Visalia; and the
issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city
to redress violations of this code by any person. By adopting this article,
the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy,
civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this code by any person, which
this city may otherwise pursue.



   C.   The adoption of this article does not in any way affect or
repeal the California Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Visalia.



   D.   The imposition of fines related to “dangerous fireworks”
under this article shall be limited to persons, including responsible
persons, who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of, 25 pounds
or less (gross weight) of such dangerous fireworks.



   E.   Fines collected pursuant to this article related to
“dangerous fireworks” shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code
Section 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court
of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by, the County Treasurer.



   F.   The city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire
Marshal if required pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire
Marshal addressing the State Fire Marshal’s cost for the transportation and
disposal of “dangerous fireworks” seized by the city, which costs will be
part of any administrative fine imposed.  However, such cost reimbursement
shall not be required unless and until the State Fire Marshal provides
services for the disposal of “dangerous fireworks.”



   G.   Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the
use of “dangerous fireworks” that can result from persistent or repeated
failures to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such
conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of
surrounding properties and to the public health, safety and welfare, this
article imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real
property for all violations of this code existing on their residential real
property. Each contiguous use, display and/or possession shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.110   Issuance of administrative citations.



   Whenever a Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) determines that a violation
of the code has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a
city-approved form listing the code violation(s) and the amount of the
administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in
accordance with the provisions of this article and Visalia Municipal Code
Title 1, Chapter 1.13.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.120   Administrative fines.



   A.   Each person who violates any provision of this code, or any
provision of state law, as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale
and/or display of “dangerous fireworks” or each person that is considered
to be a “responsible person” for a location where dangerous fireworks are
possessed, used, stored, sold, or displayed, shall be subject to the
imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below:



 


Number of offenses

 

Amount of Administrative Penalty



First
 

$ 1,000



Second
 

$ 2,000



Third and subsequent violations
 

$ 3,000




 



   B.   Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or
discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation
of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a
continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.



   C.   For purposes of this article, in calculating the amount of an
administrative fine, the number of offenses shall include every offense
documented in the last three years, unless the citation was vacated pursuant
to an appeal.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.130   Right to an administrative hearing.



   Any citee may contest the violation(s) by filing a request for an
administrative hearing on a city-approved form with Code Enforcement within
20 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. Any



applicable administrative hearing fee imposed by the City of Visalia shall
apply at the then applicable rate.  If Code Enforcement does not receive the
request in the required time period, the citee shall have waived a right to a
hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.140   Administrative hearing procedures.



   The issuance of any citation pursuant to this article, the conduct of
any administrative hearing therefor, and any other matter of procedure not
addressed herein shall be conducted in accordance with Visalia Municipal Code
Chapter 1.13, except as otherwise provided herein.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



8.24.150   Administrative hearing—mitigating factors.



   A.   In cases where the citation is issued to a property owner, a
lessee, or a holder of a special events permit, parent or guardian of minors
caught with dangerous fireworks, as the responsible person, and the citee was
not present on the property at the time the citation was issued, it is a
defense to the citation that the citee, as the responsible person, did not
explicitly or implicitly consent to or condone the use of dangerous fireworks
on his or her property and could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable
care and diligence, control the use of dangerous fireworks on his or her
property and/or at his or her special event. The hearing officer may consider
the following factors in determining if the citee exercised reasonable care
and diligence:



   1.   Whether the citee provided express notice to relevant persons
that the use of dangerous fireworks is strictly prohibited at all times;



   2.   Whether, based on the circumstances known to the citee at the
time of the violation, the citee could have reasonably foreseen that
dangerous fireworks might be used, including, but not limited to, whether the
citee, any individual occupying the property, or any individual attending the
special event, has received, or otherwise been involved in, any citation
issued for the use of dangerous fireworks in the past five years;



   3.   Whether the citee took any reasonable measures designed to
ensure that dangerous fireworks would not be used, and if so, the extent and
effectiveness of such measures;



   4.   Any other information reasonably related to the citee’s
culpability, or lack thereof, with respect to permitting or allowing the use
of dangerous fireworks.



   B.   If, based on the considerations above, the hearing officer
determines that the citee took reasonably prudent action to prevent and
discourage the use of dangerous fireworks on the property, then the hearing
officer may vacate the citation or modify the amount of the penalty, as
appropriate.



(Ord. 2017-05 § 2 (part), 2017)



Chapter 8.28
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Sections:



8.28.010   Purpose and policy. 



8.28.020   Definitions.



8.28.030   City manager authorization.



8.28.040   Garbage collection service.



8.28.050   Minimum service requirements.



8.28.060   Waste not accepted by city.



8.28.070   Disabled exemption.



8.28.080   Establishment of rates, charges and fees.



8.28.090   Ownership/scavenging of refuse or rubble.



8.28.100   Containers requirements.



8.28.110   Special collection services.



8.28.120   Special temporary hauling.



8.28.130   Roll-off box franchised permittee requirements.



8.28.140   City provided temporary bin and roll-off box service.



8.28.150   Mandatory commercial and multi-family recycling requirements.
(AB 341)



8.28.160   Mandatory commercial and multi-family organic recycling
requirements. (AB 1826)



8.28.170   Administration.



8.28.180   Fee collection.



8.28.190   Late charges.



8.28.200   Delinquent fee and late charge collection.



8.28.210   Restrictions.



8.28.220   Enforcement.



8.28.010   Purpose and policy.



   The City of Visalia, in order to promote and protect the public and
refuse worker health and safety and to reduce the danger and hazards of fires
and conflagrations, reserves unto itself the exclusive right and power to
collect, transport, and dispose of, or to authorize, regulate, permit and
control said collections, transportation and disposition of all refuse and
rubble produced or found within the corporate limits of said city.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4030)



8.28.020    Definitions. 



   For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms are defined as
follows:



Types of waste:



   A.   "Bulky wastes" means and includes large items of solid waste
such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, large branches,
stumps, asphalt, concrete, large rock, and other oversize wastes of large
size which precludes or complicates handling by normal collection or disposal
methods.



   B.   "Commercial solid wastes" means and includes refuse generated
by stores, offices, and other commercial sources, excluding wastes from
residential single family and multi-family with less than 4 units, and
industrial wastes.



   C.   "Construction and demolition wastes" means and includes the
waste building materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements and structures.



   D.   "Garbage" includes:



      1.   All kitchen and table food waste and animal, fruit or
vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, sale, preparation,
cooking or handling of food stuffs;



      2.   Uncleaned containers originally used for foodstuffs;



      3.   Consists of every accumulation of animal, vegetable, and
other matter that attends the sale, preparation, consumption, dealing in or
storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits or vegetables;



      4.   All other abandoned putrescible organic matter.



      5.   The term garbage does not include dishwater or wastewater.



      6.   The term garbage does not include dead animals, medical
waste, hazardous waste, or household hazardous waste which the city will not
collect with its regular service.



   E.   "Hazardous wastes" is defined as any waste with properties that
make it potentially dangerous or harmful to human health or the environment.
Hazardous wastes can be liquids, solids, or contained gases, and can exhibit
the properties of being ignitable, corrosive, toxic or reactive to other
chemicals or substances.  They can be the by-products of manufacturing
processes, discarded used materials such as used oil, or discarded unused
products, such as paint, cleaning fluids (solvents) or pesticides. Also
includes any substance contaminated with hazardous waste, such as
contaminated soil or dirt.  Hazardous wastes are not collected or accepted
by City and must be disposed of at a properly licensed disposal facility.



   F.   "Household hazardous waste" means leftover household products
that contain corrosive, toxic, ignitable or reactive ingredients and includes
products such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries and pesticides that
contain potentially hazardous ingredients.  Improper disposal of these
wastes can pollute the environment and pose a health threat.  Household
hazardous waste may not be disposed of by pouring them down the drain, on the
ground, or into the storm sewers or by putting them in the trash.  Household
hazardous waste may be disposed of properly by taking it to the Household
Hazardous Waste collection center during normal operating hours.



   G.   "Industrial wastes" means and includes all types of solid
wastes that result from industrial processes and manufacturing operations.
Industrial wastes do not include wastes discharged to the sanitary sewer
system.



   H.   "Infectious waste" is defined as refuse capable of causing
infectious disease; items contaminated with blood, saliva, or other body
substances, or those actually or potentially infected with pathogenic
material.



   I.   "Medical waste" is defined as "any solid waste that is
generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of human beings or
animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of
biologicals." This definition includes, but is not limited to:



      1.   blood-soaked bandages



      2.   culture dishes and other glassware



      3.   discarded surgical gloves



      4.   discarded surgical instruments



      5.   discarded needles used to give shots or draw blood (e.g.,
medical sharps)



      6.   cultures, stocks, swabs used to inoculate cultures



      7.   removed body organs (e.g., tonsils, appendices, limbs)



      8.   discarded lancets



   J.   "Oils" are defined as any mineral, vegetable, or synthetic
substance or animal or vegetable fats that are generally slippery,
combustible, viscous, liquid or liquefiable at room temperatures, soluble in
various organic solvents such as ether but not in water.  Common oils
include but are not limited to:



      1.   Petroleum or a petroleum derivative, such as engine oil
or lubricants



      2.   Oil based paints



      3.   Cooking oil or fat



      4.   Fuels such as gasoline or diesel fuel



   K.   "Organic waste" means all organic putrescible materials
including food, leaves, grass, landscaping prunings, trimmings, branches,
stumps, compostable paper including food-soiled paper or cardboard products
and other compostable paper.  Organic wastes are included within the
definitions for garbage and refuse as outlined in this section.



   L.   "Putrescible wastes" means and includes wastes that are capable
of being decomposed by micro-organisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause
nuisances because of odors, gases, or other offensive conditions, and include
materials such as food wastes and offal.



   M.   "Recyclable wastes" means residential, commercial or industrial
solid waste, which includes but is not limited to clean CRV redeemable cans
and containers, clean recyclable plastics, paper and cardboard and other such
materials that are determined by the Director to be recyclable and are not
soiled or deteriorated. Recyclable wastes do not include treated or painted
wood or other materials that are coated with a toxic or non-compostable
substance. Recyclable wastes are included within the definitions for garbage,
refuse and rubble, as outlined in this section.



   N.    "Refuse" includes organic and inorganic waste, recyclable
waste and all other general material waste streams acceptable for collection
except rubble (defined below).  Refuse does not include Hazardous waste,
household hazardous waste, or other non-acceptable material.



   O.    "Residential wastes" means and includes all types of domestic
refuse which originate in dwelling units.



   P.   "Rubbish" means all organic or inorganic materials, not defined
herein as garbage or rubble, which are rejected, abandoned or discarded by
the owners or producers thereof, as offensive or useless or no longer desired
by such owners or producers. These materials include, but are not limited to,
corrugated cardboard, paper, wood, rags, used clothing, discarded or
abandoned bedding, discarded or abandoned carpets, discarded or abandoned oil
cloth and linoleum, sweepings, cuttings, or cleanings from buildings, yards,
lawns or gardens, bottles, tin cans or containers which have no food residue,
broken crockery and glassware, old metal, wire packing or wrapping materials,
ashes, trimmings from lawns, shrubs, plants or trees, rope, twine, jute,
bagging or burlap.



   Q.   "Rubble" means rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid
material; plaster, dirt and similar abandoned or discarded inorganic,
noncombustible, non-putrescible materials; building construction or
demolition waste materials; sod.



   R.   "Sod" is defined as soil with some type of grass or plant
growing in it, cut or dug up from the ground.



   S.   "Soil or dirt" is defined as the upper layer of earth in which
plants grow, a black or dark brown material typically consisting of a mixture
of organic remains, clay, and rock particles; dirt is loose soil.



   T.   "Solid waste" means any waste stream that is not in a
completely liquid or gaseous state.  Solid waste can contain some liquid,
but cannot be in a state where the material may leak or run out of the
container it is put in.  Residential food waste should be drained of as much
liquid as possible before disposing in a container.



   U.   "Trash" means organic and inorganic refuse that cannot be
recycled, composted, or otherwise reprocessed for beneficial use.



All other definitions:



   V.   "Automated lift container" means a container with a hinged lid
that is designed to be lifted, dumped, and returned by refuse collection
vehicles that have a mechanical lifting device.



   W.   "Authorized containers": The term refers to the types of
containers provided by the City that are authorized to be used for refuse
collection within the City.  Authorized containers are 96 gallon or smaller
automated lift containers provided by the city for residential refuse
collection. The Director must authorize in writing the use of any other type
container for residential refuse collection.  Refuse set out for collection
in any unauthorized or unapproved containers will not be serviced until the
refuse is placed in an authorized container for collection.



   X.   "Bin" or "automated lift bin" means a metal or composite
material 1 to 10 cubic yard container supplied by the city for a rental fee,
approved by the Director for the deposit of refuse (loose or compacted) which
shall:



      1.   Have a close-fitting cover for each compartment;



      2.   Be leak-proof if carrying wet wastes;



      3.   Be free of sharp, rough, or jagged surfaces or edges
likely to cause injury;



      4.   Uses casters or other means for easy movement (for bins
up to four cubic yards in size);



      5.   Be designed in a manner to be emptied mechanically.



   Y.   "Bundle" means a package containing rubbish only (no liquids),
not exceeding four feet in its longest dimension, two feet in diameter nor
twenty-five (25) pounds in weight, securely tied with cord or rope of
sufficient strength to permit lifting and carrying of the full weight thereof
without spillage including, but not limited to, the following:



      1.   Tree limbs;



      2.   Brush and prunings;



      3.   Magazines and newspapers.



   Z.   "Cart" see "automated refuse containers" above.



   AA.   "City" means the City of Visalia, California.



   BB.   "City council" means the city council of the City of Visalia.



   CC.   "City manager" means the city manager of the City of Visalia
or the manager's authorized deputy, agent, or representative.



   DD.   "Commercial Generator" means any commercial or industrial
property that generates solid waste, or multi-family dwelling of 5 or more
units.



   EE.   "Container" see "automated lift container" above.



   FF.   "County" means the County of Tulare, California.



   GG.   "Customer" means the person in whose name an account for solid
waste service is established.



   HH.   "Delinquent balance" means fees which are not paid in
accordance with the schedule established by the director as required by
Section 4044(F). At the time the fees become delinquent, they shall
constitute an unrecorded lien against the property.



   II.   "Director" or "Public Works Director" means the director(s) of
the department(s) responsible for carrying out the provisions of this
chapter, the City of Visalia Public Works Department.



   JJ.   "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion of a building
arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by not more than one family and
having facilities for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitary purposes.



   KK.   "Franchised permittee" means a permitted entity that provides
roll-off box service for the removal of construction and demolition material,
yard waste, or recyclable material within the City of Visalia and is subject
to the provisions of Section 130 of this Chapter.



   LL.   "Lien" means the delinquent balance of billed fees which may
be recorded or unrecorded.



   MM.   "May" is permissive.



   NN.   "Multiple family dwelling" means a dwelling complex, such as a
duplex or apartment, consisting of more than one dwelling unit.



   OO.   "Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health or is
offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
to interfere with a person's comfort or enjoyment of life or property, or
which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or
damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.



   PP.   "Overfull" means filled to a level in excess of the designed
capacity.  A container shall be deemed overfull when the material therein
extends above the lip of the container and/or the lid of the container is
unable to close fully.



   QQ.   "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, or any other entity that owns, controls or occupies any property
within the city.



   RR.   "Property" means each individual residential, commercial or
industrial establishment or dwelling unit, as defined by property lines.



   SS.   "Roll-off box" means a large (10 cubic yards to 40 cubic
yards) metal container approved by the Director for the deposit of refuse or
rubble which shall:



      1.   Be leak-proof if carrying wet wastes;



      2.   Be free of sharp, rough, or jagged surfaces or edges
likely to cause injury;



      3.   Have the ability to be covered with a tarpaulin, lid, or
other suitable covering;



      4.   Be compatible to be safely lifted onto city roll-off
trucks.



   TT.   "Shall" is mandatory.



   UU.   “Standard containers.”  See "authorized containers."



   VV.   "Temporary service" means limited-term service for bins and
roll-off boxes which may be requested for a period not to exceed 30 days in
any 12-month period, unless authorized by the Director or his or her
designee, and except for construction sites or work requiring a permit where
temporary service may be required for longer periods of time or where longer
terms are authorized in writing by the Director.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4032)



8.28.030   City Manager Authorization.



   The city manager is authorized to delegate authority and expend all
necessary resources in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The
city manager and/or his or her designee is also authorized to:



   A.   Establish residential and commercial minimum service required
to prevent accumulations of refuse and rubble which would lead to a threat to
the health and safety of the citizens of the city;



   B.   Set policies and standards for efficient and effective refuse
and rubble collection and disposal services;



   C.   Recommend to the city council revisions to fees and charges for
regular service which are needed to insure that all refuse and rubble
collection, transport, and disposal costs, both direct and indirect, are met;



   D.   Set charges for service not specified in the rates adopted by
resolution by the city council;



   E.   Enforce the rules and regulations contained in this chapter;



   F.   For commercial accommodations or units under this chapter, the
Director shall have the authority to establish appropriate service variances
in applying this chapter.  Such variance shall be at the sole discretion of
the Director. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4031)



8.28.040   Garbage collection service.



   A.   Subscription Required. Any and all person(s) as defined in this
chapter in possession or control of all places and premises within the city
shall be required to use, and shall pay for refuse and rubble collection and
disposal services provided by the city, as found by the Director to be
necessary to allow for removal of all refuse and rubble normally created,
accumulated or produced on the premises during the intervals between regular
collections.



   B.   Storage of Refuse. It shall be the duty of every owner of any
private dwelling unit, apartment house, flat, commercial or industrial
establishment, restaurant, eating house, boarding house, or other building
generating garbage as defined in Section 8.28.020 to provide, and at all
times to keep within the building or on the lot on which the building is
situated, sufficient automatic lift containers, bins and/or roll-off boxes to
allow storage of all refuse and rubble normally accumulated on the premises
during the intervals between regular collections without spillage, escape of
odors, fly breeding, or creation of any nuisance.



      1.   Owners of any residential, commercial or industrial zoned
property shall provide sufficient space on the property to store all
permanent service containers, bins or roll-off boxes being used to collect
all waste streams generated on the property (temporary service bins or boxes
may be stored in an appropriate location on the street during the term of
service as defined below in section 8.28.140.D). 



         a.   Residential containers shall be stored on the
property off the street during non-collection days and in a location where
the containers cannot be easily viewed from the public right of way. 



         b.   In order to maintain cleanliness, restrict public
view, contain waste spillage and restrict access, all bins used for waste
collection must be stored on the property in approved enclosure(s) built to
City standards, with a minimum of 40' clearance in front of the enclosure to
allow direct stab access by the collection trucks.  Enough enclosure space
shall be allocated to provide a minimum of one 10'-6" (inside dimensions)
wide storage area for each waste stream or bin on the property (for example
if trash, recyclables and organics are required to be separately collected on
the property, three single enclosures or one double enclosure and one single
enclosure are required).



         c.   If the City determines it is unfeasible or unsafe
to locate the enclosure(s) on the property for direct stab service
accessibility, at his or her discretion, the Public Works Director may
authorize the execution of a written agreement with the property owner and
recorded with the property, to allow the owner or tenant to roll the bin(s)
out to the street for collection by 4 am on service days and roll them back
in after collection.  However, all bins are required to be stored on the
property in enclosures built to city standards on non-service days.



         d.   Commercial and industrial roll-off box service
shall be located on the property so as to provide a minimum of 40' clear
space in front of the box or compactor to allow room for the truck to line up
and load or unload the box/compactor.  Drive path on the property from the
public right-of-way to the roll-off box/compactor shall be constructed to
withstand the weight of a 56,000 lb. truck.



         e.   Any exceptions to the above requirements must be
authorized in writing by the Public Works Director or designee.



      2.   Owners or tenants of a property shall be responsible to
maintain and clean/pick up any spillage or littering of refuse or rubble
prior to the container, bin or box being serviced, regardless of who caused
the spillage or littering.



      3.   The city reserves the right to require the exclusive use
of city-provided automatic lift containers, bins, and/or roll-off boxes for
all regular refuse and rubble collection services provided by the city.



   C.   Source Separation Required. All residential, commercial and
industrial accounts in the city, except those specifically exempted in this
chapter or in writing by the Public Works Director, must source separate
their recyclable waste and organic waste, and place each type in a separate
container designated for that specific type of collection.



      1.   Contamination.  No person may mix refuse and rubble of
one type in a collection container designated for another type, except as
otherwise provided in this Chapter. A violation of this section shall
constitute an infraction, and result in the contaminated container(s) being
left unserviced, with a tag placed on the container describing the violation
and why the container was left unserviced and notifying the customer of any
actions or fines being assessed.  Customer is required to correct the
contamination issue prior to the container being serviced.  Repeated
instances of contamination may result in higher service fees to service the
contaminated container.



      2.   Curbside Special Program.  Residential accounts in good
standing are provided three (3) curbside special collections in any given
12-month period.  Each curbside special collection may consist of servicing
one (1) standard residential container of any type, or up to 10 items or
bundles.  Loose items or bundles cannot measure more than 48" long on any
side, and cannot weigh over 25 pounds. Each loose item must be able to be
lifted and carried by one person, and each container or loose item must
conform to the content restrictions as listed in section 8.28.060.A.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.050   Minimum Service Requirements.



   A.   Manner of Subscription and Payment. The owner of the property
is ultimately responsible for ensuring each property/dwelling unit owned
subscribes to and pays for minimum service as defined in this section. 
Non-payment by a tenant or lessee for services rendered can be cause for the
tenant's account to be closed and sent to collections in the tenant's name,
and the property address\account to then be placed in the property owner's
name with the property owner receiving the account billing and held
responsible for payment going forward.  This condition will continue for a
minimum of 3 years before the account can again be placed in a tenant or
lessee's name for billing and/or payment.



   B.   Prior to occupancy, a property owner or tenant must establish
appropriate utility service for the property, including solid waste
services.  Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.  City reserves
the right, at the sole discretion of the Director, to establish utility
service for the property in either the tenant or property owner's name and to
make such service effective as of date of occupancy, as determined by the
Director.



   C.   Failure of a tenant to establish service prior to occupancy
may, at the sole discretion of the Director, result in City establishing
utility service for the property in property owner's name, effective as of
date of occupancy, as determined by the Director.



   D.   Minimum Container Service, single family residential. 



      1.   Prior to January 1, 2019, one split container for trash
and recyclable material and one undivided container for organic waste shall
be the minimum refuse service for each dwelling unit or each unit of a
multiple dwelling unit complex, not to exceed three units, unless authorized
by the Director. The Director may authorize or require alternative automatic
lift container services to be shared by two units of a multiple dwelling unit
complex or mobile home park.



      2.   Beginning January 1, 2019, one container for trash, one
container for recyclables, and one container for organic wastes shall be the
minimum refuse service for each dwelling unit or each unit of a multiple
dwelling unit complex, not to exceed three units, unless authorized by the
Director. The Director may authorize or require alternative automatic lift
container services to be shared by two units of a multiple dwelling unit
complex, or mobile home park.



      3.   Each business permitted to operate at a residential
single family property address (herein referred to as "home business") and
that generates waste shall have its own waste service separate from the
residential waste service.  Home business waste services may be either
residential container service or commercial bin service, but in no case shall
be less than 1 bin or container (or split bin or container for two waste
streams) per waste stream, serviced a minimum of one time per week, as
determined by a waste assessment. 



         a.   If there is little or no measurable waste generated
by the home business as determined by a waste assessment and the customer
requests a waiver in writing to the Director, the Director may waive the
requirement for waste service for the home business and/or allow the existing
residential service to be shared by the residence and the business.



   E.   Minimum Service - Commercial, Industrial and Multi Family (4 or
more units).  Minimum service for all commercial and multi-family units 4
units or more shall be determined by a waste stream assessment conducted with
the customer either on site or remotely by City staff.  A waste assessment
will determine the volume of demand for each waste stream generated on site,
and the appropriate bin size and service frequency required to accommodate
each of the generated waste streams in order to remove all waste generated on
site in a timely manner and not allow waste to accumulate or become a
nuisance. 



      1.   In the event a determination is made that the site does
not generate enough waste to warrant bin service, or where bin service would
be impractical or unfeasible, the Director may grant an exception and allow
residential containers to be used for the service, but in no case shall
minimum service be less than one (1) residential container for each waste
stream generated on site.



   F.   Frequency of Collection. 



      1.   Service to residential single dwelling units and multiple
dwelling unit complexes shall be at the rate of a minimum of one collection
per week for each container type (split, greenwaste, trash or recyclable).



      2.   Bin or box service to multi-family complexes exceeding 3
units, boarding houses, hotels and motels, restaurants, and all other
commercial establishments generating garbage shall be at the rate of a
minimum of one collection per week, and bin/box size and service frequency
shall be sufficient enough to accommodate the waste streams generated on
site, unless otherwise authorized by the Director.



   G.   Where a curbside recyclable waste collections program, or other
special collection program as authorized by the city is implemented, the
Director has the authority to designate some of the collections identified in
Section 8.28.040 through Section 8.28.070 to be used exclusively for such a
program.



   H.   The owners of all premises upon which refuse or rubble is
produced or accumulated shall subscribe for service as herein required and
shall be given the type and frequency of service, according to the rates set
forth by the city council, that will, in the opinion of the Director, cause
all refuse and rubble to be removed from the premises, so there will be no
accumulation, collection and keeping of the same, on the premises to the
detriment of public health and/or convenience.



      1.   The city reserves the right, upon notice to the primary
account owner, to increase the number, bin size and/or frequency of service
on an account if it is determined that the current level of service is
insufficient to accommodate the waste stream(s) being generated, or if the
compactor or box is repeatedly overfull or overweight at current service
levels.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.060   Waste Not Accepted by City.



   A.   Wastes that will not be collected by the city, except as
provided in subsection E, include but may not be limited to the following:



      1.   Ammunition or other explosive or combustible materials;



      2.   Dead animals;



      3.   Hazardous waste;



      4.   Hot ashes;



      5.   Infectious waste;



      6.   Medical Waste;



      7.   Oils;



      8.   Soil or dirt.



   B.   Certain wastes shall not be collected by the city in automated
lift containers, except as provided in subsection E, including, but not be
limited to the following:



      1.   Axles;



      2.   Brick;



      3.   Building blocks;



      4.   Concrete;



      5.   Heavy machinery parts;



      6.   Large appliances;



      7.   Rocks;



      8.   Soil or dirt;



      9.   Sod.



   These wastes may be placed in an appropriate roll-off box or bin for
collection.



   C.   Overweight Loads:  Heavy material placed in bins or roll-off
boxes cannot exceed the allowable gross transport weight for the trucks. 
Overweight bins or boxes will not be serviced until they are reduced to an
allowable weight by the customer.  Maximum roll-off box weight shall not
exceed seven (7) tons.  All loads must not exceed established Department of
Transportation (DOT) requirements on road weight limits.



   D.   The city shall not collect hazardous wastes or infectious
wastes, either alone or mixed with other matter which would normally be
collected, unless the city establishes specific collection services for such
wastes that meets all applicable state and federal rules and regulations.



   E.   Certain waste listed under subsections A and B of this section
may be collected as part of special collection services as established by the
city. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.070   Disabled Exemption.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or any other
provisions of the city code to the contrary, an exemption from placing a
container at the curb as described in Section 8.28.100C may be made, upon
approval of an application to the Director, to certain service users. If
approved, a "pack out" service will be provided free of charge, where the
operator will roll the containers out from the house, service them and roll
them back (containers cannot be in garages or behind fences).  The requester
must attest and provide verifiable documentation that:



   A.   They are physically unable to place a full waste container at
the curb (must provide a doctor's note attesting that individual is
physically unable to place refuse containers curbside or roll them back after
service), AND



   B.   They can demonstrate financial inability to subscribe or pay
for assistance in moving a container to the curb, as determined by the
current standards for household low income thresholds by the California
Alternative Rates for Energy program (CARE).  This can be done by providing
a copy of the most current year signed IRS tax form or copies of the last
three (3) employers pay stubs, AND



   C.   There is no other able bodied person living or staying more
than 2 hours a day during the week at the address or available that is
physically able to place a full waste container curbside.



   The Director is authorized to set standards, terms and conditions for
said exemptions. The exemption provided for in this section shall be applied
for on a form provided by the city and will allow the recipient to receive
in-yard service exempt from the applicable curbside "packout" fee as
established by resolution of the city council. Customers not qualifying for
an exemption but still desiring to have their containers packed out must
apply for the service and pay the applicable fee for the service as set forth
and approved by City Council in the City's Rates and Fees. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.080   Establishment of Rates, Charges and Fees.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other provision in
the Municipal Code to the contrary, except as outlined in Section 8.28.030C,
the rates, charges and fees for regular service established or provided for
in this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council. Fees
for extra or special service shall be set by the Director.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4043)



8.28.090   Ownership/Scavenging of Refuse or Rubble.



   A.   All refuse or rubble placed in containers designated for refuse
or rubble provided by city or franchised permittee shall be considered owned
by and be the responsibility of the city, or franchised permittee. Without
permission of the city or franchised permittee, no person shall be allowed to
remove waste or materials placed in such a container.



   B.   All materials placed in recyclable materials containers
provided or owned by the generator, shall be considered owned by and be the
responsibility of that generator until the material is placed at a city or
franchised permittee's designated point of collection, or in containers as
described below on Section 8.28.100.



   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of collecting, removing or transporting, or otherwise organize or direct the
collection, removal or transportation of any recyclable materials without
first registering as a franchisee with the City.



   D.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or
failing to comply with the mandatory requirements of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.  At the discretion of the enforcement officer, the
violation may alternatively be charged as an infraction or an administrative
code violation. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.100   Container Requirements.



   A.   Container—Usage.



      1.   The city has determined that automatic lift container
service will be the regular service for all single dwelling units and
multiple dwelling unit complexes (three units or less), except where such
service, in the opinion of the Director, is impracticable or not feasible.
The Director has the authority to require automatic lift container service at
any refuse collection service account within the city, where such designation
will benefit the city through more efficient and economic collection
services. The city will provide automatic lift containers, unless otherwise
authorized by the Director, to all accounts where such service is required.



      2.   Containers, including automatic lift containers, bins and
boxes provided by the city, and container/bin enclosures shall be kept in a
sanitary condition by property owners and persons in possession or control
thereof.



         a.   Containers, including automatic lift containers,
bins and boxes provided by the city shall not be overfilled by the user.  A
container shall be deemed overfull when the material therein extends above
the lip of the container and/or the lid is unable to close fully. 



         b.   Overfilled containers may not be serviced if, in
the opinion of the solid waste operator, servicing of the container could
likely result in solid waste material being spilled to the ground or damage
to the waste collection equipment.  If an overfilled container was scheduled
for collection and it could not be collected due to noncompliance with the
provisions of this section, a collection fee shall be charged. The customer
must remove any excess material prior to the container being serviced and may
call to reschedule service, if required. A fee for additional service shall
apply and shall be determined by the Director.



      3.   Ashes placed in containers, bins or boxes shall be wet
down thoroughly by owners at least one day prior to placing them in a
container for collection as a protection to city employees and city
equipment. 



      4.   Except for foodwaste placed in an organics collection
container, bin or box, all wet refuse must be bagged.



      5.   Any boxes, barrels, packing or wrapping materials, or
empty cardboard containers left upon any public street, alley or sidewalk
within the city continuously for a period of six hours or more shall be
deemed to be abandoned by the owners and constitute rubbish within the
meaning of the term as used in this chapter and shall be subject to be
collected and disposed of by the city pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.  Cost of disposal shall be charged to the owner.



      6.   The Director may permit containers of different capacity
when, in his or her opinion, it is impossible or impracticable, because of
location, construction or other physical characteristics of the premises, to
comply with the capacity limitations outlined in this chapter; provided
further, that in the event the Director so determines, the Director may
impose such conditions as he or she may deem necessary to, or convenient
upon, the use, location, collection, and physical characteristics of any such
containers.



      7.   It is unlawful to have, store, deposit, or keep any waste
where rats or any other disease vector can have access thereto or feed
thereon. (Prior code § 4034)



   B.   Containers—Types.  It is unlawful to keep, place, or deposit
garbage on any private grounds or premises whatsoever, except in containers
as designated in this section.



      1.   Automatic Lift Containers.



         a.   Only the city-authorized automatic lift containers
may be used in automatic lift container service areas.



      2.   Bins. 



         a.   The city will collect appropriately designed
commercial compactor bins which have a capacity not exceeding 40 cubic yards.



         b.   Non-city provided compactor bins must be compatible
with city collection equipment and their use must be approved in writing by
the Director.



         c.   The city will provide all non-compactor bins with a
capacity of two, three, four, six, eight or ten cubic yards for an
appropriate rental fee. Additional bin sizes may be available with Director
approval.  Privately owned or private hauler provided bins are not
authorized for any waste stream or service collected by the city.



         d.   Bins, except for six cubic yard and higher capacity
bins, must be on rolling casters for easy mobility unless, upon approval of
the Director, they are located where city collections equipment can easily
access the bins. Bin and enclosure locations shall be as directed by the city.



         e.   For collection, the area surrounding the bins, the
enclosure and the access path to the bins or enclosures must be cleared of
obstacles that may block or impair the ability to service the bins. Bins must
not be overfull or overweight. In addition, any access gates that would
prevent servicing the bin must be opened, or keys or codes provided to the
City. The bin shall be placed such that a minimum of two feet of space is
available on all sides.



         f.   If the bin was scheduled for collection and it
could not be collected due to noncompliance with the provisions of this
section, a collection fee shall be charged. The customer must call to
schedule additional service, if required. The fees for additional service
shall be determined by the Director.



      3.   Boxes (Roll-Off).



         a.   The city will provide regular collection service to
customers who own or rent commercial compactor roll-off boxes compatible with
city collection equipment. All boxes not rented from the city must be
approved by the Director prior to obtaining service.



         b.   All locations for boxes must be approved by the
Director.



         c.   Boxes shall not be filled above the top so that
they can be easily tarped. Overfull boxes will not be collected.



         d.   Gross vehicle weight for roll-off trucks cannot
exceed 52,000 pounds. The maximum safe load weight (material only) to avoid
being overweight is seven (7) tons.  Boxes which, when filled, exceed the
weight limits for gross vehicle weight and individual axle weights
established by the state, will not be collected unless and until the excess
material and weight is reduced to a safe legal limit by the customer. 
Additional fees and charges may be incurred for additional trips and/or
service.



         e.   For collection, the area surrounding the box must
be cleared of any obstacles that may block the box, and the rear doors of the
box must be securely closed. In addition, any gates that would prevent
servicing of the box must be opened or a key or gate code provided to the
City. A clearance of forty (40) feet is required in front of the box to
enable collection.



         f.   If the box was scheduled for collection and it
could not be collected due to noncompliance with the provisions of this
section, a collection fee shall be charged. The customer must correct the
noncompliance and then call to schedule additional service, if required. The
fees for additional service shall be determined by the Director.



   C.   Placing Containers for Collection.  All regular residential
container collection will be provided from the curb. Certain commercial bin
and roll-off box service may be authorized by the Director to be collected at
other locations. The Director has the authority to determine what sizes of
automatic lift containers will be used at any and all locations.



      1.   Container(s) for receiving garbage, rubbish or waste
matter must be placed for collection only in the gutter area of a street, not
in alleys, on the sidewalk, on a footpath, or on any other public place and
only in accordance with rules and regulations established under this chapter
for the collection of same.



      2.   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter,
any person occupying property upon which refuse or rubble is produced shall
place the refuse and/or rubble out for collection in an approved or City
provided container, bin or roll-off box. Any container(s) placed for curbside
collection shall be placed in the gutter so as to minimize interference with
traffic.



      3.   The handles of automatic lift containers shall be placed
with the handles away from the truck (toward the sidewalk) for collection.
For collection, automatic lift containers shall be within one foot of the
curb, two feet from obstructions such as fences, posts and mailboxes, and ten
feet from parked cars, boats, trailers, portable sports equipment, and
similar obstructions. If there is more than one automatic lift container,
then the containers shall be placed at least two feet apart.



      4.   Containers shall be placed at ground level and shall be
located such that they will not be a public nuisance, impede traffic, or be
in any degree offensive.



      5.   Automatic lift container(s), and any other containers as
authorized by the Director, shall be placed for collection no earlier than
seven p.m. standard time or eight p.m. daylight savings time, the evening
prior to the scheduled collection day, and must be available for collection
at curbside no later than six a.m. on the day of collection. The container or
containers shall be removed from the curb no later than seven p.m. on the day
of collection. Bins and roll-off boxes placed curbside for collection (except
for temporary service) shall meet the time requirement as authorized above,
except that they must be available for collection no later than four a.m. on
the day of collection, unless otherwise authorized by the Director. Temporary
service bins and roll-off boxes may be left at the curb for the term of
service.



      6.   All bins (except for temporary service), when not placed
out for collection, must be kept on the property in appropriate enclosures
meeting design specifications issued by the Director, or in locations
approved by the Director.



      7.   It shall be an infraction to have permanent service
containers, bins or boxes placed in such a manner that they are easily
visible from public right-of-way on days of no scheduled collection. The
Director may extend a waiver of this provision upon application from the
property owner. A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4036)



8.28.110   Special Collection Services.



   The city may establish a separate and special collection service for
recyclable wastes, including organic wastes, and establish specific
guidelines for such service, which are consistent with the rules and
regulations contained within this chapter. The city may also establish or
authorize a recyclable waste processing franchise(s) to separate out and
process separately collected recyclable wastes.



   A.   It is an infraction to place anything other than recyclable
materials, as defined by the Director, into recycling collection containers.



   B.   Recyclable Material. Unless otherwise provided by contract,
recyclable materials, including but not limited to paper, glass, cardboard,
plastics, ferrous metal, aluminum, and other waste materials which are
segregated for the purpose of recycling and placed in authorized containers
at the designated collection location, may not be removed by anyone other
than the city or authorized collection agent of the city.



   C.   The city may provide special collection services for collection
of refuse in excess of amounts normally collected or at a time other than the
normal scheduled route, and for special, hard-to-handle, and/or bulky wastes.
The fees will be based on the cost of providing the services.



   D.   The city may provide refuse and rubble collection service
outside the city limits according to service schedules and for fees as
prepared by the Director and approved by the city council and the county.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4037)



8.28.120   Special Hauling.



   Except as provided in Section 8.28.130 below, any owner of any premises
may contract only with the city for special haul service for the removal of
refuse or rubble in residential containers or commercial bins or boxes,
except construction, demolition, tree trimming and yard maintenance
contractors may remove rubble and/or recyclables produced as a result of
their contract service if transported in equipment owned by the contractor,
and only upon receiving authorization in writing from the Director for
removal of construction rubble and recyclables.



   A.   In addition to the required minimum refuse services as
determined in section 8.28.050 above and provided by the City or its
authorized designee, an owner or occupant of any premises may self-haul
refuse and rubble generated on their premises to an appropriate county
disposal site, another city-designated sanitary fill site, hazardous waste
collection site, or organics or recycling collection facility.  The owner or
occupant is, however, still required to maintain minimum City provided refuse
services as defined in section 8.28.050 above, and pay all associated fees
for the service as established by the city.



   B.   All refuse and rubble hauled by any person (or firm) over
public streets in the city shall be securely covered during hauling thereof
so as to prevent leakage, spillage, or blowing. No person shall allow refuse
or rubble of any kind whatsoever to leak, spill, blow or drop from any
vehicle onto any public street within the city. The cost of cleanup
associated with any such spillage shall be borne by the owner of the vehicle
transporting the material. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.130   Roll-off Box Franchised Permittee Requirements.



   Any owner of any premises may contract with a franchise permittee for
removal of construction and demolition and or recyclable materials collected
in roll-off boxes or compactors only. Additionally, any provider of
construction, demolition and yard maintenance services may contract for
roll-off box services with a franchise permittee for removal of construction
and demolition and/or recyclables generated as result of their services. The
Director may issue a franchise permit to contractors to provide services
pursuant to this section subject to the following conditions and limitations:



   A.   Franchise Permit. A franchise permit must be acquired before
any roll-off bin services can be provided within the city limits. The
franchise permit shall be for the duration of one year. It may be renewed
annually provided the permit holder has complied with all terms and
conditions of this section.



   B.   Reporting.  All franchise permittees will be required to
report quarterly.  The report shall include a listing of all boxes in the
franchise permittee's inventory by serial number and size, the location of
each box in service in the city limits, what type of material the box is
collecting, how many times each box has been emptied during the reporting
period, and tonnage of each load. 



   C.   Franchise Fee. All franchise permittees will be required to pay
a quarterly franchise fee at the time they submit their quarterly report. The
private contractor will pay twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per roll off box per
empty that was placed in service during the reporting period. In January of
every year there will be an increase in the franchise fee per empty based on
the consumer price index. (U.S. CPI-U) Fees are due to the city by the
fifteenth of April, July, October and January.



   D.   Franchise Fee Exceptions.  There shall be no exceptions
granted to the franchise permit and fee requirement, except as granted by the
Public Works Director on a case-by-case basis.  The franchise fee and
franchise permit process shall not apply in instances involving a hauler
paying persons or entities to obtain recyclable materials as provided for in
this section.  The hauler must provide proof of payment to the Public Works
Director for each roll off box in service.  Without submitting proof of
payment for materials collected, the hauler will be presumed to be in
violation of the franchise fee requirement.



   E.   Inspection. All franchise permittee equipment utilized to
perform the services authorized by the franchise permit shall be subject to
inspection by the Director or the Director's delegated representative.  All
such equipment shall meet state regulations and requirements and be inspected
as required by such regulations.  It shall be maintained in good working
order.  Such equipment, other inspection reports and maintenance records
shall be subject to inspection by the Director or the Director's
representative at any time upon reasonable notice.



   F.   Roll-Off Boxes. All roll-off boxes utilized to provide the
services authorized by the franchise permit shall meet city specifications
and be identified with a unique serial number. The city shall be provided all
vehicle identification license plate numbers for vehicles used to transport
construction, demolition and recyclable waste. Roll-off boxes must be covered
while transporting to prevent materials from blowing out along public streets
or otherwise escaping from such vehicle.



   G.   Proof of Insurance and Business License. The franchise
permittee shall provide copies of required vehicle insurance, worker's
compensation insurance, comprehensive general liability insurance and
evidence of business license.



   H.   Record Maintenance. The franchise permittee shall maintain
records of all demolition, construction and/or recyclable materials hauled
pursuant to the permits granted under this section. Such records shall
indicate where such demolition, construction and/or recyclable materials were
disposed. Records must be kept for a period of at least five years and shall,
upon reasonable request, be made available to the Director or Director's
delegated representative for inspection.



   I.   Right to Audit. The Director or Director's delegated
representative may conduct an audit of the franchise permit holder's records
upon reasonable notice. The purpose of such audit will be to determine that
the franchise permittee has complied with all the provisions of this section
with respect to hauling demolition, construction and/or recyclable materials.
Such audit may also be for the purpose whether the franchise permit holder
has paid the requisite franchise fees as mandated by the provisions of this
section. 



   J.   City Right to Revoke Franchise Permit.  The Director may
revoke the franchise permit provided under this section for failure of the
franchise permit holder to comply with the terms and conditions of this
section or make required franchise fee payments to the city.  In the event
the Director determines that the franchise permit holder has failed to comply
with the terms of this ordinance or to make the requisite franchise fee
payments, the Director shall notify the franchise permit holder of his or her
intention to revoke the permit in writing at least fifteen (15) days prior to
such revocation.  The franchise permit holder may request a hearing before
the Director to contest the proposed revocation of the permit and present
evidence to support his or her position.  After the conduct of such hearing
the Director shall make a written finding with respect to the revocation of
the franchise permit which determination shall be final.  The Director may
also determine not to renew a permit if he or she finds that the permit
holder has been in violation of the terms and conditions of this section or
has failed to pay the franchise fees as required by this section.



   K.   Each franchised permittee shall provide information to each of
its customers about recycling services as follows:



      1.   Types of recyclable materials accepted, the location of
recycling Containers, and the customer's responsibility to recycle pursuant
to this section. This information shall be distributed to all customers
annually;



      2.   All new customers shall be given information and
instructions upon establishment of service with the franchised permittee; and



      3.   All customers shall be given new information and
instructions upon any change in recycling service.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.140   City Provided Temporary Bin and Roll-off Box Service.



   The city may provide temporary bin and roll-off box service for
residential accounts or areas upon application for such service, and upon a
finding by the Director that regular service would not be appropriate.
Temporary service may be authorized for short-term, intermittent refuse
and/or rubble collection needs. Temporary service shall not be authorized to
replace regular, minimum service.



   A.   Length of Service.  Except for verified permitted construction
projects, temporary bin or roll-off service will not be authorized for a
period longer than 30 days within any given 12 month period, unless
authorized by the Director or his or her designee.  This is to minimize
unsightly appearance, opportunity for illegal dumping and/or scavenging and
congestion/loss of parking that temporary bins or boxes can cause in a
neighborhood. 



   B.   Priority.  Temporary service requests are accepted on a
first-call, first-service basis.



   C.   Location.  Bins provided by the city for temporary service
shall be placed for curbside collection no later than four a.m. on the
morning of scheduled collection. The bin shall be placed such that a minimum
of four feet of space is available on all sides of the bin so the bin may be
serviced. The bin shall not be overfull or overweight. If the bin was
scheduled for collection and it could not be collected due to noncompliance
with the provisions of this section, a minimum collection fee shall be
charged to the account of the customer. The customer must correct the
noncompliance and then call to reschedule collection service.



   D.   Temporary Roll-off Boxes. For collection, the area surrounding
the box must be cleared of any obstacles that may block the box, and the rear
doors of the box must be securely closed. The box shall not be overfull or
overweight. In addition, any gates that would prevent servicing of the box
must be opened, or a key or gate code supplied to the City. A clearance of
forty (40) feet is needed in front of the box to enable collection. If the
box was scheduled for collection and it could not be collected due to
noncompliance with the provisions of this section, a minimum collection fee
will be charged to the account of the customer. The customer must correct the
noncompliance and then call to reschedule collection service. (Prior code §
4039)



   E.   Responsibility.  It will be the responsibility of the person
renting the temporary bin or box to ensure that the container:



      1.   Does not create an unsightly or unsafe environment around
the container in the neighborhood where the container is placed or being
used.  Complaints from the public about the container or its contents may be
cause for the city to remove the container and not allow temporary bin or box
rental at that location.



      2.   Does not become over full or have rubble or rubbish
placed, dropped or scattered around the container.  The area around the
container shall be kept clean and free of debris at all times.



      3.   Is not subject to or available for illegal dumping or
scavenging.  It will be the responsibility of the person renting the
temporary bin or box to properly collect and dispose of any materials
illegally dumped, scavenged or scattered in or around the bin or box. 



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.150   Commercial and Multi-Family Recycling Requirements.



   A.   Each generator of commercial solid waste or multi-family
dwellings of 5 or more units, referred to herein as a "Commercial generator",
shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the
requirements of this section. Nothing in this section shall preclude any
person from self-hauling recyclable materials generated by that person to a
recycling facility.



   B.   Commercial Generator Self-haul. A commercial generator may
transport recyclable materials generated at its business or property to a
recycling facility only if the commercial generator completes its activity by
utilizing a vehicle owned by either the commercial generator or generator's
employee. This self-haul exemption does not include contracting with a third
party to transport the recyclable materials except as permitted herein. A
self-hauler must retain on-site a self-hauling form certifying that all
self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with this section or
any other applicable law or regulation. The self-hauling form shall be made
available to the Public Works Director or designee upon request. At a
minimum, the Commercial generator shall provide the following information on
the self-hauling form:



      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the Commercial
generator's representative that will be signing the self-hauling form.



      2.   A list of the types of recyclable materials that are
being transported.



      3.   For each type of recyclable material, the amount that is
being taken from the Commercial generator's business or property to a
recycling facility on a quarterly basis.



      4.   The name and address of the recycling facility.



      5.   A written statement, signed by the Commercial generator
or representative, certifying that the generator is in compliance with the
requirements of this Section.



         a.   The Public Works Director or designee may restrict
or prohibit self-hauling by a Commercial generator if it is determined that
after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Commercial
generator's self-hauling activities violate the provisions of this section or
any other applicable law or regulation.



   C.   On-site Practices.



      1.   Each Commercial generator shall use separate and readily
identifiable containers to collect and store recyclable materials and shall
designate areas to collect and/or store recyclable materials.



      2.   Each Commercial generator shall prominently post and
maintain one or more signs in maintenance or work areas or common areas where
recyclable materials are collected and/or stored that specify the materials
to be recycled and how to recycle such material.



      3.   Each Commercial generator shall notify and instruct
employees or tenants in writing of applicable recycling requirements,
including outreach and training on what materials are required to be recycled
and how to recycle such material. A copy of such instruction or training
materials shall be provided to the Public Works Director or designee upon
request.



   D.   All recyclable materials shall be placed for collection in city
provided or approved covered containers. No container shall be loaded beyond
its capacity. It shall be the Commercial generator's responsibility to keep
the containers used for the storage and collection of recyclable material
generated on the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. No material or
containers shall be kept or handled in such a manner as to become a nuisance.
No recyclable material shall be allowed to become odoriferous or a producer
of vermin. Lids on containers shall remain closed at all times while stored
or placed for collection. The Public Works Director is specifically
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding any and all
recyclable material containers including organic containers and as related to
the recyclable materials to be placed therein, the placement and maximum
weight of high-density materials for collection and the proper use of
containers.



   E.   Required Collection of Recyclable Materials. Each commercial
generator shall arrange for the collection of recyclable material through one
of the following methods:



      1.   Utilize the recycling services of city; or



      2.   Enter into a written service agreement with a franchised
permittee or enter into a written service agreement with recycling business
that pays the commercial generator for recyclable materials collected and is
exempt from city franchise requirements. Should the commercial generator
choose to enter into an agreement with a franchised permittee, the commercial
generator shall be responsible for verifying that the franchised permittee
holds a valid business license with the city and is a permitted franchise
hauler within the City limits; or



      3.   Self haul recyclable materials generated on site;
complete and retain on-site a self-hauling form certifying that all
self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with this ordinance
or any other applicable law or regulation. A copy of such form shall be
available to the Public Works Director upon request.



      4.   Each commercial generator entering into a written service
agreement with a franchised permittee or self-hauling recyclable materials
shall ensure all recyclable materials are source separated.



      5.   Recycling service agreements and all other recycling
documents shall be available for inspection by the Public Works Director or
designee at the principal location of the Commercial generator's business,
Commercial facility, special event, or non-residential property during normal
business hours.



      6.   Each commercial generator shall ensure that recyclable
materials generated at the Commercial generator's site will be taken only to
a recycling or composting facility or make other arrangements to ensure that
the materials are recycled or composted and not delivered to a landfill for
disposal. Commercial generators shall not dispose of, or arrange for disposal
of recyclable materials by placement in a landfill except in an emergency
situation, or when no viable markets or recycling facilities are available,
as determined by the Public Works Director. Further, all Commercial
generators are encouraged to consider recycling additional materials, whether
or not they have been specifically designated by the Public Works Director.



   F.   Commercial and multi-family recycling exemption. The following
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:



      1.   The State of California, a special district or other
local public agency other than the City, as defined, or any employee thereof,
when collecting or transporting recyclable materials produced by operation or
system of the entities described above.



      2.   Municipal corporations and governmental agencies other
than City using their own vehicles and employees engaged in the collection,
transportation or disposal of recyclable materials within the boundaries of
the City.



      3.   A Commercial generator shall be exempt from the
requirements in this section if the business, commercial facility or
non-residential property:



         a.   generates less than 4 cubic yards of commercial
solid waste per week. This exemption does not apply to special events unless
the Commercial generator demonstrates to the Public Works Director that the
event will produce less than the threshold amount; or



         b.   demonstrates to the Public Works Director that
there is no collection service or other system available for such materials;
or



         c.   demonstrates to the Public Works Director that
there are no recyclable materials being generated by any activities in the
Commercial generator's business, commercial facility, or non-residential
property; or



         d.   demonstrates, through a site visit required by the
Public Works Director, that either:



            i.   There is inadequate storage space for
automatic lift Containers, bins or roll-off boxes for recyclable materials on
site and that it is infeasible for the commercial generator to share
automatic lift Containers, bins or roll-off bins for recyclable materials
with another Commercial generator or an adjoining property; or



            ii.   Compliance with this section will result in
a violation of zoning codes or City regulations for minimum parking spaces.



            iii.   If, after reviewing the site, the Public
Works Director determines that it is feasible for recycling Containers to be
placed either on-site or shared with an adjoining business or property, then
the Commercial generator will not be exempted from these requirements and
will be responsible for full compliance with this section.



         e.   demonstrates to the Public Works Director that
there are no viable markets or recycling facilities available, as determined
by the Public Works Director or designee.



   G.   If the Commercial generator seeks an exemption, an application
for such exemption shall be submitted in writing to the Public Works
Director. After reviewing the exemption request, and after an on-site review,
if applicable, the Public Works Director may either approve or disapprove the
exemption request.



   H.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.160   Mandatory Commercial and Multi-Family Organic Recycling
Requirements.



   Each generator of commercial solid waste or multi-family dwellings of 5
or more units, referred to herein as a "Commercial generator" shall be
responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the
requirements of this section. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any
person from self-hauling organic waste generated by that person to an organic
waste or compost facility.



   Commercial generator self-haul. A generator may transport organic waste
generated at its business or property to an organic waste recycling facility
only if the Commercial generator completes its activity by utilizing a
vehicle owned by either the generator or generator's employee. This self-haul
exemption does not include contracting with a third party to transport the
organic waste. A self-hauler must retain on-site a self-hauling form
certifying that all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance
with this section or any other applicable law or regulation. The self-hauling
form shall be made available to the Public Works Director or designee upon
request. At a minimum, the Commercial generator shall provide the following
information on the self-hauling form:



   A.   The name, address and telephone number of the Commercial
generator's representative that will be signing the self-hauling form.



      1.   A list of the types of organic waste that are being
transported.



      2.   For each type of organic waste, the amount that is being
taken from the Commercial generator's business or property to an organic
waste facility on a quarterly basis.



      3.   The name and address of the recycling facility.



      4.   A written statement, signed by the Commercial generator
or representative, certifying that the generator is in compliance with the
requirements of this Section.



   B.   The Public Works Director may restrict or prohibit self-hauling
by a Commercial generator if the Public Works Director determines, after
providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing, that the Commercial
generator's self-hauling activities violate the provisions of this section or
any other applicable law or regulation.



   C.   On-site Practices.



      1.   Each Commercial generator shall use containers to collect
and store organic waste and shall designate areas to collect and/or store
organic waste.



      2.   Each Commercial generator shall prominently post and
maintain one or more signs in maintenance or work areas or common areas where
organic waste are collected and/or stored that specify the materials to be
recycled and how to recycle such material.



      3.   Each Commercial generator shall notify and instruct
employees or tenants in writing of applicable recycling requirements,
including outreach and training on what materials are required to be recycled
and how to recycle such material. A copy of such instruction or training
materials shall be provided to the Public Works Director or designee upon
request.



   D.   All organic waste shall be placed for collection in City
provided or approved covered containers. No container shall be loaded beyond
2/3 full to prevent spillage during servicing. It shall be the Commercial
generator's responsibility to keep the containers used for the storage and
collection of organic waste generated on the premises in a clean and sanitary
condition. No material or containers shall be kept or handled in such a
manner as to become a nuisance. No organic waste shall be allowed to become
odoriferous or a producer of vermin.  Lids on containers shall remain closed
at all times while stored or placed for collection. The Public Works Director
is specifically authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding any
and all organic waste containers including as related to the organic waste to
be placed therein, the placement and maximum weight of high-density materials
for Collection and the proper use of Containers.



   E.   Required collection of organic waste.



      1.   Each commercial generator shall arrange for the
collection of organic waste through one of the following methods:



         a.   Utilize the recycling services of city; or



         b.   Enter into a written service agreement with a
franchised permittee. Should the Commercial generator choose to enter into an
agreement with a franchised permittee, the Commercial generator shall be
responsible for verifying that the franchised permittee holds a valid
business license with the City and is in compliance with this ordinance; or



         c.   Complete and retain on-site a self-hauling form
certifying that all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance
with this ordinance or any other applicable law or regulation. A copy of such
form shall be provided and made available to the Public Works Director upon
request.



      2.   Each commercial generator entering into a written service
agreement with a franchised permittee or self-hauling organic waste shall
ensure all organic waste is source separated and contamination kept to a
minimum.



      3.   Any recycling service agreement and other recycling
documents shall be available for inspection by the Public Works Director or
designee at the principal location of the Commercial generator's business,
commercial facility, special event, or non-residential property during normal
business hours.



      4.   Each Commercial generator shall ensure that organic waste
generated at the Commercial generator's site will be taken only to a
recycling or composting facility or make other arrangements to ensure that
the materials are recycled or composted and not delivered to a landfill for
disposal. Commercial generators shall not dispose of, or arrange for disposal
of organic waste by placement in a landfill except in an emergency situation,
or when no viable markets or recycling facilities are available, as
determined by the Public Works Director. Further, all Commercial generators
are encouraged to consider recycling additional materials, whether or not
they have been specifically designated by the Public Works Director.



   F.   Commercial and Multi-Family Organic Waste Recycling Exemption.
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:



      1.   The State of California, a special district or other
local public agency other than the City, as defined, or any employee thereof,
when collecting or transporting organic waste produced by operation or system
of the entities described above.



      2.   Municipal corporations and governmental agencies other
than City using their own vehicles and employees engaged in the Collection,
transportation or disposal of organic waste within the boundaries of the City.



      3.   Prior to January 1, 2019, a business, Commercial facility
or non-residential property generating less than 4 cubic yards of organic
waste per week. This exemption does not apply to special events unless the
Commercial generator demonstrates to the Public Works Director that the event
will produce less than the threshold amount.



      4.   On or after January 1, 2019, a business, Commercial
facility or non-residential property generating less than 4 cubic yards of
total refuse per week. This exemption does not apply to special events unless
the Commercial generator demonstrates to the Public Works Director that the
event will produce less than the threshold amount.



      5.   A Commercial generator may not be required to source
separate organic waste if:



         a.   the Commercial generator demonstrates to the Public
Works Director that there is no collection service or other system available
for such materials; or



         b.   the Commercial generator demonstrates to the Public
Works Director there is no organic waste being generated by any activities in
the Commercial generator's business, commercial facility, or non-residential
property; or



         c.   there are no viable markets or recycling facilities
available, as determined by the Public Works Director.



         d.   it is determined through a site visit conducted by
the Public Works Director or designee, that either:



            i.   There is inadequate storage space for
automatic lift containers, bins or roll-off bins for organic waste on site
and that it is infeasible for the Commercial generator to share automatic
lift containers, bins or roll-off bins for organic waste with a Commercial
generator or an adjoining property; or



            ii.   Compliance with this section will result in
a violation of zoning codes or city regulations for minimum parking spaces.



            iii.   If, after reviewing the site, the City
Manager determines that it is feasible for recycling containers to be placed
either on-site or shared with an adjoining business or property, then the
Commercial generator will not be exempted from these requirements and will be
responsible for full compliance with this section.



   G.   If the Commercial generator seeks an exemption, an application
for such exemption shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the City
Manager. After reviewing the exemption request, and after an on-site review,
if applicable, the Public Works Director may either approve or disapprove the
exemption request.



   H.   A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018)



8.28.170   Administration.



   The administration of this chapter is the responsibility of the Public
Works Director or his or her designee. The Director shall have the authority
to establish rules and regulations required to enforce or carry out the
provisions of this chapter. The Director, any of his or her staff authorized
by the Director, and such other persons as may be authorized by the Public
Works Director are authorized to enter any restaurant, hotel or other public
place, or yard or out building to determine compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4042)



8.28.180   Fee Collection.



   A.   Billing for refuse disposal service, and payment thereof, shall
be to and by the person residing at a location or to the owner of the
property as stated in section 8.28.050 if a tenant does not pay.  City may
require proof of residency prior to opening account and may require a deposit
prior to service.  Deposit fees must be set and adopted by the Visalia City
Council. Upon written application by the property owner of tenant-occupied
property, billing and payment may be to and by each property owner.



   B.   The date charges for service begin to accrue for refuse service
is the date occupancy begins, or the date the bill is transferred to the
owner, or the date utility service is activated in occupant's name, whichever
is earliest.



   C.   If a prepayment or deposit is collected but not entirely used
for service, the city may automatically prepare a refund; however, it shall
be the responsibility of the billing party to apply for the refund.



   D.   Service charges shall be calculated on a monthly basis. Service
missed as a result of non-compliance with this chapter can be rescheduled for
a fee. Service missed as a result of an error by the city can be rescheduled
by the customer; however, the monthly service charge will not be adjusted.



   E.   Schedules for billing, payment due dates and delinquency
schedules shall be determined by the Director. The schedule shall allow at
least fifteen (15) days for payment prior to considering the unpaid balance
delinquent.



   F.   At the discretion of the city, service on accounts may be
stopped or reduced to a minimum as a result of delinquency. The total due on
all accounts under the control of the party and a restart fee may be required
prior to reinstatement of the necessary or desired service level.



   G.   Fees for service may be billed through more than one account on
more than one billing system. Balances for each property or each billing
period may be transferred within the city billing systems to ensure
collections, or to minimize the service and administration costs of billing.



   H.   The city may, at the Director's sole discretion, approve of a
temporary suspension in residential service if the residential property will
be vacant for a period of not less than three months.  A written application
for a temporary suspension of residential service must be submitted by the
property owner or tenant a minimum of ten working days prior to the effective
date of the suspension.  Upon approval, all City containers at the property
will be removed on the effective date of the suspension and utility service
will be terminated for the duration of the temporary suspension.  Customer
is responsible for all fees accruing to the account prior to the effective
date of the temporary suspension of service, without regard to whether the
property was occupied prior to the effective date.  The Director shall have
the authority to establish a fee for the cost of removal and delivery of
containers associated with a suspension of service.  No temporary suspension
of service is established for commercial or industrial businesses.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4044)



8.28.190   Late Charges.



   For refuse collection and disposal service charges, as defined in
Section 8.28.080, remaining unpaid balances, which are deemed delinquent
according to the schedule defined in Section E, there may be added and
collected herewith a late charge as set by resolution of the City Council,
and any such unpaid charge, together with the late charge, shall bear
interest at the rate as set by resolution of the City Council until paid.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4045)



8.28.200   Delinquent Fee and Late Charge Collection.



   A.   At the time the fees for owner-occupied property become
delinquent, or fees for properties that are not owner-occupied but are being
billed to the owner become delinquent until such time as they are fully paid,
the delinquent account balance, including late charges, shall constitute an
unrecorded lien against the property and, as such, may be identified during a
title search. For commercial businesses, delinquent account balances,
including late charges, may be considered an unrecorded lien against the
business name and/or owner of the business.



   B.   Once a year, the City Council may cause to be prepared a report
of delinquent fees including late charges. The Council shall fix a time, date
and place for hearing the report and receive any objections or protests
thereto.



   C.   The Council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the
landowners listed on the report not less than ten days prior to the date of
the hearing.



   D.   At a hearing the Council shall hear any objections or protests
of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees, including late
charges and administrative fees, as set by resolution of the City Council.
The Council may make revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just,
after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.



      1.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed
shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land
and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees
including late charges.



      2.   A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed
with the county auditor for the amounts or the respective assessments against
the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll.



      3.   The lien(s) created attaches upon recordation, in the
office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is
situated, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation.



      4.   The assessment may be collected at the same time and in
the same manner as ordinary county ad valorem property taxes are collected
and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for such taxes.



      5.   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of county ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such
assessment; except, that if any real property to which such lien would attach
has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a
lien of a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, prior to the
date on which the first installment of such taxes would  become delinquent,
then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not
attach to such real property and the delinquent fees, as confirmed, relating
to such property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection
and recorded in the name of the prior property owner following city policies
and procedures.



   E.   In addition to, or in lieu of other collection processes,
delinquent balances may be processed through a collection bureau.



   F.   In addition or in the alternative, and at the option of the
city, the city may file a civil action for the collection of any amounts due
and unpaid. This remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to the remedy of
means of enforcing payment of the sum required to be paid by this chapter
stated in subsection 8.28.180A through subsection F of this section.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4046)



8.28.210   Restrictions.



   A.   It is a misdemeanor for any person to bury refuse at any place
within the city, or to keep, place or deposit refuse on any public or private
grounds or premises whatsoever, except in containers or receptacles for
collection upon premises owned, occupied or under possession and control of
such person; provided, however, that lawn and garden trimmings may be
composted.



   B.   It is an infraction to create, cause or add to any refuse
accumulation not placed for regular or special collection, or to cause the
attraction or collection of insects or rodents.



   C.   It is an infraction to use more service, or cause the city to
provide more service than is subscribed to.



   D.   It is an infraction for any person to burn garbage or rubbish
at any time within the city.



   E.   It is a misdemeanor to deposit refuse or rubble into
containers, bins, or roll-off boxes which are not assigned to the property at
which the refuse or rubble is generated.



   F.   It is a misdemeanor to deposit or use refuse for lot filling or
leveling purposes.



   G.   It is an infraction for any person, firm, corporation or
association to permit any manure to accumulate on premises under his, her, or
its control in such manner or such extent as to give rise to fly breeding
conditions or objectionable odors upon any public highway, street or alley or
upon any premises within the city.



   H.   It is a misdemeanor for any person, firm, corporation or
association or any agent or employee thereof, to hinder, threaten, impede or
obstruct any City refuse collector in the performance of their duty as
defined in this chapter.



   I.   It is an infraction for any persons, other than the city or the
city's designee, to collect or remove recyclable or salvageable materials
placed by any person in a bag or container labeled for use in connection with
a recycling program sponsored by the city.



   J.   It is a misdemeanor for any person to collect refuse, waste
paper refuse, or rubble within the city or transport same through the
streets, alleys, and public ways in the city unless such person has been
authorized in writing to do so by contract or otherwise by the Director or by
state law. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person from
hauling refuse, waste paper refuse, or rubble which has been produced on the
premises actually occupied by the persons in his/her own vehicle, by
himself/herself or an employee, or as outlined in Section 8.28.120.  This
provision does not apply to voluntary or charitable efforts to collect refuse
or rubble for the benefit of the community.



   K.   It is an infraction to place anything other than the specific
recyclable material types, as defined by the Director, into source separating
recycling collection containers, bins or boxes, including organic collection
containers.



   L.   It is a misdemeanor to dispose of any waste prohibited in
Section 8.28.060 into city collection containers, bins or boxes. It is the
responsibility of the property owner to dispose of such waste properly.  If
prohibited waste is included in any city authorized automatic lift container,
bin or box, it shall be deemed contaminated and shall not be collected. It
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to properly dispose of the
waste in containers, boxes or bins deemed contaminated. If an authorized
container, automatic lift container, bin or box, including prohibited wastes
is inadvertently collected by the city, at the time the city identifies the
prohibited wastes, the city shall identify where the prohibited waste
originated. The entire truck load shall be considered contaminated. It shall
be the responsibility of the property owner and generator who disposed of the
prohibited waste to properly dispose of the entire contaminated load of
refuse and rubble and to cover any related costs including, but not limited
to, ensuring that equipment that was in contact with the prohibited waste is
safe and decontaminated.



   M.   It shall be an infraction to mix refuse and rubble of one type
in a collection container designated for another type, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter.



   N.   Any other violation of this chapter shall be an infraction
unless specifically noted and in the alternative may be prosecuted as an
administrative code violation of the Visalia Municipal Code.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4040)



8.28.220   Enforcement.



   This chapter shall be enforced as a health and safety measure to
prevent the nuisances of refuse accumulations and disposition, including
odors, insect or rodent attractions, smoke problems or odor problems. The
city council finds that each and all of the above specified conditions
constitute a public nuisance, and are unlawful, in violation of this chapter,
and subject to immediate abatement by any officer of this city. Any costs
associated with enforcement and abatement which the city incurs may be
charged to the offending party or property owner for reimbursement. 
Criminal penalties for violations are described below.  Alternatively, in
its sole discretion, the city may take enforcement action pursuant to the
administrative code procedure described in Chapters 1.12 and 1.13 of the
Visalia Municipal Code.



   A.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this Article shall
be punished by:



      1.   A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation;



      2.   A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and/or ninety (90) days in the county jail for a second violation of this
chapter within one year; and



      3.   A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) and/or
six months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.



   B.   Any person convicted of any infraction of this chapter shall be
punished by:



      1.   A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation;



      2.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
the second violation of this chapter within one year; and



      3.   A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. Each day a
violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.



(Ord. 2018-03, 2018; prior code § 4041)



Chapter 8.29 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS MANAGEMENT



Sections:



8.29.010   Purpose.



8.29.020   Definitions.



8.29.030   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.



8.29.040   Diversion requirements.



8.29.050   Projects exempt from this chapter.



8.29.060   Submission and required contents of C&D Debris Recycling and
Reuse Plan.



8.29.070   Evidence of compliance with C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan.



8.29.080   Diversion requirement exemption.



8.29.090   On-site practices.



8.29.100   Reporting.



8.29.110   Enforcement.



8.29.120   Notice of violation and administrative penalties.



8.29.130   Administrative review of notice of violation.



8.29.140   Judicial review.



8.29.150   Collection of administrative penalties.



8.29.160   Effective date.



8.29.170   Severability.



8.29.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to increase the recycling and reuse of
construction and demolition debris, consistent with the goals of the
California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.020   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires:



   "Accessory structure" means a structure containing no kitchen or
bathroom and located upon



the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is an
accessory.  The structure is customary, incidental and subordinate to the
use of the principal building or the principal use of the land.  All
accessory structures shall be constructed with, or subsequent to, the
construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use.



   "Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company,
association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency,
municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity
whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake
any construction, demolition or renovation project within the city
boundaries, as defined in this chapter, and who is, therefore, responsible
for meeting the requirements of this chapter.



   "Building Official or Director" means the officer or other designated
authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or
the city's duly authorized representative. 



   "Construction" means all building, landscaping, remodeling, including
the addition, removal or destruction of buildings and landscaping.



   "Construction and demolition debris" means and includes



   1.   Used or commonly discarded materials generally considered to be
not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including but are not limited
to, steel, copper, aluminum, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe,
gypsum, wallboard and lumber from the construction or destruction of a
structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the
renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, including rocks, soils, tree
remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land
clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project;
or



   2.   Remnants of new materials, including but are not limited to,
cardboard, paper, plastic, wood and metal scraps from any construction,
demolition and/or landscape project.



   "Contractor" means any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a
contractor's license of any type under the laws of the State of California,
or who performs (whether as contractor, subcontractor, owner-builder, or
otherwise) any construction, demolition, remodeling, renovation or
landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the
city's jurisdictional boundaries.



   "Covered project" means and includes any project which consists of one
or more of the following:



   1.   Demolition projects that are 500 square feet or greater.



   2.   Any project involving renovation of a kitchen and/or bath
facility irrespective of total square footage or value.



   3.   The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing residential
structure that is equal to or greater than 500 square feet and/or projects
that exceed $20,000 in construction cost.



   4.   The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing commercial
or multi-family residential structure that is equal to or greater than 1,000
square feet and/or projects that exceed $20,000 in construction cost.



   5.   Residential development and any new residential structure that
is equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet and/or projects that exceed
$20,000.



   6.   Commercial or multi-family residential development, and any new
structure that is equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet and/or projects
that exceed $20,000.



   7.   All city sponsored construction, demolition and renovation
projects that are equal to or greater than 1,000 square feet.



   8.   All city public works and construction projects which are
awarded pursuant to the competitive bid procedures.



   "Deconstruction" means a process to dismantle or remove useable
materials from structures, in a manner which maximizes the recovery of
building materials for reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste
transported for disposal in landfills and transformation facilities.



   "Demolition" means the deconstructing, razing, ruining, tearing down or
wrecking of any structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in
part, whether interior or exterior.  Demolition needs to be done by a
contractor or owner-builder.



   "Designated recyclable and reusable materials"  means and includes:



   1.   Inert solids, asphalt and masonry building materials generally
used in construction including, but are not limited to, concrete, rock, stone
and brick.



   2.   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber,
fencing or construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, CCA
pressure treated, contaminated or painted.



   3.   Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs,
stumps, logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site
for construction or other use.  The following materials are excluded as the
materials are not recyclable and should be land filled: bamboo, palm fronds
and yucca.



   4.   Metals including all metal scrap such as, but are not limited
to, pipes, siding, window frames, door frames and fences.



   5.   Roofing materials including wood shingles and shakes as well as
asphalt, stone and slate based roofing material.



   6.   Salvageable materials and structures including, but are not
limited to, doors, windows, fixtures, hardwood flooring, sinks, bathtubs and
appliances.



   7.   Any other materials that the Building Official or Director
determines can be diverted due to the identification of a recycling facility,
reuse facility or market accessible from the county.



   "Director" means the city's Director of the Public Works Department or
his/her authorized representative. 



   "Divert" and "Diversion" means to use material for any lawful purpose
other than disposal in a landfill, transformation facility or alternative
daily cover.  Methods to divert materials from landfills include reuse,
salvage and recycling.  Diversion does not include illegal dumping.



   "Emergency demolition" means an emergency demolition can be performed
only when a facility is determined to be structurally unsound and in danger
of imminent collapse and a state or local government agency has issued an
immediate demolition order. The order for emergency demolition only applies
to the part of the building that is unsound; attached buildings may not be
demolished under this order and must be treated as a regular demolition. 



   "Facilities" means recycling, salvage and reuse establishments and
landfills.



   "Inert solids" includes asphalt, concrete, rock, stone, brick, sand,
soil and fines.



   "Non-covered projects" Construction, demolition and renovation projects
within the city that do not meet the established thresholds for covered
projects.



   "Owner-builder"; see "Contractor".



   "Permit" means an official document or certificate issued by the
Building Official authorizing performance of a specified activity. 



   "Project" means any activity involving construction, demolition or
renovation, and which requires issuance of a permit from the city.



   "Recyclables" means materials which would otherwise become solid waste
but which are capable of or suitable for recycling.



   "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing,
treating and reconstituting or converting construction and demolition debris
that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted
products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace or in the form of useable energy.  Recycling does not include
transformation.



   "Recycling and Reuse Plan" means a form provided by the city for the
purpose of compliance



with this chapter that must be submitted by the applicant for any covered
project.



   "Renovation" means any change, addition or modification to an existing
structure.



   "Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction and demolition
debris.



   "Salvage" means the controlled removal of materials from a covered
project for the purpose of recycling, reuse or storage for later reuse.



   "Source separated" means recyclables that have been segregated from
solid waste by or for the generator thereof on the premises at which they
were generated for handling different from that of solid waste. 



   "Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or
building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed
of parts joined together in some definite manner.



(Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.030   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.



   Recovered and salvaged designated recyclable and reusable materials
from the deconstruction phase shall be counted towards the diversion
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.040   Diversion requirements.



   A.   One hundred percent (100%) of inert solids and at least fifty
percent (50%) by weight of the remaining construction and demolition debris
resulting from the project shall be diverted to an approved facility or by
salvage. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



   B.   For each covered project, the diversion requirements of this
chapter shall be met by submitting and following a C&D Debris Recycling and
Reuse Plan that includes the following:



   1.   Deconstructing and salvaging all or part of the structure as
practicable; and



   2.   Directing one hundred percent (100%) of inert solids to reuse
or recycling facilities approved by the city; and



   3.   Source separating non-inert materials, such as cardboard and
paper, wood, metals, green waste, new gypsum wallboard, tile, porcelain
fixtures, and other easily recycled materials, and directing them to
recycling facilities approved by the city and taking the remainder (but no
more than 50% by weight) to a facility for disposal. 



   C.   The applicant for any covered project shall make reasonable
efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition waste diverted or land
filled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of
measurement available.  To the extent practical, all construction and
demolition debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales that are in
compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance.



   D.   Although it may not be an explicit condition of the building
permit, contractors working on non-covered projects are encouraged to divert
material from construction and demolition projects to the maximum extent
practicable in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.050   Projects exempt from this chapter.



   A.   Emergency demolition required to protect the public health,
safety or welfare.



   B.   City-sponsored demolition of a substandard structure or
construction required to protect public health or safety in an emergency.



   C.   Projects in any single-family residential district, which
consist solely of a swimming pool.



   D.   Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical permit or
mechanical permit is required.



   E.   A project for which a valid building permit has been lawfully
issued by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter.



   F.   A project of the city public construction for which the notice
inviting bids has been published prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.060   Submission and required contents of C&D Debris Recycling and
Reuse Plan.



   A.   Prior to issuance of permit, every applicant for building or
demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a
properly completed C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan to the Building
Official, unless a C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan for the project is
already on file with the city. 



   B.   A C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan must contain all of the
following information:



   1.   The name and address of the person applying for the permit.



   2.   Unless waived by the Building Official or designee, evidence
that the owner or owners of the subject property acknowledge that they are
aware of and understand that a violation of any provision of this chapter may
result in the imposition of penalties and that any unpaid penalties imposed
may be declared a lien on the subject property.



   3.   A description of the project, including location, scope,
required permit(s) and estimated timeline for completion of the project.



   4.   The names and addresses of all vendors and facilities proposed
to be used to collect, receive, dispose, recycle, reuse or salvage the
project C&D debris.



   5.   The recycling or reuse percentage rate, as applicable, of each
vendor and facility proposed to be used to recycle or reuse the project C&D
debris.



(Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.070   Evidence of compliance with C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan.



   A.   A C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan shall be approved or
denied no later than thirty (30) days after a complete application is made. 



   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no permit
shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the C&D Debris
Recycling and Reuse Plan has been approved.



   1.   All of the information has been remitted on the C&D Debris
Recycling and Reuse Plan.



   2.   The C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan establishes a mechanism
such that the diversion requirement shall be met.



   C.   If the Director determines that the C&D Debris Recycling and
Reuse Plan application is incomplete or fails to indicate that one hundred
percent (100%) of inert solids and at least fifty percent (50%) by weight of
all construction and demolition debris generated by the project will be
reused or recycled, he or she shall either:



   1.   Return the C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan application to
the Building Official marked "Denied", including a statement of reasons,
which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition
permit application; or



   2.   Return the C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan to the Building
Official marked "Further Explanation Required".



   D.   Within 30 days following project completion, a final compliance
report containing the following information and documentation must be
submitted to the Building Official, listing every vendor or facility that
collected, transported or received any C&D debris.



   1.   Copies of receipts from every vendor or facility that
collected, transported or received any project C&D debris.  Each receipt
must specify the weight of any project C&D debris handled by the vendor or
facility and must clearly demonstrate that all such C&D debris originated
from the project site.



   2.   A calculation of the actual percentage, determined by weight,
of project C&D debris that was recycled or reused for each vendor or facility
that collected, transported or received material.



   3.   A description of the manner in which the project C&D debris was
recycled or reused and the name and address of all vendors and facilities
employed in the recycling or reuse of project C&D debris, including the
recycling or reuse rate of each vendor or facility, as applicable.



   E.   Failure to accurately account for and submit the required
documentation for all project C&D debris in the final compliance report
constitutes a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.080   Diversion requirement exemption.



   A.   Application:  If an applicant for a covered project
experiences circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to
comply with established diversion requirements, the applicant may request, in
writing, an exemption from one or all of the waste diversion requirements
during the building permit process.



   B.   Meeting with Director:  The Director, or designee, shall
review all exemption request information supplied by the applicant and may
meet with the applicant to assess alternative ways of meeting waste diversion
requirements.  Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the
Director, or designee, shall determine whether it is possible for the
applicant to meet any or all of the diversion requirements of the project.



   C.   Granting of exemption:  If it is determined that it is
infeasible for the applicant to meet all of the diversion requirements
specified herein, the Director, or designee, shall determine alternate permit
conditions and the Building Official will inform the applicant, in writing,
of any such alternative requirements. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.090   On-site practices.



   During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall according
to the applicant's C&D Debris Recycling and Reuse Plan recycle, reuse or
divert the required percentages of waste, and keep records of the tonnage. 
To the maximum extent feasible, project waste shall be source separated
on-site to increase diversion. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.100   Reporting.



   A.   Progress reports during construction may be required.



   B.   All documentation is subject to verification by the city.



   C.   It is unlawful for any person to submit documentation to the
city under this chapter which that person knows to contain any false
statements, including but not limited to, false statements regarding tonnage
of materials recycled or diverted. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.110   Enforcement.



   The Director or his designee shall administer this chapter and shall
enforce the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to, the
authority to order that work be stopped where any work is being done contrary
to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.120   Notice of violation and administrative penalties.



   A.   In addition to any other remedy authorized by this chapter or
applicable law, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to an administrative penalty, enforcement, and collection
proceedings, as set forth in this chapter and authorized by Section 53069.4
of the California Government Code. Each day of a continuing violation
constitutes a separate violation.



   B.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection C., the Director may
impose an administrative penalty for each violation in an amount not to
exceed $100 for the first violation, $250 for the second violation of the
same provision of this chapter within one year after the first violation, and
$500 for each additional violation of the same provision of this chapter
within one year after the first violation.



   C.  If the Director determines that a project is in violation of the
requirements of Section 8.29.40, the Director may impose an administrative
penalty equal to $100 for every ton or fraction of a ton of C&D debris that
was not recycled or reused as required.



   D.   Whenever the Director determines that a violation of any
provision of this chapter has occurred, the Director is authorized to issue a
notice of violation. The Director's issuance of a notice of violation is
final unless an administrative review has been filed as provided in Section
8.29.130. If such an administrative review is not filed, the Director may
withhold approval of any and all Recycling and Reuse Plans submitted by the
responsible person on any covered project(s) until the applicable
administrative penalty has been paid, and the amount of any unpaid
administrative penalty may be declared a lien on any real property on which
the project took place, as provided in Section 8.29.150.  In addition, when
a final administrative determination has been made that a violation has
occurred, the Director is authorized to suspend and/or revoke any and all
permits issued pursuant to this chapter and to direct the appropriate city
officials to order the cessation of all work and activities on the covered
project in question until such time as the applicable penalty has been paid.



   E.   The notice of violation shall specify the conditions
constituting the violation, the time, if any, within which the violation must
be corrected, the applicable administrative penalty, and the availability of
an administrative appeal as provided in this chapter. The notice of violation
shall also state that if such an administrative appeal is not filed and the
applicable administrative penalty has not been paid, the Director may
withhold approval of any and all Recycling and Reuse Plans submitted by the
responsible person on any covered project(s) until such penalty has been
paid, and the amount of any unpaid administrative penalty may be declared a
lien on any real property on which the project took place, as provided in
Section 8.29.150.



   F.   A notice of violation shall be served upon a responsible
person(s) by personal delivery or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, at the Director's election. In the event, after reasonable
effort, the Director is unable to serve the notice of violation as set above,
service shall be accomplished by posting a copy of the notice on the premises
of the project. The date of service is deemed to be five days after the date
of mailing, the date of personal delivery, or the date of posting, as
applicable.



   G.   The total amount of administrative penalties imposed for a
project under this section may not exceed fifteen percent of the value of the
project, as described on the permit application(s), or $50,000, whichever is
more. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.130   Administrative review of notice of violation.



   A.   Any person upon whom a notice of violation has been served may
request an administrative review of the accuracy of the contents of the
notice and/or the propriety of any administrative penalty by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Director no later than 30 days after the date of
service of the notice of violation. The notice of appeal must include all
facts supporting the appeal and any statements and evidence, including copies
of all written documentation and a list of any witnesses that the appellant
wishes to be considered in connection with the appeal.



   B.   The appeal shall be heard by a hearing officer designated by
the City Manager. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing concerning the
appeal within 45 days from the date that the notice of appeal is filed, or on
a later date if agreed upon by the appellant and the city, and shall give the
appellant ten days prior written notice of the date of the hearing. The
hearing officer shall sustain, rescind, or modify the notice of violation by
written decision. The hearing officer shall have the power to waive any
portion of an administrative penalty in a manner consistent with the
decision. Service of the hearing officer's decision shall be made on the
appellant in the manner provided in subsection F. of Section 8.29.120. The
decision of the hearing officer is final and effective on the date of service
of the written decision, is not subject to further administrative review, and
constitutes the final administrative decision. If judicial review of the
final administrative decision is not sought in accordance with the provisions
of Section 8.29.140, the decision of the hearing officer shall be deemed
confirmed and the Director may withhold approval of any and all Recycling and
Reuse Plans submitted by the responsible person on any covered project(s)
until the applicable administrative penalty has been paid, and the amount of
any unpaid administrative penalty may be declared a lien on any real property
on which the project took place. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.140   Judicial review.



   Within 20 days after service of the written decision of the hearing
officer, a person contesting that decision may seek review of the decision by
filing an appeal in the superior court pursuant to Section 53069.4 of the
Government Code. A copy of the notice of appeal must be served in person or
by first-class mail upon the clerk of the city by the person filing the
appeal and a copy of the notice of appeal must be submitted to the Director.
If the decision of the court is against the contestant, the Director may
withhold approval of any and all Recycling and Reuse Projects submitted by
the responsible person on any covered project(s) until the applicable
administrative penalty has been paid, or the amount of any unpaid
administrative penalty may be declared a lien on any real property on which
the project took place, as provided in §8.29.150. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.150   Collection of administrative penalties.



   A.   Prior to recordation of a lien declared under this chapter in
the amount of an unpaid administrative penalty, notice shall be given to the
owner of the property to be subject to the lien and shall be served in the
same manner as a summons may be served pursuant to Section 415.10 et seq. of
the Code of Civil Procedure.



   B.   The lien shall attach upon recordation in the office of the
county recorder. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the date of
the violations, the date of the final decision, the street address (if any),
legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the
lien is imposed, and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel.



   C.   In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or
satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall record a
notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection B.
(Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.160   Effective date.



   Ord. 2005-24, 2005 shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of
the passage thereof, and prior to the expiration of fifteen (15) days from
the passage thereof a summary shall be published once in a newspaper printed
and published in the County of Tulare, State of California, together with the
names of the City of Visalia, City Council members voting for and against the
same. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



8.29.170   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter
irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. To this end, the provisions of
this chapter are declared severable. (Ord. 2005-24, 2005)



Chapter 8.30
DISPOSAL OF HOME-GENERATED SHARPS



Sections:



8.30.010   Purposes.



8.30.020   Definitions.



8.30.030   Sharps management.



8.30.040   Enforcement.



8.30.010   Purposes.



   The City of Visalia finds and declares all of the following purposes
for this Chapter 8.30:



   A.   To achieve the mandates imposed by the Integrated Waste
Management Act of 1989 (AB 939) on a regional basis;



   B.   To enact a comprehensive and innovative system for the proper
and legal management of home-generated sharps waste, as defined in Section
8.30.020G. of this chapter, in the City of Visalia in accordance with Section
118286 of the California Health and Safety Code;



   C.   To enact a law that establishes a program that is convenient
for consumers and the public to return and ensure the safe and
environmentally sound disposal of home-generated sharps waste, and to provide
a "no-cost" system for consumers for the return of home-generated sharps
waste;



   D.   To assure that the costs associated with the handling and
disposal of home-generated sharps waste are the responsibility of the
producers and retailers of home-generated sharps waste, and not local
governments or their service providers, state or local government, or
taxpayers;



   E.   To reduce the likelihood of the illegal disposal of
home-generated sharps waste;



   F.   To ensure that all costs associated with the proper management
of home-generated sharps waste are internalized by the producers and
retailers of home-generated sharps waste at or before the point of purchase,
and not at the point of discard;



   G.   To assure that manufacturers and retailers of sharps, while
working to achieve the goals and objectives of this chapter, shall have the
flexibility to partner with each other, with governmental programs, and with
private and nonprofit business enterprises that provide collection and
processing services, to develop and promote a safe and effective
home-generated sharps waste management system; and



   H.   To provide for the safe and convenient collection and disposal
of 100 percent of the home-generated sharps waste discarded in the City of
Visalia at no cost to the consumer and to comply with the requirements
pursuant to State Health and Safety Code prohibiting the disposal of
home-generated sharps waste in trash, recycling, yard waste, or landfills as
of July 1, 2014. (Ord. 2014-08 § 1 (part), 2014)



8.30.020   Definitions.



   The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter 8.30.



   A.   "Consumer" means an individual who has purchased sharps for
personal use for humans or animals.



   B.   "Distributor" means a person who sells sharps to a retailer.



   C.   "Home-generated" means all sharps as defined in Section
8.30.020G. below derived from a household, including a multifamily residence,
or a single family residence.



   D.   "Proper disposal" of home-generated sharps waste means disposal
in compliance with the applicable provisions of the California Health and
Safety Code by means of an approved/certified medical waste disposal company.



   E.   "Receptacle" means a rigid puncture-resistant container with a
sealable lid approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the
purpose of transporting sharps for disposal.



   F.   "Retailer" means any entity, including but not limited to, a
person or business, of whatever form of organization, which sells to the
general public sharps in the Visalia area to a consumer, including a
manufacturer of sharps who sells sharps directly to a consumer.



   G.   "Sharps" means hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous
needles, lancets, and other devices that are used to penetrate the skin for
the delivery of medications, to humans or animals.



   H.   "Visalia area" means the geographic area that includes the
boundaries of the City of Visalia, California. (Ord. 2014-08 § 1 (part),
2014)



8.30.030   Sharps management.



   A.   By July 1, 2014, every retailer of sharps sold in the City of
Visalia shall establish within the retail outlet a system for the acceptance
and collection of home-generated sharps waste for proper disposal.



   B.   Each system established by a retailer for the acceptance and
collection of home-generated sharps waste during the retailer's normal hours
of operation, for proper disposal shall, at a minimum, include all of the
following elements:



   1.   A convenient location within the retail establishment for the
"take-back" from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste at no cost to
that consumer.



   2.   Appropriate signage, prominently displayed within five feet of
any entrance to the retail establishment and easily visible to the consumer,
indicating that the retail establishment accepts and collects home-generated
sharps waste from consumers.



   3.   An appropriate receptacle or receptacles for the collection of
home-generated sharps waste within the retail establishment. The retailer
shall assure that all home-generated sharps waste is placed in the
receptacle(s).



   4.   Assurance that the collected home-generated sharps wastes are
disposed within the time period established by applicable state law, as
determined, from time to time by the Tulare County Environmental Health
Service Department, acting as the Local Enforcement Agency.



   5.   Comply with all applicable provisions of the California Medical
Waste Management Act, Health and Safety Code Sections 117600 et seq.



   C.   A retailer who is required to accept home-generated sharps
waste shall at a minimum provide the following take back services:



   1.   The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste
that the retailer sold or previously sold to the consumer, at no cost to that
consumer. In that event, the retailer may require proof of purchase of the
prior sales. The retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated
sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount previously sold to the
consumer.



   2.   The take-back of home-generated sharps waste from a consumer
purchasing sharps from the retailer, at no cost to the consumer. In that
event, the retailer shall only be required to accept home-generated sharps
waste in an amount not to exceed the amount being purchased.



   3.   The take-back from the consumer of home-generated sharps waste
that the retailer did not sell or previously sell to the consumer, at no cost
to that consumer. The retailer shall only be required to accept
home-generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of one
2 quart-size sharps container per week per consumer from any consumer who
resides in the Visalia area. (Ord. 2014-08 § 1 (part), 2014)



8.30.040   Enforcement.



   A.   The City of Visalia may enforce the provisions of this chapter
through a civil action for civil penalties in the amounts established herein,
and any other civil remedy, including prohibitory and mandatory injunctive
relief, filed in the Superior Court for the County of Tulare to compel and
enforce the provisions herein against any retailer within the City of Visalia
who sells sharps in violation of this chapter. In addition to any relief
available to enforce this chapter, the City of Visalia shall also be entitled
to recover its reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in enforcing
this chapter.



   B.   For any violation of this chapter, the City of Visalia may sue
to recover civil penalties in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per day for every day on which a violation exists. For purposes of
calculating the civil penalties to be established hereunder, each day on
which the retailer fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter,
after having received a written notice of violation issued by the City of
Visalia, shall constitute a separate offense.



   C.   In addition to the civil relief available to the City of
Visalia set forth above, any violation of this chapter shall also constitute
a criminal offense punishable under the laws of the State of California. The
District Attorney, the County Counsel, or any City Attorney shall be
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter within their respective
jurisdictions and shall have the authority to determine whether to prosecute
the matter as a misdemeanor, or to elect for good cause to reduce the charge
to an infraction. In the event of such criminal enforcement, the following
criminal penalties apply to violations of this chapter:



   1.   Penalty for Misdemeanor. Any retailer found to be in violation
of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any of its
requirements, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than six months, or be fined not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.



   2.   Penalty for an Infraction. Any retailer found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any
of its requirements, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of
not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.



   D.   In addition to the enforcement provided in this section, this
chapter shall be enforceable under the Administrative Code Enforcement
provisions of this Municipal Code, including but not limited to Chapter 1.13.
If enforced pursuant to the Administrative Code Enforcement provisions of
this Municipal Code, the penalties established by Subparagraph C of this
Section 8.30.040 are hereby established as an alternative administrative
penalty which shall be assessed pursuant to Section 1.13.050 or violations of
the provisions of this Chapter 8.30. (Ord. 2014-08 § 1 (part), 2014)



Chapter 8.32
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



Sections:



8.32.010   Purpose.



8.32.020   Definitions.



8.32.030   Scene management of a hazardous material release on properties.



8.32.040   Scene management of a hazardous material release on local
streets or highways.



8.32.050   Control of mitigation measures.



8.32.060   Notification of release of hazardous materials.



8.32.070   Costs subject to recovery.



8.32.080   Collection of costs.



8.32.090   Appeals.



8.32.100   Billing.



8.32.010   Purpose.



   In the event of a hazardous material release into or on any land, water
or air within the city, responsibility for scene management shall be the most
appropriate agency or responsible party as set forth in this chapter. The
costs incurred by the city in cleaning up (mitigating) the effects of such a
release shall be reimbursed by the person, firm or corporation found to be
the responsible party for causing said release. Costs subject to
reimbursement shall not include those of the city for emergency response.
(Prior code § 4511)



8.32.020   Definitions.



   For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows: 



   “City” means the city of Visalia. 



   “Emergency” means a sudden, unexpected occurrence which poses an
unreasonable and imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons, property
or to the ecological balance of the environment and requires immediate action
by emergency response personnel. 



   “Emergency response personnel” means any person employed with
either the fire and emergency management or police departments of the city or
any other emergency related governmental agency having jurisdiction within
the city.



   “Hazardous materials” means a substance or combination of
substances, of any kind whatsoever, which, because of quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:



   1.   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality,
an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or



   2.   Pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or
safety of persons, property or to the ecological balance of the environment
when improperly released, treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed. 



   3.   Hazardous materials shall include, but are not limited to, any
material defined in Section 25501 of Chapter 6.95, Division 20 of the
California Health and Safety Code as amended.



   “Nonemergency” means an occurrence that is not a life threatening
situation, and therefore, does not require the deployment of emergency
response personnel.



   “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, corporations, joint
stock company, partnership, or association, as well as the employer of said
person. 



   “Release or hazardous material release” means accidental or
intentional spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, burning, emitting,
employing, or dumping of hazardous materials into or on any land, water, or
air, which is unauthorized by federal, state, or local governing agencies or
statutes. 



   “Scene management” means the designated agency or department with
the authority to coordinate and direct the containment and cleanup activities
of an incident and herein referred to as “scene manager.” (Prior code §
4512)



8.32.030   Scene management of a hazardous material release on properties.



   In the event of an emergency hazardous material release occurring on
public or private properties (other than streets or highways) within the
limits of the city, the department of fire and emergency management shall be
responsible for scene management. In the event of a nonemergency release,
responsibility for scene management shall be the most appropriate agency or
responsible party designated by the department of fire and emergency
management. (Prior code § 4513)



8.32.040   Scene management of a hazardous material release on local
streets or highways.



   In the event of an emergency hazardous material release occurring on a
local street or highway within the limits of the city, the police department
or other law enforcing agency having jurisdiction for the affected area,
shall be responsible for scene management until containment and clean-up has
been performed. In the event of a nonemergency release, responsibility for
scene management shall be placed with the most appropriate agency or
responsible party as determined by the police department. (Prior code § 4514)



8.32.050   Control of mitigation measures.



   An emergency situation created by a hazardous material release which
poses an imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons, property or
to the ecological balance of the environment shall be mitigated in the manner
prescribed and pursuant to the direction of the department of fire and
emergency management of the city. (Prior code § 4515)



8.32.060   Notification of release of hazardous materials.



   In the event of any hazardous material release of any kind, or threat
thereof, the department of fire and emergency management of the city shall be
notified immediately of the location, nature of release, and any proposed
course of action to mitigate the effects of the release, or to prevent the
release from occurring. Notification is necessary for the purpose of
maintaining records of incidents and exposures occurring within the city.
(Prior code § 4516)



8.32.070   Costs subject to recovery.



   The costs for services incurred by the city resulting from a hazardous
material release shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to the
following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including all fringe benefit
costs, temporary or permanent disability and/or medical expenses;
administrative overhead; costs of equipment operation, repair or replacement;
costs of material obtained directly by the city; and cost of any contract
labor as said costs are required to be expended to mitigate the release of
said hazardous materials. (Prior code § 4517)



8.32.080   Collection of costs.



   The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the
person liable for expenses under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt
of that person and is collectible by the city or other public obligation
under a contract, expressed or implied. (Prior code § 4518)



8.32.090   Appeals.



   In exceptional cases where it is difficult or impossible to comply with
the strict letter of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation shall have
the option to apply for an exemption from any provision of this chapter to
the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall exercise
those powers in such a way that the public welfare is secured. If an appeal
has been initiated, the billing process will stay until such appeal has
become resolved. Appeal applications must be submitted within ninety (90)
days after the billing date. (Prior code § 4519)



8.32.100   Billing.



   The city shall cause to be issued an invoice for the costs incurred in
mitigating or causing the mitigation of the effects of a release. Such bill
shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days after the billing date.
Failure to pay after sixty (60) days from the billing date shall result in an
additional ten percent late charge. Unpaid bills may be referred to a
collection process after ninety (90) day delinquency or be assessed against
the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code as
amended and shall thereafter be transmitted to the tax collector for
collection. Per the discretion of the finance director or his designee,
collectible costs can be billed on a periodic basis. (Prior code § 4520)



Chapter 8.36
NOISE



Sections:



8.36.010   Purpose.



8.36.020   Definitions.



8.36.030   Noise measurement criteria.



8.36.040   Exterior noise standards--Fixed noise sources.



8.36.050   Exterior noise standards--Mobile noise sources prohibition
against use.



8.36.060   Residential interior noise standards.



8.36.070   Noise source exemptions.



8.36.080   Warning signs in places of public entertainment.



8.36.090   Variances.



8.36.100   Violation--Enforcement.



8.36.110   Emergency equipment.



8.36.010   Purpose.



   A.   The city council of the city declares and finds that excessive
levels of noise are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and
are contrary to the public interest as follows:



   1.   By interfering with sleep, communication, relaxation and the
full use of one's property;



   2.   By interfering with noise sensitive land uses;



   3.   By contributing to hearing impairment and a wide range of
adverse physiological stress conditions; and



   4.   By adversely affecting the value of real property.



   B.   It is the intent of this chapter to protect persons from
excessive levels of noise within or near noise sensitive land uses such as
residences, schools, churches, hospitals or public libraries, or other uses
as may be determined by the city council of the city. (Prior code § 5090.1)



8.36.020   Definitions.



   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall
have the following meanings:



   “Abutting” means physically adjacent to or coterminous with or
separated by means of an alley or a private street less than thirty (30) feet
in width.



   “Ambient noise level” means the composite of noise from all sources
excluding the alleged offensive noise. In this context it represents the
normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location for a
specific time of the day or night.



   “A weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels as
measured with a sound level meter using the A:P weighted network (scale) at
slow meter response. The unit of measurement is referred to herein as dB(A).



   “Construction” means construction, erection, enlargement,
alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures or land
together with any scientific surveys associated therewith.



   “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of
individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.



   “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound,
equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty
(20) micropascals.



   “Emergency work” means the use of any machinery, equipment,
vehicle, manpower or other activity in a short term effort to protect, or
restore safe conditions in the community, or work by private or public
utilities when restoring utility service.



   “Fixed noise source” means a device, machine or combination thereof
which creates sounds which is affixed or installed on real property,
including but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial and
commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air
conditioners and refrigeration equipment.



   “Hospital” means any building or portion thereof used for the
accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons including
rest homes and nursing homes.



   “Impulsive noise” means a noise of short duration, usually less
than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.



   “Intruding noise level” means the sound level created, caused,
maintained or originating from an alleged offensive source, measured in
decibels, at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in
operation.



   “Mobile noise source” means any source other than a fixed noise
source.



   “Noise disturbance” means any sound which violates the standards
set forth in this chapter.



   “Noise sensitive land use” means residential uses, churches,
hospitals, schools, public library, or other such uses which are identified
in the noise element of the general plan.



   “Pure tone noise” means any noise which is distinctly audible as a
single pitch (frequency) or set of pitches. For the purpose of this chapter,
a pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in
the band which the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure
levels of the two continuous one-third octave bands by five dB for center
frequencies of five hundred (500) Hz and above and by eight dB for center
frequencies between one hundred sixty (160) and four hundred (400) Hz and by
fifteen (15) dB for frequencies less than or equal to one hundred twenty-five
(125) Hz.



   “Residential property” means a parcel of real property which is
zoned in whole or in part of residential purposes.



   “School” means public or private institutions conducting regular
academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or
collegiate levels.



   “Sound level meter” means an instrument meeting American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level
meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment
which will provide equivalent data. (Prior code § 5090.2)



8.36.030   Noise measurement criteria.



   A.   Any noise measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be made with a sound level meter using the “A” weighted
network (scale) at slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used for
impulsive type sounds. Calibration of the measurement equipment utilizing an
acoustical calibrator certified by its manufacturer to be in compliance with
National Bureau of Standards (NBS) reference calibration levels shall be
performed immediately prior to recording noise level data.



   B.   Exterior noise levels shall be measured within fifty (50) feet
of the affected residence, school, hospital, church or public library. Where
practical, the microphone shall be positioned three to five feet above the
ground and away from reflective surfaces.



   C.   Interior noise levels shall be measured within the affected
dwelling unit, at points at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor
nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration.
Reported interior noise levels shall be determined by taking the arithmetic
average of the readings taken at the various microphone locations. (Prior
code § 5090.3)



8.36.040   Exterior noise standards--Fixed noise sources.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person at any location within the city
to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on property
owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes
the exterior noise level, when measured at the property line of any affected
noise sensitive land use, to exceed any of the categorical noise level
standards as set forth in the following table:



 


NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA




Category

 

Cumulative Number of minutes in any one-hour time period

 

Evening and Daytime
6 a.m. to 7 p.m.

 

Nighttime
7 p.m. to 6 a.m.




1

 

30

 

50

 

45




2

 

15

 

55

 

50




3

 

5

 

60

 

55




4

 

1

 

65

 

60




5

 

0

 

70

 

65




 



   B.   In the event the measured ambient noise level without the
alleged offensive source in operation exceeds an applicable noise level
standard in any category above, the applicable standard or standards shall be
adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level.



   C.   Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be
reduced by five dB for pure tone noises, noises consisting primarily of
speech or music, or for recurring impulsive noises.



   D.   If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot
reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient
noise level without the source can be measured, the noise level measured
while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the noise
level standards. (Prior code § 5090.4.1)



8.36.050   Exterior noise standards--Mobile noise sources prohibition
against use.



   It is unlawful to operate any of the below-listed devices, appliances,
equipment or vehicles on public or private property abutting noise sensitive
land uses between the weekday hours of seven p.m. and six a.m., and between
the weekend hours of seven p.m. and nine a.m.



   A.   Power-assisted leaf blowers, lawn mowers, edgers or other power
equipment used for the maintenance of property;



   B.   Vehicle equipment, which equipment is not expressly regulated
by state or federal statute, such as car radios or sound amplification
equipment which is audible more than twenty-five (25) feet from the exterior
of the vehicle;



   C.   Construction equipment including jackhammers, portable
generators, pneumatic equipment, trenchers, or other such equipment, except
for emergency repair purposes as provided in Section 8.36.070;



   D.   Any other noises made by crying, shouting, or by means of
whistle, rattle, bell, gong whether or not for the purpose of advertising or
other such purposes. (Prior code § 5090.4.2)



8.36.060   Residential interior noise standards.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person, at any location within the city,
to operate or cause to be operated, any source of sound or to allow the
creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured inside a
dwelling unit to exceed any of the categorized noise level standards as set
forth in the following table:



 


NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA




Category

 

Cumulative Number of minutes in any one-hour time period

 

Evening and Daytime
6 a.m. to 7 p.m.

 

Nighttime
7 p.m. to 6 a.m.




1

 

5

 

45

 

35




2

 

1

 

50

 

40




3

 

0

 

55

 

45




 



   B.   In the event the measured ambient noise level without the
alleged offensive source in operation exceeds an applicable noise level
standard in any category above, the applicable standard or standards shall be
adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level.



   C.   Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be
reduced by five dB for pure tone noises, noises consisting primarily of
speech or music, or four recurring impulsive noises.



   D.   If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot
reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient
noise level without the source can be measured, the noise level measured
while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the noise
level standards.



   E.   If the source of noise is of an impulse or voluntary nature
such as shouting, loud conversation, playing or operation of audio and video
equipment and is audible in a dwelling unit, the noise level in the above
table shall conclusively be determined to be exceeded. (Prior code § 5090.6)



8.36.070   Noise source exemptions.



   The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
chapter:



   A.   Activities conducted in public parks, public playgrounds and
public or private school grounds, including but not limited to school
athletic and school entertainment events during normal hours of instruction;



   B.   Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to,
or connected with emergency activities or emergency work;



   C.   Noise sources associated with the infrequent, occasional and
unusual maintenance of residential property provided such activities take
place between the hours of six a.m. and nine p.m. on any day except Saturday
or Sunday, or between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m. on Saturday or
Sunday;



   D.   Noise sources associated with a lawful commercial or industrial
activity caused by installed mechanical devices or equipment, including air
conditioning or refrigeration systems, installed prior to the effective date
of this chapter; that this exception shall expire twelve months after the
effective date of the chapter. This exception shall not apply to such
mechanical devices which are not in good repair;



   E.   Noise sources associated with the collection of waste or
garbage from commercially zoned or industrially zoned property by the city or
its authorized franchisee;



   F.   Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been
preempted by state or federal law;



   G.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.36.040 and
8.36.050, where the intruding noise source when measured as provided in
Section 8.36.030 is an existing residential air conditioning or refrigeration
system or associated equipment, the exterior noise level at the property line
shall not exceed fifty-five (55) dBA. For residential air conditioning or
refrigeration systems or associated equipment installed after the effective
date of this chapter, the exterior noise level at the property line when
measured as provided in Section 8.36.030 shall not exceed fifty (50) dBA;



   H.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.36.040 and
8.36.050, the collection of waste or garbage from residentially zoned
property or from persons authorized to engage in such activity, and who are
operating truck-mounted loading or compacting equipment, shall not take place
before six a.m. or after seven p.m. The noise level created by such
activities when measured at a distance of fifty (50) feet in an open area
shall not exceed the following standard:



   1.   Eighty-five (85) dBA for equipment in use, purchased or leased
prior to the effective date of this chapter,



   2.   Eighty (80) dBA for new equipment purchased or leased after the
effective date of this chapter;



   I.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 8.36.040 and
8.36.050, noise sources associated with the operation of electrical
substations shall not exceed fifty (50) dBA when measured as provided in
Section 8.36.030. (Prior code § 5090.6)



8.36.080   Warning signs in places of public entertainment.



   It is unlawful for any person to permit the operation or playing of any
loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source of
sound for public entertainment within a building or structure wherein the
noise level exceeds ninety-five (95) dBA as determined using the slow
response of a sound level meter at any point normally occupied by a customer,
without a conspicuous and legible sign stating “WARNING! SOUND LEVELS
WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT.” (Prior code § 5090.7)



8.36.090   Variances.



   A.   The owner or operator of a noise source for which it has been
determined violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an
application for variance from strict compliance with any particular
provisions of this chapter where such variance will not result in a hazardous
condition or a nuisance and strict compliance would be unreasonable in view
of all the circumstances. The owner or operator shall set forth all actions
taken to comply with such provisions, and the reasons why immediate
compliance cannot be achieved. A separate application shall be filed for each
noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common
ownership or fixed sources under common ownership on a single property may be
combined into one application.



   B.   Upon receipt of the application and within thirty (30) days,
the community development director shall either: (1) approve such request in
whole or in part; (2) deny the request; or (3) refer the request directly to
the city council for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. In the event the variance is approved, reasonable conditions may be
imposed which may include restrictions on noise level, noise duration and
operating hours, an approved method of achieving compliance and a time
schedule for its implementation. The decision of the community development
director is subject to appeal to the city council upon recommendation of the
planning commission by filing a written appeal not later than fifteen (15)
days following the mailing of the decision to the applicant.



   C.   Factors which the community development director or city
council must consider shall include but not be limited to the following:



   1.   Uses of property within the area affected by the noise;



   2.   Factors related to initiating and completing all remedial work;



   3.   Age and useful life of the existing noise source;



   4.   The general public interest, welfare and safety.



   D.   The city council may grant variances from provisions of this
chapter subject to such term, conditions and requirement as may be deemed
reasonable to achieve compliance with the provisions and intent of this
chapter.



   E.   A fee may be charged to recover the actual costs in processing
such variances.



   F.   The approved noise ordinance variance must be in the possession
of any operator of mobile noise sources during otherwise prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter. An approved noise ordinance variance shall also
be in the possession of a fixed noise source which would otherwise violate
the provisions of this chapter. Failure to have the variance in the
possession of the operator or property occupant when the provisions of this
chapter are violated, as indicated above, shall constitute a violation of
this chapter, enforceable as provided in Section 8.36.100. (Prior code §
5090.8)



8.36.100   Violation--Enforcement.



   A.   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010. Each hour of
activity which violated the provisions herein shall constitute a sole and
separate violation. The provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by an
injunction issued out of the court of jurisdiction. Any violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance.



   B.   The community development director, or a designee, shall be
responsible for the enforcement of Section 8.36.040 and Section 8.36.060(A)
through (D) inclusive. The chief of police shall be responsible for the
enforcement of Sections 8.36.050 and 8.36.060(E). (Prior code § 5090.9)



8.36.110   Emergency equipment.



   The provisions of this chapter shall have no application to the
sounding of a siren or the making of other usual signal or signals by any
police or other peace officers in the performance of their duties, nor to the
sounding of any siren or the making of any other usual signal upon any
ambulance or firefighting equipment in the usual and customary manner. (Prior
code § 5091)



Chapter 8.40
NUISANCES



Sections:



8.40.010   Findings and Purpose.



8.40.020   Definitions.



8.40.030   Public nuisances.



8.40.040   Responsibility for property maintenance.



8.40.050   Authority of enforcement officer.



8.40.060   Declaration of nuisance; issuance of administrative enforcement
order.



8.40.070   Abatement of public nuisances.



8.40.080   Failure to respond to administrative enforcement order.



8.40.090   Abatement by City.



8.40.100   Summary abatement.



8.40.110   Notice to vacate.



8.40.120   Account and record of cost of abatement.



8.40.130   Notice of report.



8.40.140   Collection on tax roll.



8.40.150   Procedure not exclusive.



8.40.160   Franchise.



8.40.170   Penalties.



8.40.010   Findings and purpose.



   A.   The city council of the city of Visalia does hereby find that
it is necessary to provide for the abatement of conditions which are
offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and
community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable
enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, or hazardous or injurious to the
health, safety or welfare of the general public in such ways to constitute a
nuisance; and to provide standards to safeguard life, health and public
welfare in keeping with the character of the city by allowing for the
maintenance of property or premises for each of the following purposes:



   1.   To safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people
maintaining property or premises in good and appropriate condition;



   2.   To promote a sound and attractive community appearance; and



   3.   To enhance the economic value of the community, and each area
in it, through the regulation of the maintenance of property or premises.



   B.   Accordingly, the City Council finds and declares that the
purpose of this Chapter is to:



   1.   Reduce the threat to health, safety, welfare, and appearance
and economic value due to the decline in property condition(s) by lawfully
delineating the circumstances under which such condition(s) may be considered
illegal and/or abated; and further finds that,



   2.   Abatement of such condition(s) is in the best interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City because maximum use
and enjoyment of property or premises in proximity to another depends upon
maintenance of those properties or premises at or above the minimum standard.
(Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.020   Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter the terms below shall mean the
following:



   “Abandoned,” in addition to those provisions provided by state
codes, local ordinances and case law, shall mean and refer to any item which
has ceased to be used for its designated purpose.  The following factors
will be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned:
present operability and functional utility, the date of last effective use,
the condition of disrepair or damage, the last time effort was made to repair
or rehabilitate the item, the status of registration or licensing of the
item, the age and degree of obsolescence, the cost of rehabilitation of the
item versus its market value, and the nature of the area and the location of
the item.



   “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, demolish or otherwise
remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such
an extent as the Enforcement Officer in his/her judgment shall determine is
necessary in the interest of the general health, safety, and welfare of the
community.



   “Abatement standards” means those minimum requirements set forth by
the enforcement officer by which premises shall be abated and maintained in
order to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   “Administrative enforcement order” shall refer to the order issued
by an enforcement officer determining that a violation of a municipal code
section or other provision as set forth in 1.13.050 has occurred, and
establishing the administrative penalty to be assessed, or setting forth the
administrative abatement order to be imposed.



   “Attractive nuisance” means any condition, instrument or machine
which is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to children whether in
a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot.  This
includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned
refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or
structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may
prove hazardous of dangerous to inquisitive minors.



   “Camping” means the use of either a public park, a private or
public street, or a vacant field, or place, none of which are intended for
living accommodation purposes, as a temporary or permanent residence. Camping
activities may be evidenced by the erecting of tents or any structure
providing shelter; (including but not limited to trees, paper, metal, tarps,
wood, shrubs, or bushes) sleeping with or without bedding, sleeping bag,
blanket, mattress, tent, hammock, or other similar device; making
preparations to sleep; storing personal belongings; starting or maintaining a
fire; cooking; or preparing meals.  Persons utilizing a vehicle as a mobile
living unit must abide by Visalia Municipal Code Section 17.32.100.



   “Dismantled” means that from which essential equipment, parts or
contents have been removed or stripped and the outward appearance verifies
removal.



   “Enforcement officer” means that City Officer or employee as may be
designated in writing by the City Manager to enforce property or premises
maintenance, zoning and other City Code violations, as authorized by
California Penal Code § 836.5.



   “Inoperative” means incapable of functioning or producing activity
for mechanical or other reasons.



   “Lienholder” means any person, as defined in this Chapter, who has
a recorded interest in real property, including mortgagee, beneficiary under
a deed of trust, or holder of other recorded liens or claims of interest in
real property.



   “Nuisance” means any public nuisance known at common law or in
equity jurisprudence.



   “Owner” means the registered owner of a vehicle, the person(s) to
whom property tax is assessed on real or personal property, as shown on the
last equalized assessment roll of the County, renter(s), lessor(s) and other
occupants residing permanently or temporarily on property.



   “Person” means individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, social club, fraternal organization, trust, estate, receiver, or
any other entity.



   “Premises” means all property, lots, parcels or real estate,
portion of any land, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied,
including adjacent or associated sidewalks, parking strips, the abutting half
of any street or alley between lot lines, buildings, structures, landscaping,
plantings, trees, bushes, fences, and the exterior storage of personal
property, equipment, supplies and vehicles.



   “Property” means any real property including but not limited to
land, lot, or parcel of land, and any improvements located thereon, held by
any owner, and shall include any alley, sidewalk, parkway or unimproved
public easement abutting such real property, lot or parcel of land.



   “Responsible party” shall refer to any natural person, the parent
or legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, trust,
estate, receiver, cooperative, partnership, corporation, association,
business, joint venture, limited liability company, any government agency
that is not statutorily exempt, or any other entity, who has done any act for
which an administrative enforcement order may be imposed.



   “Structure” means anything constructed, built or planted upon, any
edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up
or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which structure
requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location
on the ground, including fences, gates, garages, carports, swimming and
wading pools, patios, outdoor areas, paved areas, walks, tennis courts and
similar recreation areas.



   “Wrecked” means that which has outward manifestation or appearance
of damage to parts and contents which are essential to operation. (Ord.
2009-08, § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.030   Public nuisances.



   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this
Chapter for an owner or other person in control of said property or premises
to keep or maintain property, premises or rights-of-way in such a manner that
any of the following conditions exist:



   A.   Abandoned, dismantled, wrecked, inoperable, unlicensed, and
discarded objects, equipment or appliances such as, but not limited to
vehicles, boats, water heaters, refrigerators, furniture which is not
designed for outdoor use, household fixtures, machinery, equipment, cans or
containers standing or stored on property or sidewalks or streets which can
be viewed from a public street or walkway, alley or other public property
which items are readily accessible from such places, or which are stored on
private property in violation of any other law or ordinance;



   B.   Discarded putrescibles, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or recycled
items which have not been recycled within thirty (30) days of being deposited
on the property which are determined by an enforcement officer to constitute
a fire hazard or to be detrimental to human life, health or safety;



   C.   Oil, grease, paint, other petroleum products, hazardous
materials, volatile chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides or waste
(solid, liquid or gaseous) which is determined by a enforcement officer to
constitute a fire or environmental hazard, or to be detrimental to human
life, health or safety;



   D.   Lumber (excluding lumber for a construction project on the
property with a valid permit), salvage materials, including but not limited
to auto parts, scrap metals, tires, other materials stored on premises in
excess of seventy-two (72) hours and visible from a public street, walkway,
alley or other public property;



   E.   Receptacles for discarded materials and recyclables which are
left in the front yard following the day of the regularly scheduled refuse
pick-up for the property;



   F.   Swimming pool, pond, spa, or other body of water, or excavation
which is abandoned, unattended, unsanitary, empty, which is not securely
fenced, or which is determined by the enforcement officer to be detrimental
to life, health or safety;



   G.   Any premises which detrimentally impacts the surrounding
neighborhood because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay or is unsafe for
the purpose for which it is being used or is not secured or is improperly
secured;



   H.   Any premise or property in a condition which is in fact a fire
hazard or which results or can result in the impairment of the ability of the
department of fire and emergency management to respond to  and suppress
fires; and,



   I.   Any condition on a property which meets the following
requirements:



   1.   Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; and



   2.   Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood,
or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance
or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.



   J.   Camping in areas not specifically designated for such use or
not specifically authorized by a public agency.  Camping on private property
shall be permissible only in the rear yard of an existing single family
residence in a residential zone for a period not to exceed two consecutive
days and there is written permission from the property owner.



   K.   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to
place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, upon
public or private property within the city, or in an area under jurisdiction
of said city, any human feces or to urinate in public. Violators of this
provision are subject to administrative citation or being punished as
authorized by this chapter for maintaining a public nuisance.



(Ord. 2013-12, § 3, 2013: Ord. 2009-08, § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 2006-16, §
2 (part), 2006)



8.40.040   Responsibility for property maintenance.



   The owner, occupant, lessee or tenant of any property within the City
shall be responsible for the maintenance or property and premises in a manner
consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and the Municipal Code of the
City of Visalia.  (Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.050   Authority of enforcement officer.



   Enforcement of this Chapter may be accomplished by the enforcement
officer in any manner authorized by this Chapter, the City of Visalia
Municipal Code, or by any other law, including but not limited to abatement
of the nuisance conditions by the City pursuant to this Chapter, issuance of
misdemeanor citation, and all other applicable civil actions and remedies. 
(Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.060   Declaration of public nuisance; issuance of administrative
enforcement order.



   A.   Right to inspect. The enforcement officer shall have the right
to inspect properties pursuant to this code and other applicable laws. Such
inspection shall be performed to secure compliance with or prevent the
violation of this code or other uniform codes adopted thereunder. Such
inspection may be made in the following circumstances:



   1.   The enforcement officer may inspect a residential unit upon
receiving a complaint regarding public nuisance, substandard building
conditions, or the management quality standards as specified in this code,
from any person upon the property, who has viewed the property or who has
reason to believe that such conditions exist;



   2.   The enforcement officer may inspect a property which he/she
reasonably believes fails to meet the requirements of this code or other
uniform codes adopted hereunder;



   3.   The owner, after failing to abate nuisance(s) as defined in
this chapter, shall be subject to required annual inspections for a three
year period for the subject property.



   B.    Reimbursement of inspection costs. Costs of inspections
pursuant to this chapter shall be determined pursuant to Section 15.44.100 of
this chapter, and unless otherwise provided, shall be paid by the owner of
the residential unit. Provided, that costs of inspections initiated by tenant
complaint shall be paid by the tenant, unless the enforcement officer
determines that the public nuisance or a substandard building exists pursuant
to the state housing law justifying the complaint exists, in which case the
cost shall be paid by the owner.



   C.   Management quality standards. The following items shall
constitute reasonable basis for the enforcement officer to believe that a
property is not being properly managed or maintained.  The existence of any
of these circumstances shall justify an inspection of the property by the
enforcement officer.  In addition, violation of these standards may be used
as evidence that a public nuisance exists.



   1.   For an individual residential unit, whether the unit is a
standalone residence or part of a multi- family complex, more than six police
and/or fire calls over a one year period (other than a medical emergency);



   2.   For a complex or building containing multiple residential
units, more than a monthly average of .20 police and/or fire calls per unit
over a six month period (other than a medical emergency);



   3.   Any violation of this chapter or the continued presence of
graffiti for more than a two week period;



   4.   Any determination by the health officer that a pest vector is
present;



   5.   Any violation of the Uniform Building Code or Uniform Housing
Code relating to maximum occupancy or health and safety standards.



   D.   The administrative enforcement order required pursuant to this
section shall contain those elements set forth in Section 1.13.060 (B) of
this Municipal Code, and shall be substantially in the following form:



TO THE PROPERTY OWNER:



Property Address:                                        
               



Property Owner’s Address (if different)                        
                                                   
                               



NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that on the     day of              , 2   
  , pursuant to Chapter 8.40 of the Municipal Code of the City of Visalia,
an Enforcement Officer of the City of Visalia declares that the following
conditions set forth in Chapter 8.40  of said Municipal Code constitute a
public nuisance and that such nuisance must be abated by the repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal of said conditions: [description of
conditions constituting a nuisance in violation of this Chapter].



   Restructure, repair, or removal of said conditions must be completed
and maintained by the           day of            , 2    , in
accordance with the  standards of the current codes as adopted by the City
of Visalia or other standards as determined by the Enforcement Officer.



   Failure to abate said conditions by the date specified above shall
result in the City acquiring jurisdiction to abate the conditions at the
owner's expense and in addition, an administrative penalty in the amount of
_____________ may be incurred.



   All property owners who wish to object to the proposed abatement of the
conditions cited in this notice are hereby notified that they have the right
to request and Administrative hearing before a hearing officer pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 1.13 [Provide contact information]. Sufficient
cause must be shown why said conditions should not be abated.



   At the time the appeal is filed, an appeal fee is due and payable to
the City of Visalia, and a deposit of the administrative penalty must be
made, or evidence must be provided that a request for a hardship waiver has
been filed with the City of Visalia finance division.  All appeals must be
made in writing and comply with Section 1.13.080 of the Visalia Municipal
Code.  If the property owner or responsible party fails to request an appeal
before the date specified above, then the administrative order shall become
final.



   The responsible person or the property owner upon whom this
administrative enforcement order has been imposed may seek review of the
order pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.4 and
1094.6.  There are no appeals to the Visalia City Council excluding the
separate review of the City costs to abate the nuisance, if any.  (Ord.
2011-03, § 2, 2011; Ord. 2008-15, § 2, 2008; Ord. 2006-16,§ 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.070   Abatement of public nuisances.



   A.   If an enforcement officer issues to an administrative
enforcement order that includes an abatement order, the owner or responsible
party shall abate the nuisance as follows:



   1.   All premises, buildings, or structures declared to be such
public nuisances and ordered to be abated shall be abated by rehabilitation,
demolition, removal or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this
code with the concurrence of the enforcement officer.



   2.   Any unsafe building declared a public nuisance under this
chapter either shall be repaired or rehabilitated in accordance with current
codes as adopted by the city, or shall be demolished at the option of the
enforcement officer.  If the structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of its occupants
or the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated.



   3.   Whenever an enforcement officer shall determine that any
conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in this Chapter exist
upon any premises within the city, the enforcement officer may require or
provide for the abatement thereof and may make the costs of such abatement a
lien on the real property or premises in question pursuant to the procedures
set forth in this Chapter and Chapter 1.13 of the Municipal Code of the City
of Visalia.



   B.    When a administrative enforcement order includes an abatement
order, the City may choose to abate the public nuisance or violation of the
Municipal Code through any of the abatement methods set forth in the
Municipal Code or in other local, state or federal law, and nothing contained
in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing or adversely
affecting the City's ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of
those proceedings as the City may deem are applicable.  Proceeding under
this Section will not preclude the City from proceeding under other Sections
of this Chapter.  (Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.080   Failure to respond to administrative enforcement order.



   A.   Owners and responsible parties who have failed to respond and
abate a nuisance after issuance of an administrative enforcement order, and
who have failed to appeal such determination as provided for in this Chapter
and Chapter 1.13 of the Municipal Code, are conclusively deemed guilty of
violating this Chapter and the administrative enforcement order shall become
final and all appeal rights shall be deemed waived.  Owners and responsible
parties who have failed to respond and abate a nuisance after issuance of an
administrative enforcement order, and who have failed to appeal such
determination and may be assessed administrative penalties pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 1.13 and may be issued a citation for an infraction or
a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 8.40.170.



   B.   Owners who through their inaction have caused the City to have
their nuisance abated as set forth in Section 8.40.090 or 8.40.100 shall be
assessed those costs incurred for such abatement.  The cost of abating such
nuisance shall also include a per parcel charge to cover the costs of
administering this chapter.  Collection of all costs assessed pursuant to
this Section shall be made as provided for in this Chapter and Chapter 1.13
of the Municipal Code.



   C.   Any property owner, or other responsible person, who after
notification by the enforcement officer, fails to abate a condition as set
forth in this Chapter shall become liable for the expenses of fire
suppression, including injury to firefighters which is determined to have
been caused by or attributed to conditions for which the City has issued an
administrative enforcement order.  Such expenses shall become a lien on the
property as provided for in this Chapter.



   D.   The failure of any owner or other person to receive the
administrative enforcement order notice shall not affect the enforcement of
this Chapter.  (Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.090    Abatement by City.



   A.   Upon the expiration of the time period set forth in the
administrative enforcement order, the City shall acquire jurisdiction to
abate any such condition constituting a nuisance pursuant to this Chapter
which has not been abated by the owner of the property or premises in
question or which has been confirmed to constitute a nuisance in the course
of the administrative hearing process set forth in Chapter 1.13 of the
Municipal Code.



   B.   Whenever the City has acquired jurisdiction to abate such a
nuisance, the enforcement officer or his/her designee is authorized to enter
upon private property for purposes of abating such conditions if:



   1.   The enforcement officer obtains written consent from the owner
to enter the property or premises to abate the nuisance; or



   2.   The enforcement officer and/or his authorized representative is
able to enter the property or premises and abate the nuisance without
invading any of owner's constitutionally protected privacy interests; or



   3.   The enforcement officer obtains an abatement warrant from a
court of competent jurisdiction.



   C.   The cost for abatement of a nuisance by the City shall be
charged to the owner as set forth in this Chapter.  Any owner shall have the
right to abate said condition, or have the same abated at their ownexpense;
provided, such condition has been abated prior to the arrival of the
enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative.  (Ord. 2006-16, §
2 (part), 2006)



8.40.100   Summary abatement.



   A.   The City may immediately abate any nuisance or violation of
this Chapter that poses a clear and imminent danger to, or requires immediate
action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of, life, health,
property, or essential public services.  The City may perform this abatement
without providing prior notice or hearing to the owner or occupier of the
offending premises. Such summary abatement may proceed only upon the
authorization of the City Manager and the City Attorney, or their respective
designees.  The abatement shall include all actions necessary to secure the
premises to prevent further occurrences of the nuisance.



   B.   The owner and/or occupier of the premises or the persons
creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance shall be subject
to any administrative fines, penalties, fees and costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, imposed or incurred by the City pursuant to this Chapter.



   C.   Any abatement performed by the City pursuant to this section
shall be at the expense of the owner and/or occupier of the premises or the
persons creating, causing, allowing, permitting, committing, or maintaining
the nuisance.  The City shall recover its expenses pursuant any of the
methods set forth in VMC Section 1.13.110.



   D.   As soon as practicable following completion of the abatement,
the enforcement officer and the community development director shall issue an
administrative enforcement order in accordance with this Chapter.  Persons
receiving such an order shall be entitled to all hearing rights as provided
herein.  (Ord. 2006-16, § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.110   Notice to vacate.



   A.   Any structure determined to be a public nuisance by the
Enforcement Officer under this Chapter and found to be in such a condition as
to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of
the public or its occupants shall be ordered to be vacated. A notice to
vacate in addition to being served a Notice to Abate in accordance with
Section 8.40.070, shall be posted or affixed upon each exit of the structure
and shall be in substantially the following form:




DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY




   It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this
notice



            Fire and Emergency Management



               City of Visalia



   B.   No person shall remain in or enter any structure which has been
so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such
structure under permit.  (Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.120   Account and record of cost of abatement.



   The enforcement officer shall keep an account of the cost of abating
such nuisance and shall embody such account in the report and assessment list
which shall be filed with the city clerk and presented to the city council.
The allowable cost of abating such nuisance shall include a charge sufficient
to cover the costs of administering this Chapter. The report and assessment
list shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description
sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the charge proposed
to be assessed against each such separate lot or parcel.



(Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.130    Notice of report.



   The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at
city hall, together with the notice of filing thereof and of the time and
place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and
confirmation. Said notice shall advise owners that they may appear at the
time and place of the city council hearing and object to any matter related
thereto. A like notice shall also be served on each and every owner and/or
other responsible person who owns or has control of any lot or parcel listed
on said report in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10)
of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil
Procedure.  If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found,
the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place
upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation published in Tulare County.  (Ord. 2006-16,
passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.140   Collection on tax roll.



   After confirmation of the report and assessment list by the city
council, a copy of the report shall be provided to the city finance officer
and payments may be received by him/her for the amount due until such time as
the matter is referred to the county auditor for placement on the tax rolls.
On or before the 10th day of August of each year, a certified copy of the
confirmed report shall be filed with the Tulare County Auditor for the
amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land
as they appear on the current assessment roll. The assessments may be
collected on the tax roll at the same time and in the same manner as
municipal taxes. They shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for property taxes. All
laws and ordinances applicable to the levy collection and enforcement of city
taxes are made applicable to such special assessments, and the lien of said
assessment shall have priority of the taxes with which it is collected. 
(Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.150   Procedure not exclusive.



   The procedure provided in this Chapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this
city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described
herein, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other
action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.  (Ord.
2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



8.40.160   Franchise.



   When the enforcement officer has contracted with or granted a franchise
to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter
upon private property or public property to abate the condition constituting
a public nuisance pursuant to this Chapter.  (Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2
(part), 2006)



8.40.170   Penalties.



   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to maintain property or premises
conducive to creating a public nuisance in violation of this chapter or to
refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so by the enforcement
officer in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state
law where such is applicable. Notwithstanding the classification of a
violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is
commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense
from a misdemeanor to an infraction.



   A.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year.



   B.   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this article within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this chapter within one year.



   C.   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new
and separate offense.  (Ord. 2006-16, passed § 2 (part), 2006)



Chapter 8.44
OPEN BURNING



Sections:



8.44.010   General.



8.44.020   Definitions.



8.44.030   Prohibited types of open burning.



8.44.040   Types of authorized outdoor burning.



8.44.050   Outdoor cooking fires.



8.44.060   Outdoor fireplaces.



8.44.070   Agricultural burning.



8.44.080   Ceremonial fires, or theatrical fires.



8.44.090   Violation.



8.44.010   General.



   Any other provisions of this code notwithstanding, a person shall not
kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning
or outdoor fires unless conducted under the parameters set forth by Health
and Safety Code Sections 40000 et seq. (relating to air pollution control
districts), or the rules or regulations of any air pollution control district
established pursuant thereto, along with the rules set forth by the
California Fire Code and this Chapter of the City of Visalia Municipal Code.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.020   Definitions.



   For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:



   "Agricultural burning" means burning of trimmings, stubble, or other
residue incident to commercial farming operations.



   "Bonfire" means an outdoor fire that is larger than three feet in
diameter and one foot in height.



   "Ceremonial or theatrical fire" means a bonfire, open burning, or use
of flames larger than a candle during an outdoor special event, ceremony or
outdoor theatrical performance. Use of fire or pyrotechnics during indoor
performances is separately regulated by the provisions of the California Fire
Code in effect under state law and Chapter 8.20 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "City" means the city of Visalia.



   ''Cooking fires" means a barbecue, grill or similar heating or cooking
device being used for heating or cooking of food.



   "Deep pit barbecue" refers to a method and constructed item for
barbecue cooking meat below the surface of the earth.



   "Dwelling units" means a single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   "Fire Code Official" means the fire chief, fire marshal or other
designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this
chapter, or a duly authorized representative.



   "Kindle" means sparked, lit, burned, burnt, ignited, torched, set a
light, set on fire.



   "One- and two-family dwellings" means a building that does not contain
more than two dwelling units.



   "Open burning" means the burning of solid materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through
a stack or chimney within a building. This term excludes "safe and sane
fireworks " that are otherwise permitted for use by state law and Chapter
8.24 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Outdoor fireplace" means an outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that
may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible material.
An outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small
hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.030   Prohibited types of open burning.



   The following types of open burning are prohibited:



   1.   Open burning of trimmings, stubble, or other cut vegetation
unless the exception stated below for commercial agricultural operations with
a burn permit issued pursuant to San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control
District and the city of Visalia requirements applies;



   2.   Open burning of waste materials, rubbish, trash, plastic,
demolition or construction material, feces, or wood with coatings or
preservatives;



   3.   Open burning that is deemed by the fire code official as
roaring or out of control fires;



   4.   Open burning within proximity of dry weeds or other hazards
conditions that could cause a fire to spread or fires that are not constantly
supervised;



   5.   Open burning determined by the fire code official that are
causing smoke emissions offensive to the surrounding neighbors or if the fire
involves a hazardous or offensive condition such as odor, atmospheric
conditions, local circumstances or the fire is not at an adequate distance
away from a structure or other type of combustible material;



   6.   No open burning may be conducted at commercial and multi-family
property unless it falls within the exceptions listed in this chapter for
cooking fires or outdoor fireplaces;



   7.   All open burning that does not otherwise comply with the
prevision set forth by this chapter, the California Fire Code and San Joaquin
Valley Air Pollution Control District, including but not limited to
agricultural burning on non-burn days or a "wood burning device use
prohibited" as determined by the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control
District is prohibited.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.040   Types of authorized outdoor burning.



   The following types of open burning are not prohibited or intended to
be regulated by this chapter:



   1.   Controlled fire for firefighter training, in compliance with
Section 4.2.1 of the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District Rule
4103 that requires a district-approved firefighter training plan be submitted
for approval at least fifteen days prior to the date of the proposed burn;



   2.   The burning of contraband material within the performance of
their official duties by law enforcement agencies or fire protection agencies
as permitted per Section 41509 of the California Health and Safety Code.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.050   Outdoor cooking fires.



   A.   All cooking fires shall be in constant attendance, located an
adequate distance away from a structure or combustible material and have
adequate means available to extinguish the fire.



   B.   Cooking fires operated at a one- or two-family dwelling used
for preparing food for human consumption do not require a permit and are
permitted by this chapter.



   C.   When using a barbecue, grill and/or pit barbecue in a
commercial setting, a conditional use permit shall be obtained and operations
shall be in compliance with the California Fire Code.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.060   Outdoor fireplace.



   Outdoor fireplaces are allowed if they comply with the following
conditions:



   1.   It must not be used on a "wood burning device use prohibited"
day as determined by the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District.



   2.   Fuel is to be clean, dry wood and/or charcoal without coatings
or preservatives. No debris, trash, garbage, demolition materials or yard
waste shall be burned.



   3.   The fire is contained in a fire bowl, fire pit, chiminea or
outdoor fireplace that has a fire area not larger than three feet in diameter
and one foot in height.



   4.   A homemade fire bowl or pit is permitted if the fire area is
not larger than three feet in diameter and one foot in height, and
constructed of noncombustible material that contains the fire and its embers.



   5.   An outdoor fireplace shall not be operated within 15 feet of a
structure or combustible material. Exception: Outdoor fireplaces used at one-
and two-family dwellings.



   6.   Conditions such as dry weeds or other hazards that are nearby
or may cause a fire to spread from the outdoor fireplace shall be eliminated
prior to ignition.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.070   Agricultural burning.



   Agricultural burning shall be subject to permits from the San Joaquin
Valley Air Pollution Control District and the Visalia fire department before
agricultural burning can be conducted. Agricultural burning shall be
conducted while conforming to the following conditions:



   1.   All permits shall be obtained by the property owner of record.



   2.   All agricultural burning shall be conducted by commercial
farming operations only.



   3.   All conditions set forth through the permitting process by the
fire code official shall be complied with at all times.



   4.   Violators may be billed for suppression costs should any action
be taken by the Visalia fire department.



Exception: Use of orchard heaters incidental to commercial farming operations
in times of heavy frost that are in compliance with San Joaquin Valley Air
Pollution Control District Rule 4303 (Orchard Heaters).



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.080   Ceremonial fires, or theatrical fires.



   Ceremonial fires or theatrical fires are not permitted unless the
following conditions are met:



   1.   Permit must be received in advance from the fire official and
requests must be made at least fifteen business days prior to the ceremonial
fire or theatrical fire. The organizer must provide the specific date the
ceremonial fire or theatrical fire will occur, the approximate time it will
be lit and extinguished, contact person(s) that will be overseeing it,
description of safety precautions around it, plan for extinguishing it, and
any other information requested by the fire official.



   2.   The organizer of the ceremonial fire or theatrical fire must
comply with all other relevant Municipal Code requirements, including but not
limited to the provisions of the California Fire Code adopted by the city of
Visalia.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



8.44.090   Violation.



   When open burning is in violation with any of the provisions of this
chapter, including any violation of the California Fire Code, or creates or
adds to a hazardous situation, or a required permit for open burning has not
been obtained, the fire code official is authorized to order the
extinguishment of the open burning operation.



   When the person responsible for the fire, refuses, is unable, or not
present at the fire, the Visalia fire department may immediately extinguish
any fire in violation of this chapter that poses a clear and imminent danger
to, or requires immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or
impairment of, life, health, property, or essential public services. The
Visalia fire department may extinguish a fire without providing prior notice
or hearing to the owner or occupier of the offending premises.



   A.   The owner and/or occupier of the premises or the persons
creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the illegal or prohibited
outdoor fire shall be subject to any administrative fines (VMC Section
1.13.050), penalties, fees and costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
imposed or incurred by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   B.   Any extinguishment performed by the city pursuant to this
section shall be at the expense of the owner and/or occupier of the premises
or the persons creating, causing, allowing, permitting, committing, or
maintaining the prohibited outdoor fire. The city shall recover its expenses
pursuant any of the methods set forth in VMC Section 1.13.110.



(Ord. 2016-20 § 2 (part), 2016)



Chapter 8.46
EXPOSURE OF MINORS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS



Sections:



8.46.010   Legislative purpose.



8.46.030   Definitions.



8.46.050   Use of tobacco by minor.



8.46.060   Display of tobacco products.



8.46.010   Legislative purpose.



   The city of Visalia has determined that in order to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of those citizens within the city and metropolitan area,
under the age of eighteen (18) years, it is necessary to regulate the sale,
acquisition, or possession of tobacco products facilitated by self-service
displays. (Ord. 2000-11 § 1 (part), 2000)



8.46.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, those terms identified in this section shall,
unless the contexts indicates otherwise, be ascribed the meaning contained
herein.



   “Employee” means any person in the service of another under any
contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written, where the employer has
the power or right to control and direct the employee in the material details
of how the work is to be performed. Employee also includes any person
volunteering his or her time or service.



   “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.



   “Tobacco product” means any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe
tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco
which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling, snuffing, or other
manner of ingestion or absorption in the human body.



   “Tobacco shop” means a business establishment in which fifty (50)
percent or more of any one or more of the following is devoted to or
attributable to the sale of tobacco products:



   1.   Wall space or any other display area such as tables, racks, or
display structures; or



   2.   Gross revenues.



   “Wholesale retailer” means any large-scale retail establishment
with supporting goods and services designated to service a regional service
trade area and located within the PCR zone. (Ord. 2000-11 § 1 (part), 2000)



8.46.050   Use of tobacco by minor.



   No minor shall, in the streets or in any public place, smoke a cigar,
pipe, cigarette, or shall use tobacco in any form. (Ord. 2000-11 § 1 (part),
2000)



8.46.060   Display of tobacco products.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business,
partnership, or other entity doing business within the city of Visalia to
store, stock, keep, or display for sale or transfer any tobacco product in
any area other than a place that is locked and secured, or is otherwise made
inaccessible to the public and which is accessible only to the employees of
the business. This prohibition shall not apply to “tobacco shops” or
“wholesale retailers.” (Ord. 2000-11 § 1 (part), 2000)



Chapter 8.48
SMOKING



Sections:



8.48.010   Purpose and findings.



8.48.020   Authority.



8.48.030   Definitions.



8.48.040   Smoking prohibitions, public places.



8.48.050   Stores.



8.48.060   Banks.



8.48.070   Hotels/motels.



8.48.080   Terminals.



8.48.090   Buses and taxis.



8.48.100   Theaters.



8.48.110   Recreational facilities.



8.48.120   Recreation halls.



8.48.130   Restaurants.



8.48.140   Places of exhibition.



8.48.150   Hospitals.



8.48.160   Schools.



8.48.170   Day care facilities.



8.48.180   Smoking prohibitions, workplace.



8.48.190   Places where smoking permissible.



8.48.200   Posting requirements.



8.48.210   Retaliation prohibited.



8.48.220   Violation--Smoking or posting.



8.48.230   Enforcement.



8.48.240   Other applicable laws.



8.48.250   Severability.



8.48.010   Purpose and findings.



   A.   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has determined
that tobacco smoke is a major source of indoor air pollution, and the Surgeon
General's 1986 report on the health consequences of involuntary smoking
includes that exposure to tobacco smoke places healthy nonsmokers at
increased risk for developing lung cancer.  Other health hazards on
involuntary smoking include respiratory infection, broncho-constriction, and
broncho-spasm. While all members of the population are truly at increased
risk due to exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke, it constitutes a special
health hazard for children, the elderly and people with chronic lung
disorders, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease and
cardiovascular disease.



   B.   The Surgeon General labels smoking “the largest single
preventable cause of death and disability for the U.S. population.”



   C.   Employees, subjected to prolonged exposure to second-hand smoke
in the workplace, have been found in scientifically conducted studies to
experience a loss of job productivity and some have been forced to take
periodic sick leave because of reactions to said second-hand smoke.
Furthermore,  studies have shown higher costs to the employer are associated
with smoking in the workplace due to increases in absenteeism, accidents,
cost of medical care, loss of productivity, and cleaning and maintenance
requirements. A recent scientific study has reported that second-hand smoke
from tobacco may cause a significant amount of cardiovascular disease in the
United States and that the number of deaths from this cause may exceed the
deaths caused by lung disease associated with second-hand smoke.



   D.   Smoking in public places and workplaces is a major cause of
fires and damage to merchandise and equipment as well as costly maintenance
and repairs to furniture and fixtures.



   E.   The health care costs produced by smoking-related ailments and
diseases  constitute a heavy and avoidable financial drain on our community.



   F.   Opinion surveys show that a majority of the citizens of Visalia
favor restriction on smoking in areas accessible to the general public.



   G.   Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and
irritant. Smoking results in serious and significant physical discomfort of
non-smokers and constitutes a public nuisance.



   H.   Research concludes that exposure to second-hand smoke is the
third leading cause of preventable death, after smoking and alcohol.



   I.   Second-hand smoke has been found by the Environmental
Protection Agency to be a known carcinogen.



   J.   The U.S. Surgeon General has concluded that second-hand smoke
is a cause of lung cancer and other diseases in healthy nonsmokers.



   K.   The U.S. Surgeon General has concluded that children exposed to
second-hand smoke have more respiratory infections and lung problems than
children who are not exposed to secondary smoke.



   L.   Numerous government and privately sponsored scientific studies
have concluded that approximately forty thousand (40,000) deaths per year
occur from lung cancer, other cancers, and heart disease due solely to
exposure to second-hand smoke.



   M.   Accordingly, the city council declares that the purpose of this
chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents
of, persons employed in, and persons who frequent the city who would benefit
by the regulation of smoking, and to recognize that the need to breathe
smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. (Prior code §
4047)



8.48.020   Authority.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to provisions of Health and Safety
Code Sections 25946 and 25949 for the purpose of restricting and regulating
smoking in order to reduce the hazards and nuisance which smoking causes
those who are involuntarily exposed. (Prior code § 4048)



8.48.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, those terms identified in this section shall,
unless the context indicates otherwise, be ascribed the meaning contained
herein.



   Bar. The term “bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, in which the serving
of food, if any, is incidental to the consumption of alcoholic drinks. The
dining area of a restaurant utilized primarily for the serving and
consumption of food shall not constitute a bar, even though alcoholic
beverages may be served therein.



   Commercial Enterprise--Nonprofit Entity-- Person--Public Agency.



   1.   The term “commercial enterprise” means any business entity
formed for the profit making purposes, including, but not limited to,
professional corporations and other entities under which legal, medical,
dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are
delivered, and also any person charged with the responsibility of controlling
conduct on behalf of the enterprise upon any premises regulated by this
chapter.



   2.   The term “nonprofit entity” means any corporation,
unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable,
philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other
similar purposes, the net proceeds from operations of which are committed to
promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private
gain, together with any person charged with the responsibility of controlling
conduct on behalf of the entity upon any premises regulated by the provisions
of this chapter.



   3.   A public agency is not a “nonprofit entity” within the
meaning of this section.



   4.   The term “person” means any natural person, partnership,
corporation, unincorporated association, joint venture, business trust, joint
stock company, club or other organization of any kind.



   5.   For purposes of this chapter, and to the fullest extent allowed
by law, public agencies and their facilities, located within the city, shall
be subject to all provisions herein, in the same manner and to the extent as
commercial enterprises, persons and non-profit entities.



   Employee. The term “employee” means any person, who is employed by
an employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or
profit and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit
entity.



   Employer. The term “employer” means any person, partnership,
corporation, including any public entity, or nonprofit entity, who employs
the services of one or more individuals.



   Enclosed Area. The term “enclosed area” means all space between a
floor and ceiling which is served  by a common heating, ventilating and air
conditioning system  and is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows
(exclusive of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the
ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not
extend to the ceiling or are not solid, office landscaping, or similar
structures.



   Members of the General Public. The term “members of the general
public” means shoppers, customers, patrons, patients, students, clients and
other similar invitees of a commercial enterprise, public agency or nonprofit
entity, and excludes employees thereof, sales representatives, service repair
persons and persons delivering goods, merchandise or services to a commercial
enterprise, nonprofit entity or public agency.



   Office. The term “office” means an area enclosed by walls
containing a desk, table or similar furnishings for clerical, administrative
or supervisory work, a complex of such enclosures and a building containing
such enclosures, whether or not the building is utilized primarily for other
purposes such as retailing, wholesaling, or storage, or manufacturing,
together with all hallways, stairways, elevators, escalators, restrooms,
lobbies, waiting rooms, reception areas, entry areas, and conference rooms
within or associated with the complex of such enclosures, including: (1)
legal, medical, dental, engineering, accounting, counseling and other
professional offices; (2) insurance, real estate, ticket, collection agency,
and other offices where business services are offered to or goods or services
are offered to or may be ordered by or may be paid for by members of the
general public; and (3) offices to which members of the general public are
admitted in order to promote the objects or purposes of the public agency or
nonprofit entities.



   Organized Outdoor Event. The term “organized outdoor event” means a
scheduled concert, performance, sporting event, public demonstration or other
similar occurrences, open to members of the general public taking place
outside an enclosed area.



   Proprietor. The term “proprietor” means each owner, operator,
manager or other person having control of an establishment or facility within
which smoking is regulated by this chapter.



   Restaurant. The term “restaurant” means any dinner house, coffee
shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, soda fountain, fast food service and other
establishment where cooked or otherwise prepared food is sold to members of
the general public for consumption on the premises. The term does not include
a cafeteria or lunchroom defined as a workplace, whether or not members of
the general public incidentally frequent the facility.



   Smoking. The term “smoking” means lighting, inhaling, exhaling or
burning any pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed or plant, or carrying any lighted
pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, lighted weed, lighted plant or other
ignited combustible substance in any manner or in any form.



   Tobacco Store. The term “tobacco store” means a place utilized
primarily for the retail sale to members of the general public of tobacco
products or accessories and in which the sale of any other products is merely
incidental.



   Workplace. The term “workplace” means any enclosed area which is
occupied by two or more employees of a commercial enterprise, nonprofit
entity or public agency including to but not limited to the following:



   1.   A place utilized for the manufacturing, processing, assembly,
maintenance or repair of any products, goods, equipment, tools, appliances,
furnishings or other object; or the physical storage for purposes of
wholesaling, future utilization for operational purposes, or future transfer
preceding consumption or other utilization of any products, goods,
merchandise, materials, supplies, equipment, tools, appliances or furnishings;



   2.   A place utilized or operated for a purpose described by
Sections 8.48.040 through 8.48.190 and from which members of the general
public are excluded;



   3.   A place utilized as a union hall, cafeteria, lounge, lunchroom,
restroom, conference room, training room, lecture room, or classroom
primarily for the use or benefit of employees.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this definition, a private residence
including either an attached or detached garage shall not constitute a
workplace, except when the residence serves as a licensed or unlicensed day
care facility for children or the elderly. (Prior code § 4049)



8.48.040   Smoking prohibitions, public places.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful
for any member of the general public or any other person including an
employee to smoke in the public places named and described in Sections
8.48.040 through 8.48.170 and other public places similarly situated,
including but not limited to the following Enclosed Areas:



   1.   Merchandise display areas, checkout stations, and counters and
other pay stations;



   2.   Hallways;



   3.   Restrooms;



   4.   Escalators, elevators and stairways;



   5.   Lobbies;



   6.   Reception areas;



   7.   Waiting rooms;



   8.   Service lines;



   9.   Classrooms, meeting or conference rooms, or lecture halls; and



   10.   Other places in which members of the general public congregate
for service or otherwise frequent.



   B.   It is also unlawful for any member of the general public or any
other person, including an employee, to smoke in an area where public seating
is provided while attending an outdoor public event, except in designated
areas.  Seating in areas designated for smoking will not exceed forty (40)
percent of the total public seating provided. (Prior code § 4050)



8.48.050   Stores.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040 shall be applicable to:
(1) the enclosed common areas of shopping malls; (2) automobile dealerships,
furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale
at retail; (3) grocery, specialty, department and other stores which sell
goods or merchandise at retail, and (4) service stations, stores or shops for
the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, or motor vehicles,
barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners and laundromats, video game, pool hall
and other amusement centers, and other similar establishments offering
services or products to members of the general public. (Prior code § 4051)



8.48.060   Banks.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040 shall be applicable to
banks, including savings and loan associations, credit unions and other
similar institutions which offer financial services to members of the general
public. (Prior code § 4052)



8.48.070   Hotels/motels.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040 shall be applicable to
hotels and motels in which guests typically rent lodging for continuous
periods less than thirty (30) days. Smoking is permissible in rental rooms
and in on-premise restaurants, bars and other areas as provided in Sections
8.48.130, 8.48.190(B) and 8.48.190(E). The availability of nonsmoking rooms
will be prominently posted in the lobby sign-in area. The rooms so designated
will be posted as smoking prohibited and ash trays removed.  Customers
seeking accommodations should be routinely advised of the availability of
nonsmoking rooms. (Prior code § 4053)



8.48.080   Terminals.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040 shall be applicable to
depots and other terminals utilized by members of the general public for the
purpose of being transported upon or departing from airplanes, trains, buses
and taxis. (Prior code § 4054)



8.48.090   Buses and taxis.



   Smoking, by either passengers or operators, shall be prohibited within
buses, taxicabs and all public transit conveyances operated by or licensed by
the city. (Prior code § 4055)



8.48.100   Theaters.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040 shall be applicable to
theaters, including motion picture theaters, meeting halls and auditoriums
where motion pictures or live theatrical musical or dramatic productions are
made to an audience consisting of members of the general public assembled for
the purpose of witnessing the performance or presentation; provided that
neither this section nor Section 8.48.040 shall be construed to prevent
smoking by performers in connection with a stage production or by persons
making a presentation concerning addiction to tobacco or other drugs. (Prior
code § 4056)



8.48.110   Recreational facilities.



   A.   The prohibitions, contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be
applicable to enclosed areas of sports pavilions, gymnasiums, exercise rooms,
health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice skating rinks,
bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public
assemble to either engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic
competition or witness sports events.



   B.   Smoking is prohibited at all times within the seating areas of
an enclosed arena and in the surrounding open concourses where food and
beverages are dispensed.



   C.   Smoking may be allowed in enclosed on-site restaurants, subject
to the provisions of Section 8.48.130, and in enclosed on-site bars.



   D.   Smoking may be allowed in bowling alleys on those occasions
when league play occupies the majority of bowling lanes in the establishment,
and a majority of the members of the league(s) vote to allow smoking.
Evidence of the voting procedure and outcome of the vote must be retained by
the establishment, for inspection by the city upon request, for the duration
of the leagues's play. (Prior code § 4057)



8.48.120   Recreation halls.



   A.   The prohibitions, contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be
applicable to those areas of recreation halls and other similar facilities
where members of the general public play bingo or cards, dance or engage in
recreational, character-building or cultural activities which are designated
as nonsmoking.



   B.   An owner, manager or operator of a recreation hall shall
designate not less than fifty (50) percent of the main activities area of
such facility not including restrooms, lounges and kitchens as nonsmoking. 
Commencing nine months after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, an owner, manager or operator of a recreation hall shall designate
not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the main activities area of such
facility not including restrooms, lounges and kitchens as non-smoking.
Commencing eighteen (18) months after the adoption of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, the owner, manager or operator of a recreation hall shall
designate the entire premises of such facility including restrooms, lounges
and kitchens as nonsmoking. Signs shall be posted in the manner prescribed by
Section 8.48.220. It shall not constitute a violation of this chapter to
smoke in a location where smoking has been authorized by this chapter.



   C.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed in any
manner to restrict or otherwise impair the authority of an owner, manager or
operator to increase the nonsmoking area of a recreation hall. (Prior code §
4058)



8.48.130   Restaurants.



   A.   Within all restaurants, the prohibitions contained in Section
8.48.040, shall be applicable to lobbies, waiting areas, restrooms and those
dining seating areas which are designated as nonsmoking.



   B.   The owner, manager or operator of a restaurant shall designate
not less than fifty (50) percent of the available customer seating as
nonsmoking.  Commencing nine months after the adoption of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, the owner, manager or operator of a restaurant
shall designate not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the available
customer seating as nonsmoking. Commencing eighteen (18) months after the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner, manager or
operator of a restaurant shall designate all available customer seating as
nonsmoking. The owner, manager or operator of the restaurant shall post signs
as prescribed by Section 8.48.200 and remove all ashtrays from tables located
in the nonsmoking areas. Where a bar shares the same enclosed area with the
restaurant, the bar seats must be counted with the restaurant seats in
determining the total number of nonsmoking restaurant seats.  The owner,
manager or operator shall post a notice at the restaurant entrance that a
nonsmoking section is available. It shall not constitute a violation of this
chapter to smoke in a location where smoking has been authorized by this
chapter.



   C.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed in any
manner to restrict or otherwise impair the authority of an owner, manager or
operator to increase the nonsmoking seating in a restaurant or bar. (Prior
code § 4059)



8.48.140   Places of exhibition.



   The prohibitions contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be applicable to
libraries, museums, galleries, convention halls and similar facilities where
members of the general public assemble for the purpose of viewing the
exhibition of art, artifacts, objects of historical or cultural significance,
products, merchandise, equipment, appliances or services. (Prior code § 4060)



8.48.150   Hospitals.



   The prohibitions, contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be applicable to
hospitals, rest and convalescent homes, medical clinics, physical therapy
facilities and other places where medical, dental, psychiatric or counseling
services are delivered to members of the general public. Operators of
facilities treating psychiatric or chemically impaired patients may permit
smoking by patients in designated areas; provided, the medical director of
such facility has determined in writing that the practice is beneficial for
the recovery or treatment of such patients and that the practice will not
interfere with the recovery and treatment of nonsmoking patients; and
provided, that adequate nonsmoking areas are made available for nonsmoking
patients. Neither this section nor Section 8.48.040 shall be construed to
prevent smoking in locations or otherwise under conditions in which smoking
is expressly authorized by or under statutes or administrative regulations
applicable to such licensed facilities. (Prior code § 4061)



8.48.160   Schools.



   The prohibitions, contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be applicable to
any school or educational institution operated by a commercial enterprise,
public agency or nonprofit entity for the purpose of providing academic
classroom instruction, trade, craft, computer or other technical training, or
instruction in dancing, artistic, musical or other cultural skills. (Prior
code § 4062)



8.48.170   Day care facilities.



   The prohibitions, contained in Section 8.48.040, shall be applicable to
private residences during the time when such residences are operated as
licensed or unlicensed day care facilities for children or the elderly.
(Prior code § 4063)



8.48.180   Smoking prohibitions, workplace.



   A.   Smoking is prohibited in enclosed workplaces under the control
of a public or private employer which the general public has access to in the
course of conducting business, including but not limited to, open office
areas, shared offices, private offices, hallways, restrooms, escalators,
elevators, stairways, lobbies, reception areas, waiting rooms, classrooms,
meeting or conference rooms, and auditoriums.



   B.   On-site cafeterias, lunchrooms and lounges shall be deemed
workplaces and smoking prohibited therein, whether or not such facilities are
open to members of the general public.



   C.   Each commercial enterprise, nonprofit entity and public agency
shall comply with these smoking prohibitions and be responsible for their
implementation in the workplace, and “No smoking” signs shall be posted
in the manner prescribed by Section 8.48.200. (Prior code § 4064)



8.48.190   Places where smoking permissible.



   A.   Smoking may be  permitted in all locations where smoking is
not prohibited by this chapter, including the following locations:



   1.   A private residence, including an attached or detached garage,
whether or not the residence is utilized for office or other business
purposes, except when such residence is operated as a licensed or unlicensed
day care facility for children or the elderly;



   2.   Bars;



   3.   Tobacco stores, whether operated as a separate business
entity  or as a physically separated facility within a department store or
other business entity;



   4.   Private clubs during events attended exclusively by members of
the organization and their invited guests and from which members of the
general public are excluded;



   5.   Within conference/meeting rooms, public and private assembly
rooms, banquet rooms, dining rooms or areas of restaurants, hotels and
motels, while these places are occupied for private functions to which only
persons specially invited are entitled to attend and from which members of
the general public are excluded;



   6.   Within bowling alleys while the majority of available bowling
lanes are occupied by league play and the league(s) have voted to allow
smoking;



   7.   In any enclosed place wherein this chapter specifically permits
smoking, notwithstanding the fact that such location is a workplace
accessible to the general public.



   B.   It shall not constitute a violation of Section 8.48.040 a
person to smoke in a location where smoking has been authorized in the manner
prescribed by this section.



   C.   The foregoing places are not considered workplaces, subject to
the provisions of Section 8.48.180. Employers will, however, attempt to find
a reasonable alternative accommodation where feasible for nonsmoking
employees who do not wish to be assigned to work in a smoking permissible
area.



   D.   Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter which permits
smoking in a place of employment, any nonsmoking employee may object to his
or her employer about smoke in his or her workplace. The employer shall
attempt to reach a reasonable accommodation, insofar as possible. The area in
which smoking is prohibited shall be posted by “No Smoking” signs in the
manner prescribed by the provisions of Section 8.48.200. (Prior code § 4065)



8.48.200   Posting requirements.



   A.   Each owner, operator, manager or other person having control of
an establishment or facility within which smoking is regulated by this
chapter shall conspicuously post in every place where smoking is prohibited
“No Smoking” signs with letters not less than one inch in height (or the
international “No Smoking” symbol consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it).



   B.   An owner, operator, or manager of a building wherein, pursuant
to these regulations, there is no smoking permitted in any space in the
building may limit the “No Smoking” postings to first floor entrances and
exits and to the elevator lobby areas of all other floors.



   C.   Motion picture theaters shall show upon the movie or live
action screens for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature
motion picture the message that smoking is prohibited within the audience
seating and other areas as specified.



   D.   Hotels and motels will prominently post in the lobby a sign
notifying patrons of the availability of nonsmoking accommodations. The rooms
so designated will be posted as nonsmoking rooms and ashtrays removed. (Prior
code § 4066)



8.48.210   Retaliation prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for a commercial enterprise, nonprofit entity or
public agency to retaliate against any member of the general public or an
employee or applicant for employment of the enterprise, entity or public
agency because such member of the general public, employee or applicant seeks
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise protests smoking
by others.



   B.   Violation of any of the provisions of Section 8.48.200 shall be
remedied through criminal or civil action filed in a court of competent
jurisdiction for injunctive, criminal prosecutions or other appropriate
relief. (Prior code § 4067)



8.48.220   Violation--Smoking or posting.



   A.   Any person who violates the prohibitions contained in Sections
8.48.050 through 8.48.170 and any proprietor who violates Section 8.48.200 by
failing to post the signs or take the other actions required by this section
may be prosecuted as of an infraction, punishable in the manner hereinafter
prescribed and/or may have his/her business license revoked.



   B.   Fines for the crimes made infractions by this section shall be
levied in the amounts prescribed.  Any person, who violates any provisions
of this chapter by smoking in a designated nonsmoking area, shall be guilty
of an infraction, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00)  for the
first violation, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent
violation. Any employer/proprietor, who violates any provisions of this
chapter by failure to post required signs, by failure to request violating
smokers to extinguish the lit object may be guilty of an infraction
punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first
violation, and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each subsequent
violation and/or may have his/her business license revoked. Subsequent
violations may be prosecuted as misdemeanors with fines up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and/or jail time up to six months. (Prior code § 4068)



8.48.230   Enforcement.



   A.   Voluntary enforcement of and mandatory compliance of this
chapter shall lie with the employer/proprietor of the establishment. An
individual violating this chapter shall be requested by the
employer/proprietor not to smoke and shall be made aware of the posted “No
Smoking” signs. If the individual continues to violate the chapter, the
employer/proprietor shall inform the individual they are guilty of an
infraction of a city ordinance punishable by a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for
the first violation and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent
violation.



   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the chief of the police
department to enforce, on behalf of the city, the provisions of this chapter.
The chief shall be authorized to prosecute, in the name of the city, criminal
actions for the recovery of fines for violations of this chapter made
infractions by Section 8.48.220 for violations of Sections 8.48.050 through
8.48.200.



   C.   In the performance of the enforcement responsibilities assigned
by this chapter, the chief of the police department shall:



   1.   Establish a telephone number through which all complaints by
citizens relating to violations of this chapter may be directed or referred;



   2.   Reduce such complaints to writing, and analyze the frequency
and volume thereof in relation to alleged violations of this chapter by or at
particular establishments or facilities;



   3.   Conduct an on-site inspection of any establishment or facility
with respect to which the nature and volume of complaints suggests
long-standing and pronounced violations of any of the provisions of this
chapter;



   4.   Provide to the owner, operator or manager of any such
establishment or facility a copy of the provisions of this chapter and such
advisory assistance to rectify future violations as may be necessary to
achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



   5.   Follow up such investigation and advice with a written
directive explaining in detail the steps required in order to achieve future
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



   6.   If the violations do not cease following expiration of a
reasonable period of time, request commencement of a criminal or civil
proceeding by the city attorney pursuant to the provisions of Section
8.48.250, or civil remedies listed below as may be appropriate to do one,
some or all of the following civil remedies:



   a.   Public Nuisance. Any continuing violation of the provisions of
this chapter may be declared a public nuisance hereunder, and the city
attorney may proceed to abate the same by filing a civil action in a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   b.   Licensed Revocation. Any continuing violation of the provisions
of this chapter by proprietor may be punishable by the city revoking his/her
business license.



   c.   Injunctive Relief. Any continuing violation of the provisions
of this chapter by proprietors may be restrained by a temporary restraining
order, preliminary and/or permanent injunction. (Prior code § 4069)



8.48.240   Other applicable laws.



   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Prior code §
4070)



8.48.250   Severability.



   If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which
can be given effect without the invalid provision(s) or application(s), and
to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
(Prior code § 4071)



Chapter 8.52
SWIMMING POOLS



Sections:



8.52.010   Private swimming pools.



8.52.020   Pool barriers.



8.52.030   Public swimming pools.



8.52.010   Private swimming pools.



   Definitions:



   “Alternate methods” means any method or material, approved by the
building official, that provides an equivalent means of meeting safety and
other code requirements.



   “Barrier” means any material or assembly which restricts access by
children to a body of water. Fences, gates, walls, or the exterior walls of a
building, or any combination thereof may be considered as part of a barrier.



   “Pool” means any material or construction which is designed to hold
or transfer water. Examples may include but are not limited to swimming
pools, spas, fountains, and fish pond or tanks. Not included in this
definition are natural or man-made bodies of water such as large ponds,
lakes, channels, or ditches. (Ord. 9631 § 2 (part), 1996)



8.52.020   Pool barriers.



   A.   Every person owning land on which there is situated a pool
which is eighteen (18) inches or more in depth at any point, shall erect and
maintain thereon an adequate barrier sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children. Such barrier, including gates therein, shall
not be less than five feet in height above any elevation within five feet of
the barrier. Barriers shall not be climbable. Vertical members may have a
spacing between them of not more than four inches and all horizontal members
which provide a foothold shall be separated by not less than four feet
vertically, unless on the pool side of the barrier. Latching devices shall
not be operable less than four and one-half feet above all elevations within
five feet of an access.



   B.   All gates, doors, or other accesses through the barrier shall
be self-closing and self-latching.



   Exception: Except for doors from a garage, doors from the interior of a
building need not have a self-closing device when an approved pool cover or
other alternate method, that provides the same degree of protection, is
approved by the building official.



   C.   Pools adjacent to or fronting on a body of water such as a lake
or pond shall have a barrier on all sides except for the side or sides
adjacent to the body of water. Side barriers shall extend four feet where
possible. (Ord. 9631 § 2 (part), 1996)



8.52.030   Public swimming pools.



   The provisions of Sections 8.52.010 and 8.52.020 of this chapter shall
not apply to this section. Public swimming pools or spas shall conform to the
California Health and Safety Code and to the accessibility requirements of
State Title 24. (Ord. 9631 § 2 (part), 1996)



Chapter 8.56
WEEDS AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Sections:



8.56.010   Purpose and finding.



8.56.020   Definitions.



8.56.030   Responsibility of property maintenance.



8.56.040   Administration and enforcement.



8.56.050   Public nuisance.



8.56.060   Declaration; notice and order.



8.56.070   Administrative hearing.



8.56.080   Administrative penalties.



8.56.090   Abatement by city.



8.56.100   Summary abatement.



8.56.110   Charges for fire suppression services.



8.56.120   Account records and collection on tax roll.



8.56.130   Procedure not exclusive.



8.56.010   Purpose and finding.



   A. The city council of the city of Visalia does hereby find that it is
necessary to provide for the abatement of conditions which are determined to
be a fire hazard, offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to
property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference
with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent property or premises, or hazardous
or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such
ways to constitute a nuisance; and to provide standards to safeguard life,
health and public welfare in keeping with the character of the city by
allowing for the maintenance of property or premises for each of the
following purposes:



   1.   To safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people
maintaining property or premises in good and appropriate condition;



   2.   To promote a sound and attractive community appearance; and



   3.   To enhance the economic value of the community, and each area
in it, through the regulation of the maintenance of property or premises.



   B.   Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the
purpose of this chapter is to:



   1.   Reduce the threat to health, safety, welfare, and appearance
and economic value due to the decline in property condition(s) by lawfully
delineating the circumstances under which such condition(s) may be considered
illegal and/or abated; and further finds that,



   2.   Abatement of such condition(s) is in the best interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city because maximum use
and enjoyment of property or premises in proximity to another depends upon
maintenance of those properties or premises at or above the minimum standard.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.020   Definitions.



   For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and
certain provisions are to be construed as herein set forth, unless it shall
be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:



   "Abate" means to repair or replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy
the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an
extent as the fire code official in his/her judgment shall determine is
necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the
community.



   "Abatement standards" means those minimum requirements set forth by the
fire code official by which property shall be abated and maintained in order
to comply with Section 8.56.050.



   "Owner" means the person(s) to whom property tax is assessed on real or
personal property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the
county, renter(s), lessor(s) and other occupants residing permanently or
temporarily on property.



   "Premises" means all property, lots, parcels or real estate, portion of
any land, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, including
adjacent or associated sidewalks, parking strips, the abutting half of any
street or alley between lot lines, buildings, structures, landscaping,
plantings, trees, bushes, fences, and the exterior storage of personal
property, equipment, supplies and vehicles.



   "Responsible person" means the owner of any premises and/or any agent,
lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of the same.



   "Weeds" means any grasses, weeds or similar vegetation which because of
having attained, or which may attain, such a large growth that when dry shall
become a fire or safety hazard, a visual blight and/or which are otherwise
noxious or dangerous.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.030   Responsibility of property maintenance.



   Regardless of occupants, tenant, lessees, or proprietor of any real
property in the city, the legal owner of the property or premises shall be
responsible for the removal or destruction of all such weeds, trash, junk and
other debris as set forth in this chapter from his/her property,
rights-of-way, and from the abutting half of any street or alley between lot
lines as extended.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.040   Administration and enforcement.



   A.   The administration of this chapter is the responsibility of the
fire chief or his or her designee.



   B.   The fire chief shall have the authority to establish rules,
regulations and procedures necessary to enforce or carry out provisions of
this chapter.



   C.   Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished in any manner
authorized by this chapter, the City of Visalia Municipal Code, and the
California Fire Code or by any other law, including but not limited to
abatement of the nuisance conditions by the city, and all other applicable
civil actions and remedies. Violations of this chapter may alternatively be
prosecuted as a misdemeanor or as an infraction.



   D.   The fire chief and/or his/her designee shall have the right to
inspect properties pursuant to this chapter and other applicable laws. Such
inspection shall be performed to verify conditions, secure compliance with or
prevent the violation of this chapter or other codes adopted thereunder.
(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.050   Public nuisance.



   Each of the following conditions is declared to constitute a public
nuisance, and whenever the designated fire official determines that any of
the conditions exist upon any premises, he/she may require or provide for the
abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter and make the costs of locating the
nuisance, inspection time, processing of paperwork, sending of notice,
conducting a re-inspection, and abatement, a lien on the subject real
property.



   A.   The existence of weeds on the premises, or public sidewalks, or
rights-of-way;



   B.   Trash, discarded objects, rubbish, refuse, waste paper,
appliances (including, but not limited to, water heaters, washers, dryers,
televisions, refrigerators), furniture which is not designed for outdoor use,
household fixtures, and junked items which can be viewed from a public street
or walkway, alley or other public property which items are readily accessible
from such places, or which are stored on private property in violation of any
other law or ordinance;



   C.   Overgrowth of shrubs, bushes, trees, vines, plants or similar
vegetation that poses a fire hazard, health hazard, visual blight, structural
intruding or that obscures the view or impairs the access to fire protection,
utilities or other building features;



   D.   Quantities of debris such as hay, straw, grass clippings, tree
or shrub trimmings that pose, or may become, a fire hazard or attract rodents
and/or insects;



   E.   Any other condition or use of property which is in fact a fire
hazard, health hazard, visual blight or can endanger emergency responders or
which results or can result in the impairment of the ability of the fire
department to respond to and suppress fires.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.060   Declaration; notice and order.



   A.   The fire chief and/or his/her authorized designee may issue
without warning a "declaration of public nuisance notice and order" if any
conditions of a public nuisance set forth in this chapter are present on a
premises. The declaration shall be served by any method permitted by Visalia
Municipal Code Section 1.13.070.



   1.   Failure of any owner or other person to receive this notice
shall not affect the enforcement of this chapter if service requirements for
the declaration of public nuisance were followed.



   2.   Costs associated with issuing the declaration shall be paid by
the owner and constitute a special assessment against such representative
parcels or lots, and shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount
of such assessments, until paid.



   3.   Additional orders may be issued if compliance is not attained.



   B.   Any owner shall have the right to abate said condition, or have
the same abated at their own expense; provided, such condition has been
abated prior to the arrival of the enforcement officer or his/her authorized
representative.



   C.   Owners and responsible parties who have failed to respond and
abate a nuisance after issuance of a declaration, and who have failed to
appeal suchdetermination as provided for in this chapter and Chapter 1.13 of
the Visalia Municipal Code, are conclusively deemed guilty of violating this
chapter and the declaration shall become final and all appeal rights shall be
deemed waived.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.070   Administrative hearing.



   All owners have the right to an administrative hearing of a declaration
of public nuisance notice and order issued under Section 8.56.060. Requests
for such appeals shall be done in conformance with Visalia Municipal Code
Section 1.13.080. If no request for appeal is filed pursuant to this section,
then the appeal rights shall be deemed waived and the declaration of public
nuisance notice and order shall become final.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.080   Administrative penalties.



   Owners and responsible parties who have failed to respond and abate a
nuisance after issuance of an declaration of public nuisance notice & order,
and who have failed to appeal such determination and may be assessed
administrative penalties pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.13 of the
Visalia Municipal Code. These penalties may accrue and each day the property
is not in compliance shall be considered another violation.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.090   Abatement by city.



   A.   Upon the expiration of the time period set forth in the
declaration of public nuisance notice and order, the city shall abate any
such condition constituting a nuisance pursuant to this chapter which has:



   1.   Not been abated by the owner of the property or premises in
question; or



   2.   Been confirmed to constitute a nuisance in the course of the
administrative hearing process set forth in Chapter 1.13 of the Visalia
Municipal Code; or



   3.   Obtained an abatement warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   B.   The fire chief or his/her designee, including but not limited
to city employees, agents, or independent contractors, are authorized to
enter upon private property for purposes of abating such conditions. It shall
be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, or person having charge of or
occupying any such lot or premises to refuse to permit representatives of the
city to enter upon any property, during daylight hours, where any such
nuisance is reasonable believed to exist for the purpose of inspection and,
where such nuisance exists, for the purpose of abating the nuisance as
provided in this chapter, or in interfere with such representatives in any
manner whatsoever in the removal of such nuisance.



   C.   The cost for abatement of a nuisance by the city shall
constitute a special assessment against such representative parcels or lots,
and shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such
assessments, until paid following the process described in this chapter, see
Section 8.56.120.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.100   Summary abatement.



   A.   The city may immediately abate any nuisance or violation of
this chapter that poses a clear and imminent danger to, or requires immediate
action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of, life, health,
property, or essential public services. The city may perform this abatement
without providing prior notice or hearing to the owner or occupier of the
offending premises.



   B.   The owner and/or occupier of the premises or the persons
creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance shall be subject
to any administrative fines, penalties, fees and costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, imposed or incurred by the city pursuant to this chapter.



   C.   Any abatement performed by the city pursuant to this section
shall be at the expense of the owner and/or occupier of the premises or the
persons creating, causing, allowing, permitting, committing, or maintaining
the nuisance. The city shall recover its expenses pursuant any of the methods
set forth in Section 1.13.110 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.110   Charges for fire suppression services.



   Any property owner, or other responsible person, who fails to abate a
condition as set forth in this chapter shall become liable for the expenses
of fire suppression, including injury to firefighters, which is determined to
have been caused by or attributed to, in whole or in part, said conditions
for which the city has issued a declaration of public nuisance notice &
order. Such expenses shall be charged to the property owner and/or other
responsible person and shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.120   Account records and collection on tax roll.



   A.   The fire chief and/or his/her authorized representative shall
keep an account of the costs and fees of enforcing this chapter. The fire
chief, or designee, may present this account of costs and fees and request
the Visalia city council to declare a special assessment. Upon confirmation
by the city council, any unpaid costs or fees, as confirmed, shall constitute
a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land, and as
thus keep a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.



   B.   After the confirmation of said amount, a certified copy shall
be turned over to the assessor and the tax collector of the county of Tulare,
acting on behalf of the city, whereupon it shall be the duty of said assessor
and tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the
next regular bills of taxes levied against the said respective lots and
parcels for land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as other municipal taxes
are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for
other municipal taxes.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



8.56.130   Procedure not exclusive.



   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this
city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described
herein, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other
action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.



(Ord. 2016-19 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 8.60
PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICE FEES



Sections:



8.60.010   Public safety services--Charges.



8.60.020   Determination of costs reasonably borne.



8.60.030   Traffic offender fund.



8.60.010   Public safety services--Charges.



   There shall be charged in connection with the provision of the city of
enumerated public safety services, a fee or charge sufficient to recover the
costs reasonably borne by the city in providing said public safety services.
Said public safety services which shall be subject to a fee or charge shall
be set by resolution of the city council and shall include only public safety
services which the city council finds are provided to small segments of the
public.  The amount of such fee or charge shall be determined by the city
manager or his designee and shall be approved and set by resolution of the
city council, from time to time, and in no event shall such fee or charge
exceed the costs reasonably borne by city in providing such public safety
services. (Prior code § 4570)



8.60.020   Determination of costs reasonably borne.



   The costs reasonably borne by city providing such public safety
services shall be determined by the city manager or his designee by reference
to the following criteria:



   A.   All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to
salaries, wages, fringe benefits, services and supplies, operational
expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense
incurred;



   B.   All applicable indirect costs including, but not limited to
building maintenance and operation, equipment operation, communication,
printing and reproduction and like indirect expenses;



   C.   General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and
charging the expenses of the city council, city manager, finance department,
city treasurer, city clerk, city attorney, police department, fire
department, and all other staff and support services;



   D.   Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing
and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting
expenses. (Prior code § 4571)



8.60.030   Traffic offender fund.



   A.   In order to qualify for a state grant under the vehicle
impoundment program of the State of California Office of Traffic Safety and
to create a self-sustaining program to continue after the grant ends, it is
necessary to create a traffic offender fund. All fees and charges collected
for the impoundment of vehicles for a period of thirty (30) days or longer
pursuant to this section shall be deposited into said fund. All expenditures
from said fund shall only be appropriated for the purposes of the traffic
offender program for use in the enforcement of, education for, and
prosecution of suspended or revoked driving privileges, unlicensed drivers
and persons driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Qualifying
expenditures may include, but are not limited to, the purchase of equipment,
contractual services, materials and supplies, and any other technology
necessary to prosecute the case and for personnel costs.



   B.   Pursuant to Sections 8.60.010 and 8.60.020 of this chapter, a
fee for the impoundment of vehicles for a minimum of thirty (30) days under
the program shall be established from time to time. (Ord. 9703 § 1, 1997)



Chapter 8.64 PUBLIC USE/CONSUMPTION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA



Sections:



8.64.010   Purpose and intent.



8.64.020   Definitions.



8.64.030   Regulations applicable to individual use or consumption of
marijuana.



8.64.040   Regulations applicable to individual cultivation of medical
marijuana.



8.64.050   Medical marijuana dispensaries and commercial marijuana
activity prohibited.



8.64.060   Violations of chapter.



8.64.010   Purpose and intent.



   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health,
safety, morals, general welfare and enjoyment of private property of the
residents within the city by restricting the public use and consumption of
marijuana; prohibiting, to the maximum extent permitted under the state law,
the commercial cultivation, distribution, transportation, storage,
manufacturing, processing, and sale of marijuana within the City of Visalia;
and by regulating the individual cultivation of marijuana. This chapter is
intended to prohibit these activities to the maximum extent possible by a
local agency as authorized under the state law, specifically the
Compassionate Use Act, Proposition 215, passed in 1996, and the Adult Use of
Marijuana Act, Proposition 64, passed in 2016.



   B.   The City Council finds that the regulation established by this
Chapter 8.64 is necessary in order to avoid adverse effects that would occur
in the absence of any local regulations due to the uncertainty caused by the
fact that state law expressly permits activity that is prohibited under
federal law.  However, in enacting this ordinance, the City Council does not
intend to create new or separate permissive authority for the use,
cultivation or consumption of any substance that is prohibited by federal
law.  Accordingly, in the event state law defining medical marijuana and
making its possession, cultivation and use permitted under state criminal
laws is repealed, or in the event federal law is determined to preempt state
law on this issue, the City Council intends Chapter 8.64 to also be repealed
to correspond to state law, or to be preempted by action of federal law, as
the case may be.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2011-10 § 4, 2011; Ord. 2005-19 § 2
(part), 2005)



8.64.020   Definitions.



   All definitions set forth in Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5
and 11362.7 et seq. and Business and Professions Code Section 26001, as may
be amended, including but not limited to the terms “person with an
identification card”, “primary caregiver”, “qualified patient”,
“customer,” “delivery,” “license,” “manufacture,” and
“identification card” shall apply under this chapter in addition to the
definitions set forth as follows:



   “Commercial marijuana activity” shall mean the same as
“commercial cannabis activity” under Business and Professions Code
Section 26001(k), which includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture,
distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling,
transportation, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products as
provided in Business and Professions Code Division 10, regulating the
cultivation, distribution, transportation, storage, manufacturing,
processing, and sale of marijuana and marijuana products for medical or
non-medical purposes.



   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.



   “Cultivation of medical marijuana” means the cultivation of
marijuana for medical purposes as defined in strict accordance with
California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq.



   “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana
products to a customer and includes the use of a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.



   “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L.,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part
of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include industrial
hemp as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5 or the
weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.



   “Marijuana products” means marijuana that has undergone a process
whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate,
including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical
product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.



   “Medical Marijuana” means the use of marijuana for the purposes set
forth in the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana Program Act,
which was adopted by California voters as Proposition 215 in 1996, found in
California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq.



   “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile
home, or similar dwelling.



   “Sell,” “sale,” and “to sell” includes any transaction
whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products is
transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis
or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same
and soliciting or receiving an order for the same.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-19 § 2 (part), 2005)



8.64.030   Regulations applicable to individual use or consumption of
marijuana.



   A.   Public consumption of marijuana is prohibited within the City
of Visalia. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume marijuana or
marijuana products in the city unless each of the following conditions is met:



   1.   Such smoking, ingesting or consumption occurs entirely within a
private residence, and



   2.   No smoke or odor resulting from such smoking, ingesting or
consumption may be detected from any neighboring property or residence.



   B.   In addition, the following prohibitions apply to the smoking,
ingesting, or otherwise consuming marijuana or marijuana products within the
City of Visalia:



   1.   No person shall smoke marijuana or marijuana products in a
location where smoking tobacco is prohibited.



   2.   No person may possess an open container or open package of
marijuana or marijuana products while driving, operating, or riding in the
passenger seat or compartment of a motor vehicle.



   3.   No person may smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products
while riding in the passenger seat of a motor vehicle.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2011-10 § 5, 2011; Ord. 2005-19 § 2
(part), 2005)



8.64.040   Regulations applicable to individual cultivation of medical
marijuana.



    A.   No person shall possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or
process marijuana plants or possess marijuana products produced by the plants
unless each of the following conditions are met:



   1.   Such cultivation occurs entirely within a single private
residence of upon the grounds of that private residence at one time.



   2.   Such cultivation occurs within a fully enclosed and adequately
secured building (as that term is defined in Title 17 of the Visalia
Municipal Code) having at least four solid walls and roof of masonry, metal
or wood, and standard locks, but not within any portion of a building or
structure dedicated to living space.



   3.   The building within which such cultivation occurs, and any
improvements within such building, meet all applicable building and zoning
requirements (including but not limited to required setbacks, height
limitations and fire sprinkler requirements), and the structure and
improvements themselves have been properly permitted and inspected.



   4.   Cultivation shall be limited to no more than six living plants
per private residence, which includes the grounds and any accessory
structures.



   5.   Cultivation does not constitute the establishment of a medical
marijuana dispensary in violation of Section 8.64.050.



   6.   Any chemicals or other materials used in such cultivation are
used in a manner that is consistent with any applicable rules and regulations
pertaining to chemical or material handling and storage, and no hazardous
materials are maintained or allowed to exist on the premises.



   7.   The living plants and any marijuana produced by the plants in
excess of 28.5 grams, as permitted by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1,
or as that section may be amended, must be kept within the person’s private
residence, or upon the grounds of that private residence, in a locked space
and must not be visible by normal unaided vision from a public place.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-15 § 2 (part), 2012: Ord. 2011-10
§ 6, 2011; Ord. 2005-19 § 2 (part), 2005)



8.64.050   Medical marijuana dispensaries and commercial marijuana
activity prohibited.



   A.   A medical marijuana dispensary as defined in subsection B. of
this section may not be established within the City of Visalia, and no permit
of any type shall be issued therefor. Notwithstanding Section 17.02.110 of
the Visalia Municipal Code, in no event shall a medical marijuana dispensary
as defined in subsection B. of this section be considered a permitted or
conditionally permitted use in any land use zoning district. This section
shall not affect the right to possess, use or cultivate marijuana for
medicinal purposes as is presently authorized or prohibited by the laws of
the State of California as set forth in the Health and Safety Code, Penal
Code, or other state law, or by any federal law, provided such possession,
use or cultivation otherwise complies with any applicable provisions of the
Visalia Municipal Code.



   B.   A medical marijuana dispensary is any facility or location,
whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana is cultivated, made available,
and/or distributed by or to three or more persons within the following
categories: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a patient with an
identification card, as those terms are defined in California Health and
Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. as such sections may be
amended from time to time.



   C.   Commercial marijuana activities are prohibited within the City
of Visalia.



   D.   Delivery of marijuana is prohibited within the city regardless
of whether the delivery is initiated within or outside of the city, and
regardless of whether a technology platform is used for delivery by a
dispensary. This subsection does not apply to delivery services that are
using public roads to travel through the City of Visalia as permitted under
state law, although such delivery services must comply with all other state
laws and local ordinances as applicable.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2011-10 § 7, 2011)



8.64.060   Violations of chapter.



   A.   Any violation of Section 8.64.040 or Section 8.64.050, whether
enforced through civil, criminal or administrative enforcement, shall be
subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per day of violation. 
For purposes of administrative enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.13 of the
Municipal Code, the penalty provided by this section is hereby adopted as an
alternative administrative penalty consistent with Section 1.13.050(D).



   B.   In addition to any other enforcement means provided by this
Municipal Code or by state law, any violation of any provision of this
chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant
any applicable provision of this Municipal Code and pursuant to state law,
and, among other enforcement means, shall be subject to an inspection and
abatement warrant obtained pursuant to the provisions of California Code of
Civil Procedure Section 1822.5.



(Ord. 2017-11 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-15 § 2 (part), 2012)



Chapter 8.66
AUTHORITY TO REGULATE RETENTION AND DESTRUCTION OF ROUTINE VIDEO MONITORING
RECORDS



Sections



8.66.010   Declaration and purpose.



8.66.020   Authority to implement regulatory policy.



8.66.010     Declaration and purpose.



   A.   The general purpose of routine video monitoring by the city and
all of its departments is to assist local law enforcement agencies in
investigating criminal activity, and to protect the security of the city's
property and personnel.



   B.   The City Council hereby declares that retention and destruction
of records created by video monitoring equipment operated by the city are
municipal affairs pertaining solely to local concerns.  As such, the city
has the authority to make and enforce ordinances, regulations, and policies
concerning retention and destruction of its routine video monitoring records.
(Ord. 2010 § 2 (part), 2010)



8.66.020   Authority to implement regulatory policy.



   Consistent with its powers over municipal affairs, the city hereby
directs the City Manager or his/her designee to develop and enforce a policy
governing when video monitoring shall occur, the use of such records, and
retention and destruction of such routine video monitoring records (“video
monitoring records policy”).  Such policy shall be initially presented to
the City Council for approval by resolution and may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.  The video monitoring records policy
adopted pursuant to this section shall include, but not be limited to,
provisions related to: (1) timing of destruction; (2) use of records; (3)
when video monitoring shall be used.  (Ord. 2010 § 2 (part), 2010)



Chapter 8.70
ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS



Sections



   8.70.010   Findings and purpose.



   8.70.020   Definitions.



   8.70.030   Cart containment system required.



   8.70.040   Cart identification signs.



   8.70.050   Permission for cart removal from business premises
required and unauthorized possession prohibited.



   8.70.060   Enforcement and remedies.



8.70.010   Findings and purpose.



   The City Council finds that abandoned shopping carts on public and
private property create conditions that reduce property values, promote
blight and deterioration, and result in a public nuisance. This chapter is
intended to ensure that measures are taken to prevent the removal of the
shopping carts from the owner’s premises and to facilitate the retrieval of
abandoned shopping carts in a manner consistent with state law. 



(Ord. 2017-06 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



8.70.020   Definitions.



   The following definitions apply for the purposes of this chapter:



   "Abandoned cart" shall mean any cart that has been removed, without the
written consent of the owner, from the owner's business premises or parking
area of the retail establishment on which the cart owner's business premises
are located and is located on either public or private property.



   "Business premises" means the interior of a cart owner's commercial
establishment, adjacent walkways, any loading area, and the parking area, as
defined herein. The owner's business premises may include a multi-store
shopping center with shared areas of parking and public access.



   "Cart identification sign" means a sign or engraved surface which is
permanently affixed to a shopping cart containing all of the information
specified in Section 8.70.040.



   "Cart owner" means the owner or operator of a commercial establishment
which provides carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting
goods of any kind.



   "Cart removal warning" means a placard, sign or painted text which
meets the requirements specified in Section 8.70.040.



   "Cart retrieval service" means a third party commercial service in the
business of retrieving and returning shopping carts.



   "Enforcement Officer" means any officer or employee of the city
designated with the authority to enforce the applicable provisions of the
City of Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Individual cart identification number" means a number unique to each
cart owned or provided by a cart owner.



   "On-site cart containment program" means one or more of the following
measures:



   1.   Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from
being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise
preventing the movement of the carts.



   2.   An on-site security guard to deter customers who attempt to
remove carts from the business premises.



   3.   Bollards and chains around the business premises to prevent
cart removal, if permitted by the applicable zoning and the site plan, and if
approved by the fire marshal.



   4.   Obtaining a security deposit from customers for the on-site use
of shopping carts.



   5.   The rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or
permanently used for the transport of goods.



   6.   Any other measure approved by Community Development as a means
to contain carts on the premises.



   "Parking area" means a parking lot or other property provided by a
commercial establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or
other vehicle. In a multi-store complex or shopping center, "parking area"
includes the entire parking area used by or controlled by the complex or
center.



   "Physical containment system" means one of the following, as approved
by the Director of Planning and Development Services:



   1.   Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from
being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise
preventing the movement of the carts.



   2.   Any other system of equipment approved by the Community
Development Director or designee which physically contains shopping carts on
the premises.



   "Shopping cart" or "cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or
a similar device provided by the operator of a commercial establishment for
the use of customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. A
cart sold by a commercial establishment to a retail customer for that
customer's personal use is not a shopping cart for the purposes of this
chapter.  (Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



8.70.030   Cart containment system required.



   Every cart owner shall operate and maintain an on-site cart containment
program as defined in Section 8.70.020. A cart owner may be exempted from
this requirement if he or she provides proof of contracting with a qualified
cart retrieval service and submits information Community Development Director
or designee which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that the
qualified cart retrieval service will: (i) actively locate shopping carts
within the city limits of Visalia seven (7) days per week, eight (8) hours
per day; and (ii) respond to complaints from the public in a manner which
results in the retrieval of shopping carts within twenty-four (24) hours
after receiving complaint(s). 



(Ord. 2017-06 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



8.70.040   Cart identification signs.



   A.   Pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1, each
shopping cart owned or used within the City shall have permanently affixed to
it and easily visible a cart identification sign or engraved surface which
includes all of the following information: The name of the cart owner; the
telephone number of the cart owner and/or commercial establishment to which
the cart belongs; a valid toll-free phone number for cart retrieval; the
procedure (if any) to be followed to obtain permission to remove the cart
from the business premises; and a notice to the public that unauthorized
removal of the cart from the business premises is a violation of state law
and city ordinance.



   B.   In addition to the cart identification and cart removal notice
required on each cart, the cart owner shall post a notice in substantially
the following form prominently and conspicuously in the area where carts are
stored for customer use:




REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM THESE PREMISES WITHOUT WRITTEN PERMISSION OF
THE OWNER IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. (Visalia City Ordinance Code 8.70.050)




The notice required by this section shall be considered exempt from the
Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 17.48.



   C.   It shall be the responsibility of each cart owner to comply
with subsections A. and B. of this section, and to continuously maintain, or
cause to be maintained all signs so that all of the required information is
accurate and clearly legible. 



(Ord. 2017-06 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



8.70.050   Permission for cart removal from business premises required and
unauthorized possession prohibited.



   A.   No person shall be deemed to be authorized to remove a cart
with cart identification from the business premises unless he or she
possesses written authorization from the cart owner. Removal authorization
shall be valid for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours. The
authorization shall include: the date and time of removal, the name, address,
and phone number of the store where the cart was removed, as well as the
name, title and signature of the person authorizing the removal. This section
shall not apply to the possession of a shopping cart removed from the
business premises at the direction of the cart owner for the purposes of
repair, maintenance, or when persons have taken possession of the cart in
order to return it to the cart owner.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person to possess a shopping cart
with a cart identification sign on sidewalks, streets, trails, other public
property open to the public, or on private property open to public view,
without written authorization from the cart owner, unless the person has the
express permission of the cart owner to repair or maintain the cart, is in
the process of returning an empty cart to the cart owner, or is moving the
cart so it can be picked up by a cart retrieval service. 



(Ord. 2017-06 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



8.70.060   Enforcement and remedies.



   The city may exercise the following remedies:



   A.   Pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7, any
owner that fails to retrieve its abandoned cart(s) within three (3) business
days after receiving notice from the city, shall pay the city's
administrative costs for retrieving the cart(s) and providing the
notification to the owner.  Any owner who fails to retrieve abandoned carts
in accordance with this chapter in excess of three (3) times during a
specified six (6)-month period shall be subject to a fifty dollar ($50) fine
for each occurrence.  An occurrence includes all carts owned by the owner
that impounded by the city a one (1)-day period.



   B.   If a cart is not retrieved by its owner within thirty (30) days
after the owner has received notice of the cart being impounded, including a
failure to pay costs and fines, or if the cart's owner cannot be determined,
the cart will be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the city sees
fit.



   C.   Following the city having retrieved more than ten (10) carts in
any thirty (30)-day period or the issuance of more than ten (10)
administrative citations in any twelve (12)-month period, the Director of
Community Development may require the owner to install a physical containment
system.



   D.   Violations by any person of § 8.70.050 may be enforced through
any of the penalties for municipal code violations specified in Visalia
Municipal Code § 1.12.010. 



(Ord. 2017-06 § 2 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-05, 2013)



Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE



Chapters:



9.04   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



9.08   CURFEW



9.12   GAMBLING



9.16   GRAFFITI



9.24   PROPERTY OFFENSES



9.28   WEAPONS



9.32   PUBLIC DISTURBANCES



9.34   AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION



Chapter 9.04
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Sections:



Article 1. Use of Alcoholic Beverages



9.04.010   Intoxicated persons.



Article 2. Alcoholic Beverages--Warning Signs



9.04.020   Signs--Dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during
pregnancy.



9.04.030   Violations--Infractions.



Article 3. Possession of Open Containers Containing Alcoholic Beverages in
Specified Areas Prohibited



9.04.040   Possession in specified areas prohibited.



9.04.050   Intoxicating beverages -- Consumption on public streets, etc.,
and on commercial parking lots and adjacent land unlawful.



9.04.060   Possession in specified areas--Vehicles.



9.04.070   Alcoholic beverage--Defined.



9.04.080   Exceptions.



9.04.090   Exception--State law.



9.04.100   Misdemeanor.



9.04.110   Severability.



Article 1. Use of Alcoholic Beverages



9.04.010   Intoxicated persons.



   It is unlawful for any person to be drunk or intoxicated on any public
highway or in any public place or in any place open to public view, or to be
in any private premises or in any private house in a drunken or intoxicated
condition to the annoyance of any other person. (Prior code § 5020)



Article 2. Alcoholic Beverages--Warning Signs



9.04.020   Signs--Dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during
pregnancy.



   A.   1. Duty to Post. Any person or entity who owns, operates,
manages, leases or rents a premises offering for sale or dispensing for
consideration to the public, alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine,
shall cause a sign or notice to be posted or displayed on the premises as
provided in this section. The sign or notice shall comply with the
readability requirements specified herein and shall read substantially as
follows:



PREGNANCY AND ALCOHOL DO NOT MIX. DRINKING WINE, BEER AND OTHER ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS. For information and
Materials Relating to Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Contact (Name of Non Profit
Organization) at (Phone Number).



   2.   In no event shall a sign as required herein be smaller than
eight inches wide and eight inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be
less than one-half inch in height.



   B.   Placement. A sign or notice required by subsection (A) of this
section shall be placed as follows:



   1.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine, to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the
premises, at least one sign shall be placed as to assure that it is readable
from all locations at which said sale or dispensing occur.



   2.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages, including
beer and wine, to the public is primarily provided through over the counter
service, at least one sign shall be placed to insure that it is readable from
all counter locations available to the public.



   3.   Where the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages including
beer and wine, to the public is primarily provided for consumption on the
premises by the public at tables served by food or beverage service persons,
at least one sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public
entering the premises; provided, however, that notices may be placed or
displayed at each of the tables in a manner which will assure that the
notices are as readily visible and readable as materials provided to the
public which list food and beverage prices. (Prior code § 5300)



9.04.030   Violations--Infractions.



   Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of
infraction and upon conviction is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this article within one
year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
each additional violation of this article within one year. A person who
violates the provisions of Section 9.04.020 shall be deemed to be guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation
continues. (Prior code § 5301)



Article 3. Possession of Open Containers Containing Alcoholic Beverages in
Specified Areas Prohibited



9.04.040   Possession in specified areas prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person within the city to possess any alcoholic
beverage in any public place, or to transport any alcoholic beverage upon any
public street, sidewalk, pedestrian mall, alleyway or thoroughfare where such
alcoholic beverage is in a receptacle which has been opened, or the seal of
which has been broken, or the contents of which has been partially removed.
(Prior code § 5255)



9.04.050   Intoxicating beverages -- Consumption on public streets, etc.,
and on commercial parking lots and adjacent land unlawful.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to consume beer, wine, or any
intoxicating liquor on any street, sidewalk, alley, highway or public court
except where expressly permitted pursuant to the terms of a permit issued by
the city for temporary use and occupancy of such public property.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to consume beer, wine, or any
intoxicating liquor:



   1.   Upon any property used, or intended to be used as an accessory
use, for the parking of motor vehicles by the patrons of any commercial
establishment authorized by the state of California to sell alcoholic
beverages; or



   2.   Upon any unimproved property which adjoins such commercial
establishment not used for the parking of motor vehicles, which is owned,
operated or possessed by the owner, lessee or agent of such commercial
establishment; or



   3.   Upon private property open to the public, including but not
limited to parking lots and shopping centers except where expressly permitted
pursuant to the terms of a license issued by the ABC; or



   4.   Upon a private drive, stairway, doorway or other private
property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, the
owner's agent or the person lawfully in possession of the private property.



   C.   It is an infraction for any person who has in his or her
possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic
beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which
have been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the premises of,
including the parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package
off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Division 9
(commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code, or on
any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, if the
premises and parking lot contain clearly visible notices to the patrons of
the licensee and parking lot and to persons on the public sidewalk as follows:



      Unlawful to enter, be or remain on these premises, adjacent
parking lot or adjacent public sidewalk with an open alcoholic beverage
container. CPC 647e(a); Visalia Municipal Code Section 9.04.050(C)



   D.   This section shall not prohibit the consumption, at sidewalk
tables adjacent to the premises, of alcoholic beverages purchased on the
premises by the customer of a bona fide eating place, as the term is defined
in California Business and Professions Code Section 23038, if the bona fide
eating place has obtained a revocable encroachment permit from the city
authorizing the placement of sidewalk tables and a license from the
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control which permits the sidewalk
consumption.



   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to make criminal any
act or acts which are permitted or prohibited by any law of the state of
California.



(Ord. 2008-04, 2008)



9.04.060   Possession in specified areas--Vehicles.



   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any vehicle, or the driver,
if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle, to keep in a
motor vehicle when such motor vehicle is located in any area enumerated in
Sections 9.04.040 and 9.04.050 and this chapter, any bottle, can or other
receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal
broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, unless such
container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle, or kept in some other area of
the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if such
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers. This section shall, however, not apply to living quarters of a
house, car, camper, or motor home. (Prior code § 5257)



9.04.070   Alcoholic beverage--Defined.



   The definition of “alcoholic beverage” as used herein shall include
alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing
alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent
or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either
alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. (Prior code
§ 5258)



9.04.080   Exceptions.



   A.   For purposes of this article, the definition of public place
shall not include any city owned community centers, within the city limits of
the city. In addition, the city manager shall have the authority to exempt
from the applicability of this article, any public place, within the city, on
a specified date and for a specified period of time, provided: 



   1.   Said public place is to be used for a public charitable,
educational and/or recreational purpose;



   2.   Said activity is sponsored by a public, non-profit organization
or group;



   3.   That all alcoholic beverages sold and/or provided in
conjunction with said public activity are dispensed by public, nonprofit,
charitable organizations or groups; and



   4.   That all such alcoholic beverages are consumed within the area
so designated in the permit issued by the city manager.



   B.   The city manager shall establish reasonable rules and
regulations for the application, processing and issuance of such permits for
such specific event exemptions. (Prior code § 5259)



9.04.090   Exception--State law.



   Sections 9.04.040, 9.04.050 and 9.04.060 shall not be deemed to make
punishable an act or acts which are prohibited by any statue of the state of
California. (Prior code § 5260)



9.04.100   Misdemeanor.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 9.04.050,
9.04.060 or 9.04.070 which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Prior code § 5261)



9.04.110   Severability.



   The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter
sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and
does declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable and, if for
any reason any sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be held
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts
of this chapter. (Prior code § 5262)



Chapter 9.08
CURFEW



Sections:



9.08.010   Purpose.



9.08.020   Intent.



9.08.030   Definition of a minor.



9.08.040   Curfew restrictions for minors.



9.08.050   Exceptions.



9.08.060   Enforcement.



9.08.070   Penalties.



9.08.010   Purpose.



   The city council declares that since it has been determined that the
general presence of unsupervised minors on public streets and parking lots
between eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day is contrary to the
public peace, health and safety, and has contributed to the delinquency of
minors, a worsening of the drug problem, and an increase in juvenile crime,
the purpose of this chapter is to require, with certain exceptions, that
minors stay at home or be under adult supervision between eleven p.m. and
five a.m. of the following day to reduce the problems of juvenile
delinquency, drugs and crime. (Prior code § 5700)



9.08.020   Intent.



   The city council desires to establish a curfew ordinance in order to
reduce crime and general problems of juvenile delinquency and, at the same
time, comply with the requirements of law. This intent is based upon:



   A.   The ability to make reasoned judgments, resist peer pressure
and understand the consequences of improper behavior increase with age,
knowledge and experience, all of which are likely to increase as a person
grows older, and these factors justify the application of a curfew to minors,
but not adults;



   B.   Juvenile crime, especially nighttime crime, has increased and
other jurisdictions enforcing a nocturnal juvenile curfew have experienced a
reduction in crime and noncriminal mischief;



   C.   In the past year, minors have increasingly been victims of
violent crime, and the adoption and enforcement of a curfew ordinance will
reverse this trend;



   D.   Curfew ordinances would reinforce parental authority and
supervision. (Prior code § 5702)



9.08.030   Definition of a minor.



   For the purpose of this chapter, any person under the age of eighteen
(18) shall be deemed a minor. (Prior code § 5704)



9.08.040   Curfew restrictions for minors.



   It is unlawful for any minor to loiter, wander idle, stroll, ride or
drive about aimlessly in or upon any public street, curb area, sidewalk,
alley, park, playground, public place, public building, place of amusement or
eating place, parking lot or unsupervised place between the hours of eleven
p.m. and five a.m. of the immediate following day. (Prior code § 5706)



9.08.050   Exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   A.   Any minors accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal
guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of the minor, or
by his or her brother, sister or spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older;



   B.   Any minor performing an errand or task at the direction of his
or her parent or legal guardian, or to any minor responding to an emergency
with or without parental consent;



   C.   Any minor then acting within the course or scope of his or her
employment;



   D.   Any minor on the property of, or immediately adjacent to the
building in which he or she resides;



   E.   Any minor returning home from a public meeting, sporting event,
school activity, or a place of public entertainment such as a movie, play,
concert or special event;



   F.   Any minor in the military service of the United States;



   G.   Any minor attending a constitutionally protected activity such
as school meetings, classes, religious meetings, or similar organized
associational activities;



   H.   Any minor engaged in reasonable and direct travel to and from
those activities described in subsections (E) and (G) of this section. (Prior
code § 5708)



9.08.060   Enforcement.



   The city council authorizes every police officer to demand from any
person, whom the officer has reasonable cause to believe is in violation of
Section 9.08.040, that such person give his or her name, address, proof of
age, the name of parent, guardian or adult having care or custody of such
person, and other information reasonably necessary to determine whether such
violation exists. (Prior code § 5710)



9.08.070   Penalties.



   A.   It is unlawful and an infraction to violate Section 9.08.040 of
this chapter.



   B.   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two-hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this chapter within one year.



   C.   Any minor convicted under section (B) of this section who is
unable to pay the fine, the parent(s), guardian or other person having legal
care, custody or control become personally liable for the fine imposed.
(Prior code § 5712)



Chapter 9.12
GAMBLING



Sections:



Article 1. Card Games



9.12.010   Construction.



9.12.020   Unlawful games.



9.12.030   Exceptions.



Article 2. Lottery Tickets



9.12.040   Possession unlawful.



Article 1. Card Games



9.12.010   Construction.



   No provision of this article shall be construed to prohibit any act
made unlawful by any general law of the state of California but said article
is intended to be supplemental thereto. (Prior code § 5045)



9.12.020   Unlawful games.



   A.   Gambling House Prohibited. No person shall keep, conduct or
maintain any house, room, apartment or place, used in whole or in part as a
gambling house or place where any game is played, conducted, dealt, or
carried on with cards, dice, dominoes or other devices, for money, checks,
chips, credit, or any representative of value, in the result of which game
chance is any determining factor, except as set forth in Section 9.12.030.
The word “cards” as used in this article is not intended to and shall not
include games known as bridge or whist.



   B.   Permitting Use as a Gambling House. No person shall knowingly
permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or under his charge
or control to be used in whole or in part as a gambling house or place of
playing, conducting, dealing, or carrying on any game, played with cards,
dice, dominoes, or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any
representative of value, in the result of which game chance is any
determining factor, except as set forth in Section 9.12.030.



   C.   Betting. No person shall deal, operate, attend, play or bet at
or against any game, in the result of which game chance is any determining
factor, which game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards,
dice, dominoes, or other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any
representative of value, in any house, room, apartment, or place, except as
set forth in Section 9.12.030. (Prior code § 5046)



9.12.030   Exceptions.



   The following exceptions are made to the provisions of Section 9.12.020
and the subsections thereunder.



   A.   Private Games. Said provisions shall not apply to occasional
private games, otherwise lawful, carried on for purely social purposes in a
private home. Neither shall said provisions apply to otherwise lawful games,
other than card games, conducted by a private group of customers, for the
sole purpose of determining which member of said group shall pay for food,
refreshments, or beverages, for immediate consumption by the group.



   B.   Benevolent Organizations Licensed. A license may be issued in
the reasonable discretion of the chief of police to any incorporated or
chartered fraternal, labor, nonprofit, benevolent or charitable organization,
or to any religious association, which organization or association has been
continuously carrying on within the city the activities of which it was
organized for a period of not less than two years immediately proceeding
making application therefore. Said license shall authorize such organization
or association to conduct a game room or rooms wherein games not in conflict
with any state law may be played and conducted, incidental to the other
activities of such organization, but in conformity with the provisions of
this subsection. No advertising or advertising signs shall be permitted in
connection with said  operation. The licensee shall have a paid attendant on
the premises at all times when games are in progress, and it shall be his
duty to report to the licensee any violation of law.



   C.   Members Only. No such game shall be open to the public but
shall be used only by the members of the respective organization or
association licensed and shall be maintained in the building principally used
by the licensee.



   D.   Existing Card Rooms. Any card room in the annexed area in
operation pursuant to the provisions of the Ordinance Code of the county of
Tulare for a period of one year prior to the effective date of annexation of
the property to the city, shall be permitted to operate for a period of six
months from the effective date of annexation; thereafter, the further
operation of said card room by any persons shall be in violation of this
section. (Prior code § 5047)



Article 2. Lottery Tickets



9.12.040   Possession unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person within the city to have in his possession
any lottery ticket, or any ticket, bill, paper, device, certificate, or
instrument purporting to be or to represent a ticket, chance, share or
interest in, or depending upon the event of, a lottery; or any tool,
instrument, stamp, die, cut or device used, or intended to be used in, or for
contriving, setting up, preparing, printing, stamping, writing, or getting
ready for sale, or distribution any lottery, ticket or lottery tickets, or
used or intended to be used in, or for contriving, setting up, preparing,
proposing or drawing up a lottery; or any tool, instrument, stamp, die, cut,
or device for stamping, or marking lottery scrolls, or for stamping, or
marking any statement, declaration, memorandum, copy, or list of lottery
tickets that have been sold, or for marking or for stamping any paper,
statement, certificate, or instrument representing or purporting to be a
statement, scroll, copy or list of numbers, characters or figures chosen,
selected, designated, or marked as played, or as having been played at, or in
or against a lottery, or lottery drawing, or any tool, punch, instrument,
die, cut or device used, or intended to be used, in or for contriving or
preparing or setting up, or printing or stamping or writing or getting ready
for distribution, or circulation, lottery drawings or papers, bill handbills,
cards, writings, prints, instruments or devices setting forth or containing,
or purporting to set forth or contain memoranda, statements, copies or lists
of the lucky or winning numbers, characters or figures in or of a lottery or
lottery drawing. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
licensed bingo games authorized and as restricted by Section 19(c) of Article
IV of the California Constitution, California Penal Code Section 326.5
(including future amendments thereto), and the provisions of Sections
5.12.010 through 5.12.090 of this code. (Prior code § 5040)



Chapter 9.16
GRAFFITI



Sections:



9.16.010   Purpose.



9.16.020   Graffiti defined.



9.16.030   Sale of aerosol paint containers or wide tipped marker pens to
minors.



9.16.040   Possession by minors.



9.16.050   Control.



9.16.060   Signs required.



9.16.070   Removal.



9.16.080   Appeal of cost of removal.



9.16.090   Responsibility.



9.16.100   Penalties.



9.16.110   Alternatives.



9.16.120   Reward.



9.16.130   Severability.



9.16.010   Purpose.



   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prompt
abatement of graffiti from public and private properties in the city; to
provide for methods of controlling the sale to and the unauthorized use of
aerosol paint containers and wide tipped marker pens by minors; and to
encourage citizens to report occurrences of graffiti vandalism within the
city.



   B.   Due to the increase of graffiti vandalism on both public and
private property, a condition has arisen within the city which has resulted
in a deterioration of property values and concern for the quality of life of
the city's citizens. The city council finds and determines that graffiti
constitutes a public nuisance which, left unabated, adversely affects the
city's image, business development, retail sales and residential housing
costs. Allowing graffiti to remain on public or private property encourages
additional unacceptable occurrences of graffiti, fuels fear among the
community and is a factor which not only depreciates the value of the
property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates
the value of adjacent and surrounding properties.



   C.   The purpose of this chapter is, therefore, to minimize the
impact which graffiti has on the  city's quality of life, economic
stability, environmental image, aesthetic standard, and the overall sense of
feeling of safety and security of its citizens. Because the existence of
graffiti tends to breed community discontent and criminal and gang related
activities, the chapter will serve to mitigate these problems through quick
removal and control of graffiti vandalism. (Prior code § 5500)



9.16.020   Graffiti defined.



   “Graffiti” is defined as, but not limited to, an unauthorized
inscription, word, figure, design, writing or picture which is marked,
etched, scratched, drawn or painted upon any public property or any
structure, wall, fence, sidewalk, sign, public utility box, or any structural
component of any building, bridge, structure or any facility in public view
to any person utilizing any public street in the city, including but not
limited to any roadway, parkway, sidewalk or alley. (Prior code § 5501)



9.16.030   Sale of aerosol paint containers or wide tipped marker pens to
minors.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or cause to be
sold, any  aerosol or pressurized container of paint and/or any wide tipped
marker pens exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other
than a solution which can be removed with water when dry, to any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult.
(Prior code § 5502)



9.16.040   Possession by minors.



   It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years,
who is in a public place or on private property, without the consent of the
owner, tenant or operator thereon, and who is not accompanied by a
responsible adult, to possess (1) an aerosol or pressurized container of
paint, and/or (2) wide tipped marker pens with tips exceeding four
millimeters in width which contain other than a solution which can be removed
with water when dry. (Prior code § 5503)



9.16.050   Control.



   Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail
commercial establishment selling aerosol containers, or wide tipped marker
pens exceeding four millimeters in width, which contain other than a solution
which can be removed with water when dry, shall store or cause such aerosol
containers or marker pens to be stored in an area viewable by, but not
accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee
assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such marker pens or paint
containers. (Prior code § 5504)



9.16.060   Signs required.



   Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized
containers of paint and/or wide tipped marker pens exceeding four (4)
millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be
removed with water when dry, shall display at the location of retail sales a
sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as
follows:



      It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any
individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is not accompanied by a
responsible adult, an aerosol or pressurized container of paint or wide
tipped marker pens exceeding four (4) millimeters in width, containing
anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry.



(Prior code § 5505)



9.16.070   Removal.



   A.   General. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall
have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the city and the
property owner within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or
public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so
remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter.
Consistent with Civil Code Section 1714.1, where graffiti is applied by
minors, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for such removal or
payment of costs thereof.



   B.   Public Property. Whenever the director of public services or
his designate representative determines that graffiti exists upon property
owned by the city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property
is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti
may be authorized by the director of public services or his representative,
and removal undertaken by city only after securing written consent of the
public entity having jurisdiction over the property. The public entity shall
execute a release and waiver as approved by the city's risk manager.



   C.   Notice of Affected Area; Requirement to Remove Graffiti.



   1.   Where graffiti is located upon private property and said
graffiti is capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public
right-of-way or sidewalk within the city, it is the property owner's duty to
remove said graffiti promptly from the property and to restore said property
at least to the condition it was in prior to such act of vandalism. If the
property owner fails to promptly remove said graffiti, the city shall cause a
written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected property notifying
the owner of the location and description of the graffiti and of the property
owner's obligation to remove said graffiti. The notice shall request the
owner provide the city with contact information, including a telephone
number.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to commence
removal of the graffiti described in the notice within fifteen (15) days of
service by mail or within three working days of personal delivery of the
notice, or within three working days of a city official notifying the
property owner or property owner's agent by telephone of the issue and
mailing the notice.  The property owner shall diligently and promptly pursue
total removal of said graffiti; provided, that an exception may exist in
cases of undue hardship as established pursuant to Section 9.16.070(C)(2). 
Working days for purposes of this section are days which are neither
Saturday, Sunday, nor a nationally observed holiday.  The service is
complete at the time of deposit of the notice in the U.S. mail or by personal
delivery of the notice to the owner of the property subject to removal of
graffiti. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect
the validity of any proceeding.



   2.   Undue Hardship--Optional Procedure for Removal. In the event
the property owner cannot comply with the requirement of Section
9.16.070(C)(1) due to hardship, the property owner shall file a written
request for waiver of the removal requirement with the city. The property
owner shall explain his/her reason(s) for making such request. The written
request shall be filed within the fifteen (15) day removal period stated in
Section 9.16.070(C)(1) when service of notice was by mail or three (3)
working days when notice was personally served or the owner was notified by
telephone and written notice was also mailed. In determining whether the
request for waiver will be granted, and subsequent assistance provided to the
property owner in removal of said graffiti, the city shall consider the
following circumstances:



   a.   The cost of restoration of the property to its original state
prior to the imposition of the graffiti in proportion to the relative value
of the property;



   b.   The ability of the owner to pay for such removal;



   c.   Whether or not the property has been the target of previous
incidents of graffiti or whether a pattern of vandalism to such property
exists.



   The decision of the city in the form of a written decision by the
public services director, as to whether or not to grant the waiver, shall be
final.



   3.   City's Release From Liability. A written request to waive the
requirements of Section 9.16.070 (C)(1) shall be accompanied by a release
from liability form signed by the property owner which shall release the city
and its authorized agents from any and all liability that may be caused or
attributed to removal of graffiti from the owner's premises by persons acting
under the authorization of the city.



   4.   Approval for City to Remove Graffiti. A written request to
waive the requirements of Section 9.16.070(C)(1) accompanied by a signed
release from liability form shall constitute an express approval by the
property owner that the city or its authorized representatives may provide
for the removal of the graffiti on owner's property by persons acting under
the authorization of the city.



   5.   Failure to Remove Graffiti or Seek Waiver of Removal. In the
event the owner fails to remove graffiti from his/her property after he/she
fails to request a waiver of such removal, or such waiver has been denied,
the city may declare the property a public nuisance and the city may take any
of the following courses of action:



   a.   Administrative Procedure to Abate Nuisance. City may direct the
removal of graffiti from the property with the cost of work performed and
billed to the property owner who may select the option of direct payment of
such costs. Failure to make direct payment for the abatement of graffiti
shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel
plat to which it relates. The assessment may be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to
the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable
to the special assessment. Upon completion of the graffiti abatement work,
the public services director shall cause to be recorded in the office of the
recorder of Tulare County, a notice of completion of graffiti abatement
proceedings against a particular parcel involved. The notice of completion of
graffiti abatement proceedings shall have the affect when recorded of
conclusively establishing that graffiti abatement proceedings have been
completed and that all necessary charges incurred on account thereof by the
city are due and owing and constitute a special assessment against the
subject real property. This notice shall specify the name for the current
owner of the parcel as shown on the last equalized assessment rolls of the
county of Tulare, and the Tulare County Assessor's Parcel Number for the
parcel involved.



   b.   The city may commence criminal proceedings to abate a public
nuisance under applicable Penal Code provisions.



(Prior code § 5506)  (Ord. 2010-02 § 2, 2010)



9.16.080   Appeal of cost of removal.



   A property owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing
by the city of the bill for the cost of removal of graffiti from the owner's
property. Said appeal must be submitted in writing to the city clerk. Upon
receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before
the city council. The public services director shall be so notified and shall
submit a written report to the city council, with a copy to the appealing
party, setting forth justifications for the description of the work done and
the cost thereof. The city clerk shall notify the party appealing of the date
and time of the hearing before the city council, at least ten days in advance
of such hearing. At the time and place of such hearing, the public services
director shall present his report and the appealing party shall present any
and all information in opposition to the calculation of the cost of removal.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine what cost,
if any, is to be imposed upon the appealing party. (Prior code § 5507)



9.16.090   Responsibility.



   A.   Any individual who is found guilty of violating Section
9.16.070(A) shall pay restitution to the property owner, in addition to
authorized penalties to the city. If the violator is a minor, the parent or
guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution. If unable to pay
the city, the juvenile may be permitted to work off his/her penalty owned to
the city under the direction of at least one parent and the city by abating
an equivalent amount of any graffiti.



   B.   The city may, as permitted by California law, file a lien to
collect abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary
abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor or other
person of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed
material.  The city may record this lien on real property belonging to the
person who defaced the property, or if the person is a minor, on real
property owned by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the
minor.  This lien may only be filed against the individual who is found
guilty of violating Section 9.16.070(A) or if the individual is a minor the
parent or guardian having custody and control of the individual. 



   C.   Prior to recording a graffiti nuisance abatement lien, the city
shall serve notice on the person who defaced the property, or if the person
is a minor, the city shall serve notice on the parent or guardian having
custody and control of the minor.  The notice shall be served in the same
manner as a summons in a civil action.  If the minor or other person cannot
be found after diligent search the notice may be served by posting a copy of
the notice upon the property owned by the minor or other person, in a
conspicuous place, for a period of ten (10) days. The notice shall also be
published pursuant to Government Code Section 6062 in a newspaper of general
circulation that is published in the county in which the property is located.
If the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, after
diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy
of the notice upon the property owned by the parent or guardian having
custody and control of the minor, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten
(10) days. The notice shall also be published pursuant to Government Code
Section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the
county in which the property is located.  The notice shall include an
itemized description of the abatement and related administrative costs, the
date of the abatement order, a description of the lien process, and the facts
supporting the lien on the property. 



   D.   The graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the
county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is
located. From the date of recording, the lien shall have the force, effect,
and priority of a judgment lien. 



   E.   The graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount
of the lien; that it is recorded on behalf of the city; the date of the
abatement order; the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel
number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and the name and address
of the recorded owner of the parcel. 



   F.   If the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either
through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the
information specified in subdivision D. shall be recorded by the city.



   G.   The graffiti nuisance abatement lien authorized by this
section  may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the
city.   



   H.   The city may recover any costs incurred regarding the
processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property
owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. As used in this
chapter, "abatement and related administrative costs" include, but are not
limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or
other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced
property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying
and apprehending the minor or other person.  Attorney's fees may be awarded
to the prevailing party in any litigation initiated under this section. 



   I.   As an alternative to obtaining a lien as described above, as
permitted by California law, the city may make the abatement and related
administrative costs a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by
the individual who is found guilty of violating Section 9.16.070(A) or if the
individual is a minor the parent or guardian having custody and control of
the individual.  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes.  All laws applicable to the levy,
collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment.  However, if any real property to which the abatement
and related administrative costs relate has been transferred or conveyed to a
bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for
value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the
first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the abatement
and related administrative costs shall instead be transferred to the
unsecured roll for collection.  Notices or instruments related to the
abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. 



   J.   The city may impose a special assessment by keeping an account
of the cost of abating such nuisance and shall embody such account in a
report.  The report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by
description sufficient to be assessed against each such separate lot or
parcel.  A copy of the report shall be mailed to the property owner of
record.  The city shall also send in writing to the property owner of
record: the date of the abatement; the street address, legal description and
assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the assessment is imposed; a
description of the assessment process; when the report will be submitted to
the city council for hearing and confirmation and the facts supporting the
assessment.  Said notice shall advise owners that they may appear at the
time and place of the city council hearing and state any objections to the
assessment.



   K.   The city clerk shall post a copy of such report at city hall,
together with the notice of filing thereof and of the time and place when and
where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and
confirmation.  After confirmation of the report and assessment by the city
council, a copy of the report and assessment shall be sent to the city
finance officer. 



   L.   The city finance officer may receive payments for the amount
due until the city refers the matter to the county auditor for placement on
the tax rolls. On or before the tenth day of August of each year, a certified
copy of the report shall be filed with the Tulare County Auditor for the
amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land
as they appear on the roll at the same time and in the same manner as
municipal taxes. They shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for property taxes. All
laws and ordinances applicable to the levy collection and enforcement of city
taxes are made applicable to such special assessments, and the lien of said
assessment shall have priority of the taxes with which it is collected.



   M.   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and
in addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of
this city or by state law for the abatement of graffiti, including, summary
abatement.  This section is not intended to affect any other action, civil
or criminal, for maintenance of any such condition.



(Prior code § 5508)  (Ord. 2010-02 § 3, 2010)



9.16.100   Penalties.



   A.   It is unlawful to apply graffiti on any premises as described
herein. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of the chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction.



   B.   It is unlawful and an infraction for a minor to possess any
aerosol paint container or wide tipped marker pen as described herein in
violation of Section 9.16.040.



   C.   Any person convicted of an misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of the chapter within
one year.



   D.   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this chapter within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 5509)



9.16.110   Alternatives.



   Nothing in Sections 9.16.010 through 9.16.100 shall be deemed to
prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a
public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an
alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 5510)



9.16.120   Reward.



   The city may provide rewards of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for information which leads to the arrest and conviction of graffiti vandals.
As part of this incentive, the police department may establish, publicize,
and maintain a “graffiti hotline” for citizens to utilize to report this
nuisance. (Prior code § 5511)



9.16.130   Severability.



   It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter form
an interrelated program for dealing with the problem of graffiti and
vandalism within the city, but that such subsections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases are distinct and severable and, in the event that any
subsections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases are declared unconstitutional,
invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses or phrases of this chapter.
(Prior code § 5512)



Chapter 9.24
PROPERTY OFFENSES



Sections:



9.24.010   Posting of handbills prohibited.



9.24.020   Unlawful presence on school grounds prohibited.



9.24.030   Selling or soliciting.



9.24.040   Violations--Infractions.



9.24.050   Revocation of business license.



9.24.010   Posting of handbills prohibited.



   It is declared unlawful for any person, to hand or distribute to, or
among pedestrians, or to place, throw or deposit, or cause to be placed,
thrown or deposited into, or upon, any motor vehicle, doorstep, porch, yard
or lawn within the city, or upon any of the public streets, any
advertisement, paper, bill, poster, notice, handbill, advertising card,
business card, advertising device, dodger or emblem used or purporting to be
used or intended as an advertisement or notice of any article or merchandise,
or any trade, profession or business, show exhibition, theater, store or
occupation of any person. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not
be applicable to any bill, poster, notice or other document or material
distributed by, on behalf of or in the name of the city. (Prior code § 5095)



9.24.020   Unlawful presence on school grounds prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person, not a student of the school involved, to
return to any school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks, or
public ways adjacent thereto, without lawful business therein, within a
period of ninety (90) days if the person has been asked during school hours
or during school functions to leave the school grounds, school buildings or
streets, sidewalks, or public ways adjacent thereto, by the chief
administrative officer of the said school, or by any certified school
employee designated as the agent of the chief administrative officer or by
any peace officer for any of the following reasons:



   A.   Misconduct on or about any of the above- described premises
(misconduct is to be defined by local school regulations regarding conduct on
campus, or by Penal Code Section 415);



   B.   Conviction of any offense requiring registration under Section
290 of the Penal Code;



   C.   Conviction of any offense included in Division 10 of the Health
and Safety Code of the State of California; or



   D.   Repeated or frequent loitering in or about the above-described
premises, without having lawful business at said premises. (Ord. 9605 § 23,
1996: prior code § 5270)



9.24.030   Selling or soliciting.



   Within the limits of any park or recreational area located within the
city and owned or operated by city, and any public street or roadway
immediately adjacent thereto, it is unlawful for any person to sell, vend,
peddle or distribute any food, merchandise or property whatsoever, nor shall
a person station or place a stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing. This section shall not apply to
any person acting pursuant to a contract or concessionaire license with the
city. This section shall also not apply to any person who has received a
temporary permit from the director of leisure services for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale food or other merchandise in connection with a
special event or activity being conducted within the limits of a city owned
and operated park as enumerated pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 5280)



9.24.040   Violations—Infractions.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction and upon conviction is punishable to: (1) a fine not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one
year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each
additional violation of this chapter within one year. A person who violates
the provision of Section 9.24.030 shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate
offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation
continues. (Prior code § 5281)



9.24.050   Revocation of business license.



   A.   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this code to the
contrary, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
grounds for revocation of any business license issued pursuant to the
provisions of Title 5 of this code to a business or person who shall have
committed said violation. Revocation proceedings shall be commenced upon the
filing with the city clerk written application by the director of leisure
services asserting that there are grounds for revocation of a business
license as a result of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and
stating the circumstances of each violation which the director alleges has
occurred. A copy of the application shall be mailed by the director to the
holder of the business license not later than the date on which the
application is filed with the city clerk. Within fifteen (15) calendar days
following the date of mailing by the director, the holder of the business
license must request, in writing, a hearing before the city council. Such
written request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk and a copy
shall be mailed to the director of leisure services. The failure to file a
written demand for a hearing within the time specified herein shall
constitute a waiver of the licensee's right to such a hearing.



   B.   Should the licensee fail to file his written request for a
hearing within the time limit specified, the city council shall place the
matter on its agenda and the director shall present evidence to support his
application for revocation. Based upon said evidence, the city council shall
render a final decision regarding revocation of said business license.



   C.   Should the licensee file a timely request for a hearing, the
city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing the application
to revoke the license. The clerk of the council shall give notice to the
director of leisure services and to the licensee of the time and place of
hearing by serving it personal- ly or by mailing it to the mailing address
listed on the business license records of the city. At the time and place
appointed, the director and the licensee shall present all relevant evidence
to the council and the council shall thereupon render its decision in the
matter.



   D.   The decision of the city council in any hearing concerning the
revocation of a business license pursuant to this chapter shall be final and
binding upon the parties and there shall be no provision for further
administrative appeal or reconsideration by the council. (Prior code § 5282)



Chapter 9.28
WEAPONS



Sections:



9.28.010   Unlawful to discharge firearms in city.



9.28.020   Demonstration equipment prohibited.



9.28.010   Unlawful to discharge firearms in city.



   It is unlawful, for any person to fire or discharge, within the city
limits of the city, any pistol, rifle or weapon of any type which may be
powered by compressed air or CO2 gas, except in facilities specifically
constructed as firing ranges which have been inspected and approved by the
city building and police departments, and which have obtained all necessary
city planning and building approvals. (Prior code § 5200)



9.28.020   Demonstration equipment prohibited.



   A.   No person shall carry or possess while participating in any
demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly, any length of lumber,
wood, or wood lath unless that object is one-quarter inch (1/4”) or less in
thickness and two inches (2”) or less in width, or if not generally
rectangular in shape, such objects shall not exceed one-half inch (½”) in
its thickest dimension.



   B.   No person shall carry or possess while participating in any
demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly, any metal standards or
poles, or objects or poles with sharpened, pointed or jagged surfaces.



(Ord. 2002-22 § 1, 2002)



Chapter 9.32
PUBLIC DISTURBANCES



Sections:



9.32.010   Purpose.



9.32.020   Definitions.



9.32.030   Public disturbances prohibited.



9.32.040   Disturbing noises designated.



9.32.050   Responses to disturbances.



9.32.060   Social host responsibility.



9.32.070   Appeal; defenses and mitigation.



9.32.080   Severability.



9.32.090   Nonexclusive remedy.



9.32.100   Protected activities.



9.32.010   Purpose.



   A.   This chapter is enacted to remedy and defray the costs
associated with responding to public disturbances that repeatedly occur or
exist at certain properties, and to ameliorate those conditions and hold
responsible the owners or persons in charge of such property.



   B.   This chapter is not an exclusive remedy available under any
state or local laws and may be used in conjunction with such other laws.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:



   A.   "Disturbance" shall include conduct creating any disturbing or
loud noise or sound; any conduct which disrupts the peace and quiet of a
neighborhood; and any conduct which interferes with the quiet enjoyment of
neighboring property by persons lawfully thereon.



   B.   "Owner" means the person(s) (including individual(s),
corporation, partnership or other entity) having legal or equitable title to
the property.



   C.   "Property" means any real property and any improvement thereon
incidental or appurtenant, including but not limited to any room, apartment,
house, building, structure or any separate part or portion thereof, whether
permanent or not.



   D.   "Response" shall mean the arrival of a police officer at the
scene of a disturbance to render whatever service is reasonably required in
order to stop a disturbance.



   E.   "Responsible party" is any person who owns, leases or is
lawfully in charge of the property where the disturbance takes place, or any
person who organizes, controls or participates in a disturbance. If the
responsible party is a juvenile then the parent or guardian who has physical
custody of the juvenile at the time of the disturbance shall be considered
the responsible party.



   F.   "Alcoholic beverage" is alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer,
and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and
which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which
is fit for beverage purposes or other consumption either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.



   G.   "Juvenile" is any person under 18 years of age.



   H.   "Private property" shall mean, but is not limited to, a home,
yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or
a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis,
whether occupied as a dwelling, during party or other social function, and
whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.



   I.   "Social host" the person who owns, leases, or is lawfully in
charge of the property where an unruly gathering occurs. The following
persons may be considered the social host of an unruly gathering:



      1.   Person(s) hosting an event that is an unruly gathering;



      2.   Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for
granting access to an event that is an unruly gathering;



      3.   Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a juvenile hosting an
unruly gathering or a juvenile receiving money or other consideration for
granting access to an unruly gathering and therefore considered the
responsible party where an unruly gathering occurs.



   J.   "Unruly gathering" is a party, event or gathering where four or
more persons under legal drinking age are present at a private property in
which alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by any person under
legal drinking age and upon which a disturbance as defined in this chapter
occurs.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.030   Public disturbances prohibited.



   No person shall disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any
neighborhood by creating therein any disturbing or unreasonably loud noise.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.040   Disturbing noises designated.



   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit noises that are
disturbing, unreasonably loud, or conduct that disrupts the peace and quiet
of a neighborhood. The types of noises set out in this section shall not be
deemed or construed as in any way exclusive, but merely illustrative.



   B.   The following types of noises or conduct are declared to be
disturbing to the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighborhood in which they
are heard, and persons creating such noises are in violation of Section
9.32.030:



      1.   The sounding of any horn, signal or noise device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck or other vehicle, in any other manner or
for any other purpose than allowed by the California Vehicle Code or other
laws of the state;



      2.   The noise from an exhaust system of any vehicle that is
not equipped or constructed so as to prevent any disturbing or unreasonably
loud noise;



      3.   The revving of the engine of any motor vehicle while such
vehicle is not in motion, except when done in the course of repairing,
adjusting or testing it;



      4.   Disturbing or unreasonably loud shouting or crying of
peddlers, hawkers, vendors, or newspaper carriers;



      5.   The playing or operating of any device or instrument in a
manner that creates disturbing or unreasonably loud noise to a reasonable
person outside the facility or unit from which the noise emanates; and



      6.   Disturbing or unreasonably loud shouting, screaming,
wailing or other vocalization that is disturbing or unreasonably loud to a
reasonable person outside the facility or unit from which the noise emanates.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.050   Responses to disturbances.



   A.   At the first response to a public disturbance call at a
property, the responding police officer shall determine if a violation of
this chapter has occurred. If the police officer determines that a violation
has occurred, the officer shall inform the responsible party(ies) or social
host at the property that the disturbance must cease immediately and may
issue an administrative citation/penalty to the responsible party or social
host in the amount specified for violations of the Visalia Municipal Code,
$100 for the first violation, $200 for the next violation within a
twelve-month period from the intimal violation, and $500 for each subsequent
violation within that twelve-month period. Alternatively violations may be
charged as a criminal misdemeanor or infraction.



   B.   Collection of fines for violation of this chapter shall be made
pursuant to any of the methods set forth in VMC Section 1.13.060.F.



   C.   Reports of citations issued and status of accounts receivable
shall be made to council quarterly or as needed. Fees to be reviewed as
appropriate.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.060   Social host responsibility.



   The service of alcohol to persons under legal drinking age at unruly
gatherings or a disturbance and the consumption of alcohol by persons under
legal drinking age is a threat to the health and safety of all persons who
reside in the city, is a drain on public safety resources within the city,
and is declared to be a public nuisance.



   Any responsible party or social host that is determined to have allowed
a person under legal drinking age to consume alcohol at an unruly gathering
or a disturbance may be separately and immediately be cited administratively
under the Visalia Municipal Code for violation of this section.
Administrative penalties for violations shall $100 for the first violation,
$200 for the second violation within a twelve-month period, and $500 for each
subsequent violation within a twelve-month period. Alternatively, violations
may be charged as a criminal misdemeanor or infraction.



   If a juvenile is found to be in possession of alcohol or narcotics or
found to be intoxicated at an unruly gathering or a disturbance, then the
police may contact the juvenile's parents or legal guardians or request the
juvenile's school to do so. If the juvenile's school has an internal student
disciplinary office, then any such incident may likewise be reported to that
office.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.070   Appeal; defenses and mitigation.



   A.   A responsible party or social host found to be liable for an
administrative penalty pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to an
administrative appeal and hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section 1.13.060.D. of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   B.   It is a defense to an action brought pursuant to this chapter,
that the responsible party or social host, at the time the alleged action(s)
or behavior(s) occurred resulting in a violation of this chapter, could not,
in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that a public
disturbance occurred at the property, or could not, in spite of the exercise
of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the
determination that a public disturbance had occurred at the property. The
assertion that the responsible party or social host was not present at the
property at the time the alleged public disturbance occurred upon the
property, shall not, alone, be a defense to the action.



   C.   For any appeal made pursuant to this section, the hearing
officer may consider any of the following factors, as appropriate, in its
decision, and shall cite those found applicable in any decisions:



      1.   The effort taken by the responsible party or social host
to mitigate or correct the alleged action or behavior which occurred at or
near (as defined in this chapter) and in relation to the property;



      2.   The degree to which the alleged action or behavior at the
property was repeated or continuous;



      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the alleged action or
behavior;



      4.   The cooperativeness of the responsible party or social
host with the city in causing the abatement of the alleged action or behavior;



      5.   The cost to the city of investigating and abating action
or behavior or attempting to correct the condition; or



      6.   Any other factor deemed by the hearing officer to be
relevant.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.080   Severability.



   If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
chapter, or the application of its provisions to other persons or
circumstances, shall not in any way be affected.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.090   Nonexclusive remedy.



   The remedies described in this chapter shall not be the exclusive
remedies of the city in enforcement of the prohibition of the acts and
behaviors described in this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



9.32.100   Prohibited activities.



   This chapter shall not apply to activities protected by Article I,
section 4 of the California Constitution or the 1st or 14th Amendments of the
United States Constitution.



(Ord. 2016-09 § 2 (part), 2016)



Chapter 9.34
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION



Sections:



   9.34.010   Purpose.



   9.34.020   Definitions.



   9.34.030   Aggressive solicitation prohibited.



   9.34.040   All solicitation prohibited at specified locations.



   9.34.050   Solicitation under false pretenses prohibited.



   9.34.060   Penalty.



   9.34.070   Severability.



   9.34.080   Non-exclusivity.



9.34.010  Purpose.



   It is the intent of this Chapter to impose reasonable place and manner
limitations on solicitation, as defined herein, in order to protect the
safety of the general public against abusive solicitation, prevent
disruptions to public functions, improve access to public places, and to curb
intimidating or coercive behavior, while respecting the constitutional right
of free speech.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.020  Definitions.



   The following words or phrases as used in this Chapter shall have the
following meanings:



   A.   "Aggressive solicitation" means to do one or more of the
following while engaging in solicitation or immediately thereafter:



   1.   Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person
before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging, if that conduct is
intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:



   a.   Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of
property; or



   b.   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of
value;



   2.   Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;



   3.   Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or
alongside of him or her after the person solicited declines to make a
donation;



   4.   Threatening the person solicited with physical harm by word or
gesture;



   5.   Using profane, offensive, or abusive language, which is
inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction before, during, or
after solicitation;



   6.   Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's
consent.



   B.   "Donation" means a gift of money or other item of value and
shall also include the purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its
value under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the
purchase is in substance a gift.



   C.   "Person" means and includes both individual persons and
organizations.



   D. "Public Place" shall mean a place to which the public or a
substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to,
any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility,
school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance,
hallway, lobby, and other portion of any business establishment open to the
public.



   E.   "Solicitation" means any request made in person seeking an
immediate donation of money or other item of value. A person shall not be
deemed to be in the act of solicitation when he or she passively displays a
sign or gives any other indication that he or she is seeking donations
without addressing his or her solicitation to any specific person, other than
in response to an inquiry by that person.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.030   Aggressive Solicitation Prohibited.



   No person shall engage in aggressive solicitation in any public place.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.040   All Solicitation Prohibited at Specified Locations.



   A.   Banks and ATMs. 



   1.   No person shall engage in solicitation within fifteen (15) feet
of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit
union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within fifteen
(15) feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for
customers' use. 



   2.   Definitions, for the purpose of this section:



   a.   "Automated Teller Machine" shall mean any electronic
information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection
with a credit, deposit, or convenience account.



   b.   "Bank" means any member bank of the federal Reserve System, and
any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking
institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and
any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation.



   c.   "Check Cashing Business" means any person duly licensed as a
check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Division 3 of the
California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000.



   d.   "Credit Union" means any federal credit union and any state
chartered credit union the accounts of which are Insured by the Administrator
of the National Credit Union Administration.



   e.   "Savings and Loan Association" means any federal savings and
loan association and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of
the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined
in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act.



   B.   Motor Vehicles and Parking Lots.



   1.   Motor Vehicles.  No person shall approach an operator or
occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of solicitation, while such
vehicle is located in any public place.



   2.   Parking Lots.  No person shall engage in solicitation in any
parking lot or structure at any time.



   3.   Exemptions.  Subdivision B shall not apply to any of the
following:



   a.   To solicitations related to business which is being conducted
on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants;



   b.   To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or,



   c.   To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of a vehicle.



   C.   Public Transportation Vehicles and Bus Stops.



   1.    Public Transportation Vehicle. No person shall engage in
solicitation while in a public transportation vehicle. 



   2.   Bus Stops.  No person shall engage in solicitation at or
within fifteen (15) feet of a bus stop. 



   3.    Definitions, for the purpose of this section:



   a.   "Public Transportation Vehicle" means any vehicle, including a
trailer bus, designed, used, or



maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a
passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the
driver, and used to carry passengers for hire.



   b.    "Bus Stop" means any posted or otherwise designated location
or area that exists on a public transportation vehicle or bus route where
public transportation vehicles or buses stop to discharge and take on
passengers.



(Ord. 2013-12, § 2, 2013: Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.050   Solicitation Under False Pretenses Prohibited.



   No person shall knowingly make a false or fraudulent representation or
use false pretenses to obtain a donation.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1(part), 2009)



9.34.060    Penalty.



   A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is punishable as a
misdemeanor or infraction, at the discretion of the prosecuting entity or
agency.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.070   Severability.



   If any provision of this Chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
Chapter, or the application of its provisions to other persons or
circumstances, shall not in any way be affected.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)



9.34.080   Non-Exclusivity.



   The provisions of this Chapter shall not limit or preclude the
enforcement of other applicable laws.



(Ord. 2009-08 § 1 (part), 2009)


Visalia, CA Municipal Code


Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



Chapters:



10.04   GENERAL PROVISIONS



10.08   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND DEVICES



10.12   SPEED LIMITS



10.16   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



10.18   RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM



10.20   MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES



10.24   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



10.28   CRUISING



10.32   ABANDONED VEHICLES



10.36   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



10.40   BICYCLES



10.44   SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLERSKATES AND BICYCLES



Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



Article 1. Uniform Traffic Ordinance



10.04.010   Definitions.



Article 2. Traffic Administration



10.04.020   Authority of city manager.



10.04.030   Duties of city manager--Delegation.



Article 3. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations



10.04.040   Authority of police and fire department officials.



10.04.050   Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.



10.04.060   Obedience to police or authorized officers.



10.04.070   Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or
animals.



10.04.080   Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.



10.04.090   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.



10.04.100   Exemption of certain vehicles.



10.04.110   When vehicles may be removed from streets.



10.04.120   Authority of police in crowds.



10.04.130   Blocking entrance or exit to public or private property.



10.04.140   Authority to impose fees for removal, impound, storage, and
release of properly impounded vehicles



10.04.150   Procedures for vehicle disposition; collection of fees



Article 1. Uniform Traffic Ordinance



10.04.010   Definitions.



   A.   Definitions of Words and Phrases. The following words and
phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the
meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section.



   B.   Motor Vehicle Code Definitions to be Used. Whenever any words
or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code
of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall
apply.



   C.   Central Traffic District. All streets and portions of streets
within the area described as follows are designated as the central traffic
district:



   All that area bounded on the north by the north curb line of Murray
Avenue, bounded on the south by the south curb line of Noble Avenue and
bounded on the west by the west curb line of Giddings Avenue and bounded on
the east by the east curb line of Burke Street.



   D.   Specific Definitions.



   “Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or
passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.



   “Council” means the council of the city of Visalia.



   “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb
be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word curb as herein
used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking
strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public
utility companies.



   “Divisional island” means a raised island located in the roadway
and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.



   “Holidays” means within the meaning of this title, holidays are the
first day of January, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May,
the fourth day of July, the first Monday in September, the fourth Monday in
October, Thanksgiving Day and the 25th day of December. When any of such
holidays fall on a Sunday, the following day shall be considered the holiday.



   “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



   Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this city.



   “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a
sidewalk.



   “Parking meter” means a mechanical device installed within or upon
the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the
purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter
space by any vehicle.



   “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.



   “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.



   “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of
this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make
arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   “Stop” when required, means complete cessation of movement.



   “Vehicle code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California.



   “Physically handicapped” means any person who shall fall within the
provisions of Sections 22511.5 or 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. (Prior
code § 3000)



Article 2. Traffic Administration



10.04.020   Authority of city manager.



   The city manager shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in
this chapter and in the traffic ordinances of this city. Whenever the city
manager is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic
control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed
or maintained. (Prior code § 3001(a))



10.04.030   Duties of city manager— Delegation.



   It shall be the general duty of the city manager to determine the
installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and
signals, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise
remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of
traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the
development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out
the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. Whenever,
by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the city manager or
a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by
a person authorized in writing by him. (Prior code § 3001(b))



Article 3. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations



10.04.040   Authority of police and fire department officials.



   Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by
the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrian, officers of the police department or member of the fire
department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code.
(Prior code § 3002(a))



10.04.050   Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.



   No person other than an officer of the police department or members of
the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or
other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided,
any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city manager. (Prior
code § 3002(b))



10.04.060   Obedience to police or authorized officers.



   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act
forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police
officer, or a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the
chief of police or by law. (Prior code § 3002(a))



10.04.070   Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles or
animals.



   Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a
highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code §
3002(d))



10.04.080   Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers.



   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police
officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any
chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other
employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the
parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading
the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction.
(Prior code § 3002(e))



10.04.090   Public employees to obey traffic regulations.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this
state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any said  operator to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted
in this chapter or by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3002(f))



10.04.100   Exemption of certain vehicles.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the
police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle
or any private ambulance, which public utility or private ambulance has
qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in
this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in
response to an emergency call.



   B.   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the
operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the
safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety
of others.



   C.   The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or
public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or
any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department
while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States
mail. (Prior code § 3002(g))



10.04.110   When vehicles may be removed from streets.



   Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of
this city may remove or cause to be removed:



   A.   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street
or highway for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours;



   B.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or
highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or
standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the city and signs are
posted giving notice of such removal;



   C.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or
highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is
necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway
or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the
street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other
than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or
any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that
such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24)
hours prior to the removal. (Prior code § 3002(1))



10.04.120   Authority of police in crowds.



   At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or
have gathered, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any
police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or
using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using
any street or sidewalk, and said police officer shall have authority to
direct the parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction,
and it is declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey the
said police officer's order, signal or command, regardless of any other
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 3002(j))



10.04.130   Blocking entrance or exit to public or private property.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to block or attempt to block the
entrance to or exit from any public or private property including, but not
limited to, any building, parking lot or parking structure or other structure
or facility located on such property.



   B.   This section shall not apply to any person who owns, rents,
leases or otherwise has rightful possession of the property or to any
employee or agent of such person who is acting under the authority and at the
direction of such person, or, to any person obtaining permission from the
owner, renter, lessee or person who has right to possession of the property.
This section shall also not apply to any duly authorized employee, agent or
officer of the City of Visalia or County of Tulare, State of California, or
government of the United States, or any authorized agent or employee or any
corporation, company or business furnishing gas or telephone or electrical
service when such employee is in the course of his/her duty. This section
shall not apply to delivery vehicles while making bonafide deliveries.
(Visalia City Ordinance Section 10.16.260 shall apply to delivery vehicles.)
This section shall not apply to any member of a street maintenance, repair or
construction crew or to any employee or agent of a corporation, company or
other business acting under contract with the City of Visalia when such crew
member, employee or agent is acting within the course and scope of his/her
duty, nor shall this section apply to any person who has obtained a permit or
other form of authorization by an employee or agent of the City of Visalia
authorized to grant such permit or authorization.



   C.   “Block” as used in this section means to obstruct or impede
the passage of pedestrians and/or vehicles.



   D.   Violation—Misdemeanor. Violation of this section is a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for not more than six  (6) months, or by both such fine or imprisonment.



(Ord. 2002-23 § 1, 2002)



10.04.140   Authority to impose fees for removal, impound, storage, and
release of properly impounded vehicles.



   A.   An administrative fee to recover the city's administrative
costs for removal, impound, storage, and release of a properly impounded
vehicle, whether pursuant to the Visalia Municipal Code or pursuant to the
California Vehicle Code, shall be imposed upon the registered or legal owner
of the subject vehicle.



   B.   Pursuant to Section 8.60.010 of Chapter 8.60, the
administrative fees charged for the removal, impound, storage, and release of
properly impounded vehicles shall be established from time to time.



(Ord. 2007-05 § 2, 2007)



10.04.150  Procedures for vehicle disposition; collection of fees.



   A.   All fees relating to the removal, impound, storage, and release
of a vehicle shall be paid by the vehicle's registered owner prior to the
disposition of a properly impounded vehicle, subject to the exception
provided in Section 10.04.150B.



   B.   Once a registered or legal owner has requested a hearing to
challenge the validity of the impoundment, he or she may pay the fees then
due and the vehicle shall be released.  Paying the fees prior to the hearing
shall not be deemed a waiver of the registered or legal owner's rights under
the hearing.  If it is determined at the hearing the vehicle was not
properly impounded, the fees shall be reimbursed to the registered or legal
owner.  If it is determined at the hearing the vehicle was properly
impounded, the registered or legal owner shall also be responsible for
payment of fees associated with conducting the hearing.



(Ord. 2007-05 § 2, 2007)



Chapter 10.08
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND DEVICES



Sections:



Article 1. Traffic Control Devices



10.08.010   Authority to install traffic control devices.



10.08.020   Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes.



10.08.030   Obedience to traffic control devices.



10.08.040   Installation of traffic signals.



10.08.050   Lane marking.



10.08.060   Distinctive roadway markings.



10.08.070   Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control
devices.



10.08.080   Traffic control devices--Hours of operation.



10.08.090   Unauthorized painting of curbs.



10.08.100   Special speed zones--Regulation of speed by traffic signals.



Article 2. Turning Movements



10.08.110   Authority to place turning markers—Intersections—Multiple
lanes.



10.08.120   Authority to place restricted turn signs.



10.08.130   Signal controlled intersections—Right turns.



10.08.140   One-way streets and alleys.



Article 3. Special Stops Required



10.08.150   The city manager to erect stop signs.



10.08.160   Stop at through street or stop sign.



10.08.170   Emerging from alley, driveway or building.



Article 4. Pedestrian Regulations



10.08.180   City manager to establish marked crosswalks.



10.08.190   When pedestrians must use crosswalks.



Article 1. Traffic Control Devices



10.08.010   Authority to install traffic control devices.



   A.   The city manager shall have the power and the duty to place and
maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control
devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any
provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the city manager is authorized to
install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.



   C.   The city manager may also place and maintain or cause to place
and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary
or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make
such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and
traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and
rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be determined by
ordinance or resolution of the council. (Prior code § 3003(a))



10.08.020   Traffic control signs required for enforcement purposes.



   No provisions of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs
are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate
legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic
laws. (Prior code § 3003(b))



10.08.030   Obedience to traffic control devices.



   The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device placed in accordance with this chapter unless
otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to
the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to emergency calls. (Prior code § 3003(c))



10.08.040   Installation of traffic signals.



   A.   The city manager is directed to install and maintain official
traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately
interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or
to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.



   B.   The city manager shall ascertain and determine the locations
where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and
other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations
therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and
safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance
Manual issued by the  Division of Highways of the State Department of Public
Works.



   C.   Whenever the city manager installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching
from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed
and are maintained at any said intersection. (Prior code § 3003(d))



10.08.050   Lane marking.



   The city manager is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon
the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic
moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway. (Prior code § 3003(c))



10.08.060   Distinctive roadway markings.



   The city manager is authorized to place and maintain distinctive
roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code of those streets or parts
of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of
the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or
signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same
effect as similar markings place by the State Department of Public Works
pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3003(f))



10.08.070   Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control
devices.



   The city manager is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the
operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the
Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular
case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no
longer exist or obtain. (Prior code § 3003(g))



10.08.080   Traffic control devices--Hours of operation.



   The city manager shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. (Prior code §
3003(h))



10.08.090   Unauthorized painting of curbs.



   No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or
curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the
painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the
provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto.
(Prior code § 3003(i))



10.08.100   Special speed zones--Regulation of speed by traffic signals.



   The city manager is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner
at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within
the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof. (Prior code § 3014)



Article 2. Turning Movements



10.08.110   Authority to place turning markers--Intersections--Multiple
lanes.



   The city manager is authorized to place official traffic control
devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city manager is
authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which
drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law
or ordinance. (Prior code § 3004(a))



10.08.120   Authority to place restricted turn signs.



   The city manager is authorized to determine those intersections at
which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall
place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be
removed when such turns are permitted. (Prior code § 3004(b))



10.08.130   Signal controlled intersections--Right turns.



   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or
stop signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such
restriction as hereinafter provided in this section.



   B.   The city manager shall post appropriate signs giving effect to
this section where he determines that the making of right turns against
traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe
and orderly flow of traffic. (Prior code § 3004(c))



10.08.140   One-way streets and alleys.



   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any
one-way street or alley, the city manager shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited. (Prior code § 3005)



Article 3. Special Stops Required



10.08.150   The city manager to erect stop signs.



   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and
described any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any
intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances
thereto, or any railroad grad crossing at which vehicles are required to
stop, the city manager shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:



   A.   A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street
intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at
those entrances to other intersections  where a stop is required and at any
railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall
not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such
entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign
shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code.
(Prior code § 3006(a))



10.08.160   Stop at through street or stop sign.



   A.   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of
the council are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this
section.



   B.   The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more
entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are
established by resolution of the council.



   C.   The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway
railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. (Prior
code § 3006(b))



10.08.170   Emerging from alley, driveway or building.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or a building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Prior code §
3006(c))



Article 4. Pedestrian Regulations



10.08.180   City manager to establish marked crosswalks.



   A.   The city manager shall establish, designate and maintain
crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:



   Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections
within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such
district, and at other places within or outside said district where the city
manager determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing
the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection (B) of this
section.



   B.   Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be
established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length
and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable to mid-block.



   C.   The city manager may place signs at or adjacent to an
intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not
cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Prior code § 3008(a))



10.08.190   When pedestrians must use crosswalks.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the
central traffic district or in any business district. (Prior code § 3008(b))



Chapter 10.12
SPEED LIMITS



Sections:



10.12.010   Purpose.



10.12.020   Increased speed limits.



10.12.030   Decreased speed limits.



10.12.040   Mooney Grove speed limit.



10.12.050   Plaza Park speed limit.



10.12.060   Engineering and traffic survey required.



10.12.070   Placing appropriate signs required.



10.12.080   Official city list of zones.



10.12.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate orderly traffic movement
within the city through the establishment of prima facie speed zones.
Furthermore, this chapter intends enforcement of said prima facie speed
zones, within the limits of the city, through the use of electronic devices,
such as but not limited to, radar. (Prior code § 3002.1)



10.12.020   Increased speed limits.



   The city council may, by resolution, establish increased speed limits
when, pursuant to the provisions of Section 22357 of the California Vehicle
Code, it is determined that on certain roadways speeds greater than
twenty-five (25) miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of
vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe on said roadways at the
prima facie speed limits of thirty (30), thirty-five (35), forty (40),
forty-five (45), and fifty (50) miles per hour respectively, and that on all
remaining residential and business district roadways within the city, as set
forth within Section 22352 of the California Vehicle Code, a vehicular speed
of greater than the prima facie speed limit as to said roadways should not be
increased. The limits shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice
thereof have been erected. (Prior code § 3002.2)



10.12.030   Decreased speed limits.



   The city council may, by resolution, establish decreased speed limits
when, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, it determines that a
speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour is more than is reasonable or
safe on any part of a street or highway when such speed limit is fifty-five
(55) miles per hour under the California Vehicle Code and further determines
that a speed of fifty (50), forty-five (45), forty (40), thirty-five (35),
thirty (30) or twenty-five (25) miles per hour is more appropriate to
facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic. The limits shall be
effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof have been erected.
(Prior code § 3002.3)



10.12.040   Mooney Grove speed limit.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed greater
than fifteen (15) miles per hour in Mooney Grove Park. (Prior code § 3007(k))



10.12.050   Plaza Park speed limit.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed greater
than fifteen (15) miles per hour in Plaza Park. (Prior code § 3007(l))



10.12.060   Engineering and traffic survey required.



   Establishment of the prima facie speed limits shall be done pursuant to
an engineering and traffic survey as set forth in Section 627 of the
California Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3002.4)



10.12.070   Placing appropriate signs required.



   A.   When the city council, by resolution, has designated a prima
facie speed limit other than applicable under the California Vehicle Code,
the city manager is authorized and directed to erect, post and maintain
appropriate signs on the streets or portions thereof designating the prima
facie speed limit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.12. 



   B.   All signs shall be as specified in, erected and placed pursuant
to, the California Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3002.5)



10.12.080   Official city list of zones.



   A.   Also, pursuant to this chapter there shall be established an
official city “speed zone list.”



   B.   The city manager shall cause the prima facie speed limits,
adopted pursuant to this chapter, to be placed on the speed zone list.



   C.   The city manager shall keep a record of all resolutions
hereafter adopted designating the prima facie speed zone limits and shall
cause notation of such records and such roadways or portions thereof, to be
placed on said list.



   D.   Whenever any speed zone or portion thereof is changed or
deleted, the city manager shall cause the speed zone list to reflect such
change or deletion.



   E.   Said speed zone list shall be prima facie evidence of the
existence and legality of the speed zones upon the roadways, or portions
thereof, and the legality for placing the appropriate speed zone signs as
required by this chapter.



   F.   The speed zone list shall be deemed to be incorporated herein.
(Res. 2015-46, 2015; Res. 2014-49, 2014; Res. 2014-19, 2014; Prior code §
3002.6)



Chapter 10.16
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Sections:



10.16.010   Application of regulations.



10.16.020   Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.



10.16.030   City manager to maintain no stopping zones and no parking
areas.



10.16.040   No parking areas.



10.16.050   Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.



10.16.060   Parking for demonstration.



10.16.070   Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.



10.16.080   Washing or polishing vehicles.



10.16.090   Parking adjacent to schools.



10.16.100   Parking prohibited on narrow streets.



10.16.110   Unlawful parking--Peddlers, vendors.



10.16.120   Emergency parking signs.



10.16.130   Twenty minute parking.



10.16.140   One hour, two hour and four hour parking.



10.16.145   Downtown parking permits.



10.16.150   Parking parallel on one-way street.



10.16.160   Diagonal parking.



10.16.170   Parking space markings.



10.16.180   No stopping zone.



10.16.190   All night parking prohibited.



10.16.200   Parking on city property.



10.16.210   Parking commercial vehicles in residential district.



10.16.220   Movement of parked vehicle in central business district.



10.16.230   Handicapped parking.



10.16.240   Authority to establish loading zones.



10.16.250   Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.



10.16.260   Effect of permission to load or unload.



10.16.270   Standing for loading or unloading only.



10.16.280   Standing in passenger loading zone.



10.16.290   Standing in any alley.



10.16.300   Bus zones.



10.16.310   Bicycle parking zones.



10.16.320   Funeral zones.



10.16.330   Taxicab stands.



10.16.340   Special passenger loading zones.



10.16.010   Application of regulations.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping,
standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times
herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other  traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic control device.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on
standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe
other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances
of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times. (Prior code § 3009(a))



10.16.020   Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway.
(Prior code § 3009(b))



10.16.030   City manager to maintain no stopping zones and no parking
areas.



   A.   The city manager is authorized to maintain, by appropriate
signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking
area, and restricted parking area, as defined and described in this chapter.



   B.   When said curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of
any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such
legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 3009(c))



10.16.040   No parking areas.



   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or other authorized officer, of traffic sign or signal:



   A.   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly
indicated with appropriate signs or markings;



   B.   On either side of any street between the projected property
lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating
at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface;



   C.   In any area where the city manager determines that the parking
or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger
life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface;



   D.   In any area established by resolution of the council as a no
parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface;



   E.   Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to
hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;



   F.   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;



   G.   On any street or highway where the use of such street or
highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or
construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground
utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the
use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the
movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the
parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or
movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected
or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such
no parking. (Prior code § 3009(d))



10.16.050   Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.



   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle
shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive
period of seventy-two (72) hours. (Prior code § 3009(e))



10.16.060   Parking for demonstration.



   No operator of any vehicle shall park said vehicle upon any street in
this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale,
unless authorized by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 3009(f))



Editor's note:
   The United States District Court (Central District of California)
recently offered an opinion regarding the legal validity of city ordinances
prohibiting vehicles to be parked on a roadway displaying a "for sale" sign.
The United States District Court found that prohibiting the display of such a
sign in a vehicle on a roadway may be a First Amendment violation of free
speech and has issued a preliminary injunction against the City of Los
Angeles, forbidding them to issue citations for that violation. (8-9-01)



10.16.070   Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets.



   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause
to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be
dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this
city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Prior
code § 3009(g))



10.16.080   Washing or polishing vehicles.



   No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be
polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city,
when a charge is made for such service. (Prior code § 3009(h))



10.16.090   Parking adjacent to schools.



   A.   The city manager is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when
such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.



   B.   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that
side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 3009(i))



10.16.100   Parking prohibited on narrow streets.



   A.   The city manager is authorized to place signs or markings
indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such
signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30)
feet.



   B.   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected
upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon
any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Prior code §
3009(j))



10.16.110   Unlawful parking--Peddlers, vendors.



   A.   1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person
shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares,
merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited
or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating
cart or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that
such vehicles, wagons, or pushcarts may not stand or park at any specific
location for more than ten minutes, unless the person is otherwise stopped on
a personal break, or as necessary to complete a transaction(s) at the request
of a bona fide purchaser(s) that approached the person while stopped.



   2.   No person shall stand or park any such vehicle, wagon or
pushcart within this city within one thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior
boundary for property used or occupied by any private or public school.



   3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons
delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from
a store or other fixed place of business of distribution.



   B.   No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon,
eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart, stand, display, pedal driven cart,
wagon, showcase, rack or other nonmotorized conveyance from which food or
merchandise is sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written
permit to do so under this municipal code, Chapter 5.72 concerning sidewalk
vendors seeking permits or Chapter 17.64 concerning food truck operators
seeking permits.



   C.   No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or
intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street
while awaiting patronage for such  vehicle or wagon without first obtaining
a written permit to do so from the city manager, which shall designate the
specific location where such vehicle may stand.



   D.   Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this
municipal code and a particular location to park or stand is specified
therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any
location other than as designated in such permit. (Ord. 2019-05 § 2, 2019:
prior code § 3009(k))



10.16.120   Emergency parking signs.



   A.   Whenever the city manager shall determine that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city manager
shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or
posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is
prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city manager shall direct during
the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place
only during the existence of such emergency, and the city manager shall cause
such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.



   B.   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Prior code
§ 3009(l))



10.16.130   Twenty minute parking.



   A.   Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a
period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between eight a.m.
and five p.m. on any day except Sunday and holidays.



   B.   When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by
the city manager to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no
operator of vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any
such legible curb marking or sign in violation thereof. (Prior code §
3010(a))



10.16.140   One hour, two hour, three hour and four hour parking.



   A.   When authorized signs have been determined by the city manager
to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight
a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of
time longer than one hour.



   B.   When authorized signs have been determined by the city manager
to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight
a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and holidays for
a period of time longer than two hours.



   C.   When authorized signs have been determined by the city manager
to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight
a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and holidays for
a period of time longer than three hours.



   D.   When authorized signs have been determined by the city manager
to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight
a.m. and five p.m. of any day except Saturday(s), Sunday(s), and holidays for
a period of time longer than four hours. (Ord. 2007-04 § 2, 2007; prior code
§ 3010(b))



10.16.145   Downtown parking permits.



   A.   Whenever the city manager shall determine that the
establishment of parking permits are reasonably necessary or desirable to
prohibit, restrict or regulate off-street parking facilities within the
central business district parking zone as defined by Section 17.30.030, the
city manager shall have authority to implement parking permit programs for
city-owned or operated off-street parking facilities. The city manger shall
issue rules and regulations needed for the administration and enforcement of
downtown parking permits including but not limited to criteria and procedures
for issuance and revocation of a parking permit.



   B.   The city manager may defer any parking permit programs to the
city council for public review and authorization.



   C.   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.



   D.   Permit fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.



   E.   Fees collected, less administrative costs, shall be deposited
into an account for the purpose of providing future public parking
facilities. (Ord. 2000-10 § 1, 2000)



10.16.150   Parking parallel on one-way street.



   A.   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle
may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb
facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless
signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.



   B.   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway
unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.



   C.   The city manager is authorized to determine when standing or
parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any
one-way roadway or a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall
erect signs giving notice thereof.



   D.   The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section
shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in
the process of loading or unloading freight, or goods, in which case such
vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not
extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic
thereby. (Prior code § 3010(c))



10.16.160   Diagonal parking.



   A.   On any of the streets, portions of streets, or publicly owned
parking lots established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking
zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal
parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said
vehicle except:



   1.   At the angle to the curb or barrier indicated by signs or
pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the
limits of said allotted space;



   2.   With the front wheel nearest the curb or barrier within six
inches of said curb or barrier.



   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such
vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading
passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in
Section 10.16.150 shall be complied with. (Prior code § 3010(d))



10.16.170   Parking space markings.



   A.   The city manager is authorized to install and maintain parking
space markings to indicate parking space adjacent to curbing and the publicly
owned lots where authorized parking is permitted.



   B.   When such parking space markings are placed on the pavement,
subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be
stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the
size and shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Prior code §
3010(e))



10.16.180   No stopping zone.



   A.   The city manager shall designate established no stopping zones
by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of
vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is
prohibited.



   B.   During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it
shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any
of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the council
as no stopping zones. (Prior code § 3010(f))



10.16.190   All night parking prohibited.



   Whenever, within the central traffic district, signs are in place
indicating that parking is prohibited for any specified time between the
hours of two a.m. and five a.m. of any day, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle during any period of time prohibited by such signs. (Prior
code § 3010(g))



10.16.200   Parking on city property.



   A.   Whenever the city manager shall determine that the orderly
efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of
vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the city
manager shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or
posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or
restricted.



   B.   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. (Prior code §
3010(h))



10.16.210   Parking commercial vehicles in residential district.



   No person shall park any commercial vehicle, having an unladen weight
exceeding five thousand (5,000) pounds in any residential district except:
(a) while loading or unloading property; or (b) when such vehicle is parked
in connection with, or in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a
property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. A “residence
district” shall be determined as per California Vehicle Code, Division 1,
Section 240 or Section 515, or as those districts or areas zoned as
residential and indicated as such on the city zoning map, including
low-medium, and high-density residential. (Prior code § 3010(i))



10.16.220   Movement of parked vehicle in central business district.



   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, except a commercial
delivery vehicle while actually engaged in making delivery or pick up of
merchandise, more than one time within any two consecutive hours in the
central traffic district when posted in accordance with this chapter. (Prior
code § 3010(j))



10.16.230   Handicapped parking.



   A.   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a stall or
space designated for physically handicapped persons on public or private
property if such stall or space is indicated by blue paint on the curb.  In
addition to the blue paint, the space may also be indicated by sign if
immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space there is a
posted sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in
white on blue background, unless the vehicle displays a distinguishing
handicapped license plate or handicapped placard issued pursuant to Sections
22511.5 or 9105 of the California Vehicle Code.



   B.   This chapter shall not apply to any off-street parking facility
privately owned and maintained and generally held open for use of the public
for purposes of vehicular parking unless the owner or operator has, in
addition, caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such
off-street parking facility a notice not less than seventeen (17) by
twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in
height, to the effect that such off-street parking is subject to enforcement
of handicapped parking spaces as per Section 10.16.230 of the Municipal Code.



   C.   Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction
and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided:



   1.   A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00);



   2.   On the 5th calendar day following the date indicated on the
citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:



   a.   Payment of bail,



   b.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section,



   c.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency,



the citation shall be deemed delinquent and a fine of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsection (C)(1) of this
section;



   3.   On the 40th calendar day following the date indicated on the
citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:



   a.   Payment of bail,



   b.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section,



   c.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency,



the citation shall be deemed delinquent and an additional fine of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under
subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2).



   D.   For the purpose of processing parking citations and collecting
bail, fines and penalties, the collecting agency will be the Visalia
Municipal Court or the city.



   E.   In the event of changes in the California Vehicle Code sections
pertaining to handicapped parking, this chapter will automatically conform to
such change. (Prior code § 3011(k--n))



10.16.240   Authority to establish loading zones.



   A.   The city manager is authorized to determine and to mark loading
zones and passenger zones as follows:



   1.   At any place in the central traffic district or any business
district;



   2.   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or
in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.



   B.   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length
in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.



   C.   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top
of all curbs within such zones.



   D.   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint 
upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (Prior code § 3011(a))



10.16.250   Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.



   The city manager is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place,
the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and
such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth.



   A.   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a
red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.



   B.   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time
between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for
any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials;
provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more
than three minutes; nor the loading or unloading of materials more than
twenty (20) minutes.



   C.   White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes
and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day
except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:



   1.   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mail
box, the restrictions shall apply at all times;



   2.   When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall
apply at all times except when such theater is closed.



   D.   When the city manager as authorized under this chapter has
caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the
provisions of this section. (Prior code § 3011(b))



10.16.260   Effect of permission to load or unload.



   A.   Permission granted to stop or stand a vehicle for the purposes
of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles
and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefore, and in no event for
more than twenty (20) minutes.



   B.   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel
post packages and United States mail.



   C.   Permission granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or
unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal
baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefore, and in no
event for more than three minutes.



   D.   Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of
this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable
loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted.
(Prior code § 3011(c))



10.16.270   Standing for loading or unloading only.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading
zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials
for such time as is permitted in Section 10.16.260. (Prior code § 3011(d))



10.16.280   Standing in passenger loading zone.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading
zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for
such time as is specified in Section 10.16.260. (Prior code § 3011(e))



10.16.290   Standing in any alley.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other
than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. Such
loading or unloading is limited to the time periods specified in Section
10.16.260. (Prior code § 3011(f))



10.16.300   Bus zones.



   A.   The city manager or his designee, with the concurrence of the
city engineer, is authorized to establish bus zones for the loading and
unloading of passengers and to determine the location thereof and the time
such zones shall be restricted to the use of buses, subject to the directives
and limitations set forth herein.



   B.   Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an
intersection. 



   C.   The normal length of any bus zone shall be determined as
follows:



   1.   Eighty (80) feet when the zone is located at the far side of
any intersection;



   2.   One hundred (100) feet when the zone is located at the  near
side of an intersection, or at any location where the bus turns at an
intersection immediately prior to entering the bus zone;



   3.   One hundred fifty (150) feet when the city engineer determines
that the length of the bus zone, as stated in subsection (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section, is insufficient for safe or efficient operation of the bus;
provided, that such length minimums may be revised by the city engineer when
a zone is constructed off the standard street right-of-way.



   D.   The bus zone shall be designated by a red curb marking
stenciled with the words “BUS ZONE,” or by posting signs containing the
same words.



   E.   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, except a
transit bus, in a bus zone during times as may be specified on such sign or
marking.



   F.   If any development occurring to or upon any real property
adjacent or contiguous to the public right-of-way upon which a bus zone
and/or a bus bench is located requires the temporary relocation of an
existing bus zone and/or bus bench, then the owner of said real property, or
his contractor, or both, whose actions are, in whole or in part, responsible
for the relocation of any such bus zone and/or bus bench, shall be
individually and collectively responsible for all costs incurred in providing
any such temporary relocation and for the reinstallment of the bus zone
and/or bus bench to a permanent location. (Prior code § 3011(g))



10.16.310   Bicycle parking zones.



   When the city manager shall determine that the establishment of a
bicycle parking zone is reasonably necessary or desirable for the regulation
of traffic or to provide facilities for the temporary parking of bicycles
being operated upon public streets, or to safeguard life or property, he is
authorized to set aside a space on the street not more than thirty-six (36)
feet in length for the parking of bicycles during such hours of such days as
are found by him to be best suited for the accomplishment of the purpose set
forth in this section. When a bicycle parking zone is so established, the
city manager shall cause appropriate signs to be posted thereat during such
hours, giving notice that parking of other vehicles is prohibited. No person
shall stop, stand or park any other vehicle in front of such zone while such
signs are in place. (Prior code § 3011(k))



10.16.320   Funeral zones.



   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle for
any period of time longer than is necessary for the loading and unloading of
passengers and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit
markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any
undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place
at any time during or within forty (40) minutes prior to the beginning of any
funeral by or has received permission from the director or other person in
charge of such funeral or funeral service to park such vehicle in such place;
provided, that such director or person in charge shall have placed and
maintained prior to and during the time limit specified herein, two approved
portable signs one at each extremity of such place, upon the sidewalks or
pavement area and within two feet of the curb. (Prior code § 3011(l))



10.16.330   Taxicab stands.



   A.   The city manager may establish taxicab stands and determine the
location thereof.



   B.   The curb surface within each taxicab stand shall be  painted
white and marked “Taxicab Stand” in red lettering, or shall be designated
by signs of a type approved by the city manager.



   C.   No operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab or automobile
for hire, shall park said vehicle in such taxicab stand. (Prior code §
3011(m))



10.16.340   Special passenger loading zones.



   A.   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park said
vehicle in any special passenger loading zone when approved permanent or
portable signs are in place, as hereinafter provided, for any period of time
longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not
to exceed three minutes.



   B.   Special Passenger Loading Zones, as used herein, shall be those
areas adjacent to the curb, not more than sixty (60) feet in length, located
between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to,
and within the projected real property boundaries of any church, theater,
club, or place of business or public gathering. Said signs shall be provided
and paid for by the church, theater, club, or place of business or public
gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the city manager.
(Prior code § 3011(n))



Chapter 10.18
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING PROGRAM



Sections:



10.18.010   Legislative purpose.



10.18.020   Legislative findings.



10.18.030   Definitions.



10.18.040   Designation of residential permit parking areas.



10.18.050   Designation criteria.



10.18.060   Designation process.



10.18.070   Council determination.



10.18.080   Amendment of designation.



10.18.090   Posting of residential permit parking area.



10.18.100   Permit fees.



10.18.110   Issuance of permits.



10.18.120   Additional parking permits.



10.18.130   Prohibiting issuance of permits to out-of-state
vehicles--Exception for on-duty military personnel and recent newcomers to
Visalia.



10.18.140   Display of permits.



10.18.150   Permit parking exemption.



10.18.160   Application for and duration of permit.



10.18.170   Penalty provisions.



10.18.180   Revocation of permit.



10.18.190   Severability.



10.18.010   Legislative purpose.



   This chapter is enacted in response to the serious adverse effects
caused certain residential areas and neighborhoods of the city of Visalia by
motor vehicle congestion, particularly the long-term parking of motor
vehicles on the streets of such areas and neighborhoods by nonresidents
thereof. As set forth in more specific detail in Section 10.18.020 of this
chapter, such long-term parking by nonresidents threatens the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the city of Visalia. In order to protect and
promote the integrity of these areas and neighborhoods, it is necessary to
enact parking regulations restricting unlimited parking by nonresidents
therein, while providing the opportunity for residents to park near their
homes. Uniform parking regulations restricting resident and nonresidents
alike would not serve the public interest. Rather, such regulation would
contribute to neighborhood decline while ignoring the public transit
alternatives to automobile travel available to nonresidents. For the reasons
set forth in this chapter, a system of preferential resident parking is
enacted for the city of Visalia. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.020   Legislative findings.



   The city council makes the following specific legislative findings in
support of preferential resident parking as illustrations of the need
compelling the enactment of this chapter. They are intended as illustrations
only and do not exhaust the subject of the factual basis supporting its
adoption.



   A.   The safety, health and welfare of the residents of Visalia can
be greatly enhanced by maintenance of the attractiveness and livability of
its residential neighborhoods and other residential areas, and by preserving
the character of such areas and neighborhoods as residential.



   B.   Certain neighborhoods and areas of Visalia do not have
sufficient on- or off-street space to accommodate the convenient parking of
motor vehicles by residents thereof in the vicinity of their homes because of
the influxes of motor vehicles owned by nonresidents which compete for the
available on-street parking spaces. This causes an unreasonable burden in
residential neighborhoods in obtaining parking near their residences and in
gaining access to their homes.



   C.   There further exist certain parking “attractors” such as
commercial and institutional uses which further exacerbate resident parking
problems. These entities have attracted progressively more people every year
so that the parking problem in some areas exists seven days a week.



   D.   Unnecessary vehicle miles, noise, pollution, trash and strain
on interpersonal relationships caused by the conditions set forth herein work
unacceptable hardships on residents of these neighborhoods and other
residential areas by causing the deterioration of air quality, safety,
tranquillity and other values available in an urban residential environment.



   E.   If allowed to continue unchecked, these adverse effects on the
residents of the city will contribute to a further decline of the living
conditions therein, a reduction in the attractiveness of residing within this
city and especially these affected neighborhoods, and are consequently
injurious to the general public welfare.



   F.   A system of preferential resident parking as enacted in this
chapter will serve to promote the safety, health and welfare of all the
residents of the city by reducing unnecessary personal motor vehicle travel,
noise and pollution and by promoting improvements in air quality, the
convenience and attractiveness of urban residential living, and the increased
use of public mass transit facilities available now and in the future. The
public welfare will also be served by ensuring a more stable and valuable
property tax base in order to generate the revenues necessary to provide
essential public services. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   “Commuter vehicle” means a motor vehicle parked in a residential
area in which it is not registered with the state of California Department of
Motor Vehicles to a person residing in said area, except as otherwise
provided in Section 10.18.110(B).



   “Motor vehicle” means an automobile, truck, motorcycle or other
self-propelled form of transportation not in excess of six thousand (6,000)
pounds of gross weight, and shall not include a trailer, coach, or a utility
trailer, or any other type of vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle
Code, whether separate from or attached to a motor vehicle.



   “Public works director” means the public works director of the city
of Visalia or his or her designee.



   “Resident vehicle” means a motor vehicle parked in a residential
area in which it is registered with the State of California Department of
Motor Vehicles to a person residing in said area as allowed in Section
10.18.110(b).



   “Residential area” means a contiguous or nearly contiguous area
containing public streets and highways or parts thereof where residents dwell
within an area zoned residential by the city's zoning ordinance.



   “Residential permit parking area” means a residential area
designated as herein provided wherein resident motor vehicles displaying a
valid permit as described herein shall be exempt from parking time
restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A
(part), 1999)



10.18.040   Designation of residential permit parking areas.



   The city council shall, upon appropriate staff recommendations,
consider for designation as residential permit parking areas those
residential areas meeting and satisfying the objective criteria established
in this chapter. The council may in its discretion then designate by
resolution certain residential areas as residential permit parking areas in
which resident vehicles displaying a valid parking permit may stand or be
parked without limitation by parking time restrictions established by this
chapter.  (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.050   Designation criteria.



   A.   A residential area shall be deemed eligible for consideration
as a preferential permit parking area if, based on surveys and studies
prepared under the direction of the public works director, objective criteria
establishes that the area is impacted by commuter vehicles for any extended
period during the day or night, on weekends, or during holidays.



   The area eligible for consideration as a preferential parking area
includes streets which, in the judgment of the public works director or city
council, are not presently impacted by commuter vehicles but would be so
impacted upon adoption of preferential parking restrictions for an adjacent
area.



   B.   In determining whether an area identified as eligible for
preferential permit parking may so be designated, the public works director
and the city council shall take into account factors which include, but are
not limited to, the following:



   1.   The extent of the desire and need of the residents for
preferential permit parking;



   2.   The extent to which legal on-street parking spaces are or will
be occupied by motor vehicles in the neighborhoods affected and during the
period proposed for parking regulations;



   3.   The extent to which vehicles parking in the area during the
period proposed for parking regulations are or will be nonresident or
commuter vehicles rather than resident vehicles;



   4.   The extent to which motor vehicles registered to persons
residing in the area cannot be readily and conveniently accommodated by the
number of available off-street parking spaces; and



   5.   The extent to which service and maintenance vehicles and
equipment cannot move freely while the operators are under the employ of the
resident. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.060   Designation process.



   A.   Upon receipt of a verified petition by residents living in
fifty percent (50%) of the living units in the area proposed for designation,
the public works director shall undertake or cause to be undertaken such
surveys or studies as are deemed necessary to determine whether a residential
area satisfies the designation criteria for a residential permit parking
area. Such surveys or studies shall be completed within ninety (90) days of
receipt of such verified petition, unless otherwise provided by the council.



   B.   Within thirty (30) days of the completion of the surveys and
studies to determine whether designation criteria are satisfied, the public
works director shall prepare and file with the city clerk a written report to
the council recommending whether to designate the residential area under
consideration as a residential permit parking area. Such report shall set
forth the evidence generated as a result of surveys and studies performed,
the findings relative to those designation criteria listed in Section
10.18.050 deemed applicable to the residential area, and conclusion as to
whether the findings justify preferential residential parking for that
particular area and, if so, the proposed boundaries of the residential permit
parking area, a proposed time limitation, period of the day, and days for its
application.



   C.   Upon filing such report, the matter shall be set for public
hearing before the council for the purpose of determining whether a
residential permit parking area should be established in the area in question
and, if so, for determining the boundaries of such residential permit parking
area, the time limitation on parking therein, the period of the day and days
for its application. Notice of the public hearing or hearings provided herein
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least
ten days before the hearing date and posted generally in the neighborhood.
The notice shall clearly state the purpose of the hearing, the location and
boundaries tentatively considered for the proposed residential permit parking
area, the proposed time limitation, period of the day and days for its
application, and that a copy of the public works director report is available
for examination in the office of the city clerk.



   D.   The requirements for a verified petition as specified in
subsection (A) of this section shall be deemed minimum alternatives. If at
the conclusion of the public hearing conducted pursuant to this section the
council finds that the area proposed for designation has unique residential
parking problems due to the nature, location, frequency or duration of
activities or events causing such problems, the council may by resolution
provide for additional requirements as conditions to the approval and
adoption of the designation. Such conditions may include but are not limited
to requiring the purchase of permits by residents of at least fifty percent
(50%) but no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the number of dwelling
units on each block face of such area before implementation of the
designation or continuance thereof in any subsequent year. Such other
conditions as the council determines necessary and in the public interest may
also be imposed as additional conditions of approval and continued
implementation of the designation. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.070   Council determination.



   The city council shall conduct a public hearing on the date established
pursuant to Section 10.18.060 of this chapter to consider whether a
residential area should be designated as a residential permit parking area.
Following such hearing, the council shall adopt, modify, or reject the
recommendation of the public works director. In the alternative, the council
may refer the proposed designation to the public works director for further
consideration or study. Adoption of the designation shall be by resolution.
Such resolution shall state the boundaries of such residential permit parking
area, the applicable time limitation, period of day or days for its
application, and such other conditions as may have been imposed by the
council pursuant to Section 10.18.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh.
A (part), 1999)



10.18.080   Amendment of designation.



   Any amendment, additions, or deletions to a residential permit parking
area shall be initiated, considered and approved or disapproved according to
the procedures set forth in Sections 10.18.050 through 10.18.070 of this
chapter, except any such amendment, additions, or deletions may be initiated
by the city council upon its own initiative. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part),
1999)



10.18.090   Posting of residential permit parking area.



   Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution designating a
residential permit parking area, the public works director shall cause
appropriate signs to be erected in the area, indicating prominently thereon
the requirement of a permit to park in that area. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A
(part), 1999)



10.18.100   Permit fees.



   The fee for a residential parking permit shall be as designated in the
master fee resolution, which fee may differ from residential permit parking
area to residential permit parking area. In no event shall such fee exceed
the cost of administering the residential permit parking program. (Ord. 9901
§ 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.110   Issuance of permits.



   A.   Parking permits shall be issued by the public works director.
Each such permit shall be designed by the director to state or reflect
thereon the particular residential permit parking area as well as the license
number of the motor vehicle for which it is issued. No more than one parking
permit shall be issued to each motor vehicle for which application is made.
Parking permits shall not be issued for vehicles for which any notice of
violation of parking rules and restrictions is outstanding and unpaid. The
public works director shall issue such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this chapter, governing the manner in which persons shall
qualify for parking permits.



   B.   Parking permits may be issued for motor vehicles only upon
application by the following persons:



   1.   A legal resident of the residential permit parking area who has
a motor vehicle which is both registered in his or her name, and registered
at his or her address within that residential permit parking area, or a legal
resident of the residential permit parking area who has a motor vehicle for
his or her exclusive use and under his or her control where such motor
vehicle is registered to his or her employer and he or she presents a valid
employee identification card or other proof of employment that is acceptable
to the public works director;



   2.   A legal resident of the residential permit parking area who has
a motor vehicle registered to a vehicle-leasing company and leased to the
resident's employer, providing such vehicle for the resident's exclusive use
and provided proof of the lease agreement which is acceptable to the public
works director and shows that the vehicle is registered in compliance with
the California Vehicle Code;



   3.   A legal resident of the residential permit parking area for
display upon a rented motor vehicle, provided that no such permit shall be
valid for more than fourteen (14) days from the date of issuance or renewal
thereof;



   4.   A legal resident of a residential permit parking area for use
by bona fide transient visitors therein. Such a “long-term” visitor
permit shall have all the rights and privileges of a regular permit. A
“long-term” visitor permit shall be valid for no more than fourteen (14)
days from the date of issuance. No resident of a residential permit parking
area shall be issued more than one “long-term” visitor permit at any one
time;



   5.   The public works director may issue a temporary permit valid
for a minimum of fourteen (14) days and maximum of four weeks, on a one-time
basis, for a legal resident of the residential permit parking area upon
presentation of satisfactory proof of such new residency.



   C.   In succeeding years, a resident parking permit may be obtained
by mail, but an initial permit requires the resident or an authorized
representative to appear in person at Visalia City Hall with the following
two items of documentation:



   1.   A valid California automobile registration showing the
applicant's (resident's) car registered and principally garaged in the
applicant's (resident's) name at the current Visalia address;



   2.   Proof of residency bearing the applicant's (resident's) name
and Visalia address. The proof of residency must be current, postmarked
within the past thirty (30) days. Examples of proof of residency include:



   a.   Gas, electric or telephone bill,



   b.   Cable television bill,



   c.   Monthly bank statement (excluding mortgage),



   d.   Credit card bill.



   D.   With each parking permit, three visitors permits (short term
permits) shall be issued, each bearing the street address of the residence,
the date of issue and the same identification number as the parking permit.
These permits are designed to be placed on the dashboard of a visiting
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible.



   1.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a resident
to lend, rent, sell or give away a visitors permit or to allow the use of a
visitors permit for any purpose other than a personal visitation by the
visitor. However, a resident may lend a visitors permit to another resident
for use by that resident should there be a personal visitation by more than
three visitors, thereby exceeding the three visitors permits issued pursuant
to subsection (D) of this section. Upon conviction, a person shall be
punished by revocation of his or her own residential parking permit and all
visitors permits. Any motor vehicle displaying such a revoked permit will be
considered to be in violation of this chapter and the violation shall be
deemed an infraction.



   2.   A resident may request not more than twenty (20) additional
visitors permits from the public works director. Such additional visitors
permits shall be valid for only one day which shall be clearly marked on the
permit. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.120   Additional parking permits.



   The public works director is authorized upon application to issue
additional parking permits to residents of a residential permit parking area
for use of persons who, on a regular basis, provide health care or other
related services essential to the well-being of the resident applicant, upon
the certification under penalty of perjury by a licensed physician that such
services are required. No resident of a residential permit parking area shall
be authorized to possess more than three such additional parking permits at
any one time. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.130   Prohibiting issuance of permits to out-of-state
vehicles--Exception for on-duty military personnel and recent newcomers to
Visalia.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the
public works director shall not issue any residential parking area permit
pursuant to this chapter to any vehicle not registered with the state of
California Department of Motor Vehicles.



   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this
section, the public works director is authorized upon application to issue
parking permits to residents of a residential permit parking area for motor
vehicles registered out-of-state, provided that the resident establishes that
he or she is on active military duty.



   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this
section, residents who have recently moved to a residential permit parking
neighborhood from out of state, and own a vehicle that is not registered with
the state of California Department of Motor Vehicles, may be issued a
temporary permit valid for a minimum of fourteen (14) days and a maximum of
four weeks, in order to allow time for the registration of the vehicle with
the California Department of Motor Vehicles. This temporary permit may be
renewed one time, and at the discretion of the public works director, but
only upon presentation to the director of written documentation from the
California Department of Motor Vehicles of a legitimate reason for such a
delay. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.140   Display of permits.



   Permits shall be displayed in the lower left-hand corner of the
vehicle's front windshield; provided, that the public works director may
change the required location annually, with appropriate written notice to all
permit holders. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.150   Permit parking exemption.



   A.   A resident motor vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking
permit as provided herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the
residential permit parking area for which the permit has been issued without
being limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter. Said
resident motor vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions or
prohibitions established pursuant to authority other than this chapter. All
other motor vehicles parked within a residential permit parking area shall be
subject to the time restrictions adopted as provided in this chapter as well
as the penalties provided for herein. A residential parking permit shall not
guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space within
the designated residential permit parking area.



   B.   Motor vehicles used in providing a service to a resident; e.g.,
janitorial or cleaning service, lawn care, carpentry, painting, construction,
etc., wherein the service is obviously being provided at the residence at the
time the motor vehicle is parked at the residence in question, shall not be
subject to the time restrictions established pursuant to this chapter when
parked within a residential permit parking area. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A
(part), 1999)



10.18.160   Application for and duration of permit.



   Each parking permit issued by the public works director shall be valid
for two years from the date established by the public works director. Permits
may be renewed biennially upon reapplication in the manner required by the
public works director; provided, however, that parking permits shall not be
renewed for which any notice of violation of parking rules and restrictions
is outstanding and unpaid. Each application or reapplication for a parking
permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, his or
her residence address or address of real property owned or leased within a
residential permit parking area, and the license number of the motor vehicle
for which application is made, and such other information as may be deemed
relevant by the public works director.



   Each parking permit issued hereunder is valid only as long as the
permittee continues to own the vehicle and/or live in the residence
designated in the permit. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.170   Penalty provisions.



   A.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter, unless
expressly provided to the contrary herein, for any person to stand or park a
motor vehicle or other vehicle of a gross weight exceeding twenty (20) pounds
for a period exceeding the time limitation established pursuant hereto. The
first violation of this subsection is an infraction. All subsequent
violations of this section are misdemeanors; however, the city attorney, with
the approval of the court, can reduce the charge to an infraction.



   B.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to
falsely represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application therefor to the public works
director. The first violation of this subsection is an infraction. All
subsequent violations of this subsection are misdemeanors; however, the city
attorney, with the approval of the court, can reduce the charge to an
infraction.



   C.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person
holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or
display of such permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the
permit is issued, or upon any other type of vehicle. Such conduct shall
constitute an unlawful act and violation of this chapter both by the person
holding the valid parking permit and the person who so uses or displays the
permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is issued. The first
violation of this subsection is an infraction. All subsequent violations of
this subsection are misdemeanors; however, the city attorney, with the
approval of the court, can reduce the charge to an infraction.



   D.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to
copy, produce or otherwise create a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit
or permits without written authorization from the public works director. It
is further unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly
use or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade
time limitations on parking applicable in a residential permit parking area.
The first violation of this subsection is an infraction. All subsequent
violations of this subsection are misdemeanors; however, the city attorney,
with the approval of the court, can reduce the charge to an infraction. (Ord.
9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.180   Revocation of permit.



   The public works director is authorized to revoke the residential
parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this chapter and,
upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such permit to
the public works director. Failure, when so requested, to surrender a
residential parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of law and
of this chapter.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the chief of
police or the public works director is authorized to remove from a motor
vehicle any parking permit, the use of which is deemed to be unlawful herein.
(Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



10.18.190   Severability.



   The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision,
clause, sentence, subsection, section, word or part thereof is held illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance,
such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall
not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences,
subsections, sections, words or parts of the chapter or their application to
other persons or circumstances. It is declared to be the legislative intent
that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional provision, clause, sentence, subsection, section, word or
part had not been included therein, or if such person or circumstance to
which the chapter or part thereof is held inapplicable had been specifically
exempted therefrom. (Ord. 9901 § 1 (Exh. A (part), 1999)



Chapter 10.20
MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RULES



Sections:



10.20.010   Driving through funeral procession.



10.20.020   Clinging to moving vehicle.



10.20.030   Commercial vehicles using private driveways.



10.20.040   Riding or driving on sidewalk.



10.20.050   New pavement and markings.



10.20.060   Obedience to barriers and signs.



10.20.070   No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.



10.20.080   Limited access.



10.20.090   Restrictions on use of freeways.



10.20.100   Traffic barriers.



10.20.110   Parking and pedestrian regulations on city property.



10.20.120   Transit property damage.



10.20.130   Use of transit property.



10.20.140   Lost or unclaimed property.



10.20.150   Railway gates.



10.20.160   Trains not to block crossings.



10.20.170   Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment--Permit required.



10.20.180   Flange wheel machinery.



10.20.190   Restrictions on use of certain vehicles in the city.



10.20.192   Definitions.



10.20.194   Exceptions.



10.20.196   Nuisance.



10.20.200   Reckless driving prohibited.



10.20.210   Driving, standing, or parking on private property prohibited.



10.20.220   Signs identifying hours of closure.



10.20.230   Violation--Penalty.



10.20.010   Driving through funeral procession.



   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising
a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that such vehicles are
conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any
street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be
subject to the orders of the police department. (Prior code § 3007(a))



10.20.020   Clinging to moving vehicle.



   No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold
onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the
purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Prior code § 3007(b))



10.20.030   Commercial vehicles using private driveways.



   A.   No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or
across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself
without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or
markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.



   B.   For the purpose of this section, a commercial vehicle shall
mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Prior code
§ 3007(c))



10.20.040   Riding or driving on sidewalk.



   No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any
vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently
constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary
purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that
said sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches
thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the city manager.
Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area
during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Prior code § 3007(d))



10.20.050   New pavement and markings.



   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across
any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a
barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons
not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device
is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.
(Prior code § 3007(e))



10.20.060   Obedience to barriers and signs.



   No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or
place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city
manager, or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any
barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility
or by any department of this city. (Prior code § 3007(f))



10.20.070   No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.



   No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Prior code § 3007(g))



10.20.080   Limited access.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Prior code
§ 3007(h))



10.20.090   Restrictions on use of freeways.



   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle, or
any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established
as a freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across
or along any such street so designated and described except in space set
aside for the use of pedestrians; provided, official signs are in place
giving notice of such restrictions. (Prior code § 3007(i))



10.20.100   Traffic barriers.



   No person shall operate a vehicle contrary to directions or provisions
of any barrier or sign erected: (a) pursuant to the provisions of any
ordinance of the city; or (b) by any public utility; or (c) by any department
of the city; or (d) by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the
city, nor shall any unauthorized person move or alter the position of any
such barrier or sign. (Prior code § 3007(j))



10.20.110   Parking and pedestrian regulations on city property.



   A.   All property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of
the city is, by authority of this chapter, subject to provisions of Sections
21113 and 22651 “n” of the California Vehicle Code.



   B.   When the city manager has determined that a particular portion
of city property mentioned in subsection (A) of this section is open to
vehicular or pedestrian travel, and that the regulation of pedestrian and
vehicular travel are necessary, the city manager shall authorize the posting
of said property in accordance with this chapter.



   C.   When authorized signs are erected in place giving notice of
particular restriction on said property and any hours of limited enforcement,
no operator of any vehicle shall drive, park or leave standing said vehicle
in any area restricted or regulated, except in accordance with the posted
regulation.



   D.   When authorized signs are erected in place giving notice of
particular restriction on said property and any hours of limited enforcement,
no rider of any bicycle, unicycle or other wheeled contrivance shall drive,
ride, park or leave standing said bicycle, unicycle or other wheeled
contrivance except in accordance with posted regulation.



   E.   When authorized signs are erected in place giving notice of a
particular prohibition or restriction on said property and any hours of
limited enforcement, no person shall walk, trespass, stand, loiter, drive or
ride through any area where such passage, standing, loitering, driving or
riding is prohibited or restricted.



   F.   1. Violation of subsections (C) and (D) of this section shall
constitute an infraction and be punishable according to provisions of Section
10.16.230(C).



   2.   In addition to the punishment indicated in subsection (F)(1) of
this section, if the property is posted indicating a tow-away zone, the
vehicle may be towed from the property at the registered owner's expense.



   G.   Violation of subsection (E) of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, subject to penalties in accordance with Section 1.12.010. (Ord.
9605 § 24, 1996: prior code § 3010.1)



10.20.120   Transit property damage.



   Any person damaging transit property shall report such damage to the
risk manager of the city immediately and may be fully responsible to the city
for any expense required to repair such damage. (Prior code § 3011(h))



10.20.130   Use of transit property.



   A.   All shops, garages, equipment, and facilities at or upon
transit property are expressly for operation of transit business. No employee
shall use these facilities, equipment or tools for other than transit
business. No person, other than the employees, shall make use of these
facilities, or loiter around such premises, without specific permission of
the city manager or his designee.



   B.   No person shall transport or deliver fuel on transit property
to any transit vehicles on or off transit  property unless said persons are
holders of a valid contract, purchase order, or agreement with the city
authorizing them to do so. (Prior code § 3011(i))



10.20.140   Lost or unclaimed property.



   Transit shall take charge or custody of all lost or unclaimed property
which is turned over to or  comes into the possession of transit, and shall
retain the possession thereof. All persons shall turn over to the city
manager or his designee any lost or unclaimed property which is found in or
about transit buses or transit property. (Prior code § 3011(j))



10.20.150   Railway gates.



   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed. (Prior code § 3013(a))



10.20.160   Trains not to block crossings.



   No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or
similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner
as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of
time longer than ten minutes; except, that this provision shall not apply to
railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or
obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of
the train, car or  similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of
the accident. (Prior code § 3013(b))



10.20.170   Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment--Permit required.



   A.   No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets
any vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle
Code without a written permit from the city manager.



   B.   The city manager may, by written permit, authorize a load or
loads in excess of those allowed for in the Vehicle Code, if, in his
judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely
withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the
city that all costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the
city damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. Such
permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as
the city manager in his discretion may require. (Prior code § 3015(a))



10.20.180   Flange wheel machinery.



   No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of
equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges, or other projections
on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or
corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat
bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times. (Prior
code § 3015(b))



10.20.190   Restrictions on use of certain vehicles in the city.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any
motorcycle, motor bike or all-terrain vehicle of any kind on any private
property, or unoccupied public property, within one-half mile of any school,
hospital, convalescent home, public park or residential area, except upon a
regularly established private road, driveway or parking lot appurtenant to a
structure on that property.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle of
any kind on the river bed, islands, banks, levees or the area located between
the levees, within the city limits of the city or St. John's River, Millcreek
or other natural water course within the city limits. (Ord. 9807 § 2 (part),
1998)



10.20.192   Definitions.



   Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall
govern the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter:



   “All-terrain vehicle” means a motor vehicle which is designed for
operation off of the highway by an operator with no passengers, is fifty (50)
inches or less in width, is six hundred (600) pounds or less in unladen
weight, is suspended on three or four low-pressure tires, has a single seat
designed to be straddled by the operator, and has handlebars for steering
control as defined by Section 111 of the California Vehicle Code.



   “Motor bike” means any motorcycle, including every motor scooter,
with a motor which produces less than fifteen (15) gross brake horsepower,
and every bicycle with motor attached as defined by Section 405 of the
California Vehicle Code.



   “Motorcycle” means a motor vehicle other than a tractor having a
seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more
than three wheels in contact with the ground and weighing less than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds as defined by Section 400 of the
California Vehicle Code.



   “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle which is self-propelled as
defined by Section 415 of the California Vehicle Code.



   “Residential area” means any area one-quarter mile in depth
abutting a public or private road, and one-quarter mile in length measured
along such road, which contains any apartment house(s), condominium(s),
multiple unit dwelling structure(s), or four or more residences of any kind
or combination.



   “Within one-half mile of” means the distance measured from that
part of a school, hospital, convalescent home, park or residential area
closest to the point of operation of a motorcycle, motor bike or all-terrain
vehicle. (Ord. 9807 § 2 (part), 1998)



10.20.194   Exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the following:



   A.   The use of any motor vehicle operated on any private property
by the owner of such property, his or her employee or invitee, when such
motor vehicle is engaged in farming or other actions in the course and
operation which are part of a lawful business or commercial activity.



   B.   The use of any motor vehicle engaged in the inspection,
maintenance and/or repair of a river bed or levee. (Ord. 9807 § 2 (part),
1998)



10.20.196   Nuisance.



   Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 9807 § 2 (part), 1998)



10.20.200   Reckless driving prohibited.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to drive
any motor vehicle in or upon any property open to and intended for use by the
public or the patrons of an adjacent business, commercial, industrial,
entertainment or recreational establishment or public facility of any kind
without having in his possession a valid operator's license issued in
accordance with the California Vehicle Code or in willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property. This section shall not apply to any
property or portion thereof being used for a special event with the express
permission of the owner or his representative and from which the public has
been temporarily excluded, nor shall it apply to a public highway or to any
act prohibited by the Vehicle Code or other law of the State of California.
(Prior code § 3351)



10.20.210   Driving, standing, or parking on private property prohibited.



   No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle on private property
without the express permission of the property owner or the person in lawful
possession of the property. (Prior code § 3500)



10.20.220   Signs identifying hours of closure.



   A.   The property owner or person in lawful possession of the
property shall erect authorized signs giving notice of the particular
violation and the hours of enforcement.



   Example: “Private Property - Customer Parking Only.  No driving,
stopping, or parking between 10:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m.  Violators will be
cited or towed at the owners expense.  Visalia City Ordinance 8920, CVC
22658, Visalia Police Department.  738-3257.”



   B.   Authorized signs shall be a minimum of seventeen (17) inches by
twenty-two (22) inches, with one-inch letters, posted adjacent to the
entrances. These signs may be erected in such a position to prevent vandalism
or theft. The property owner or person in lawful possession of the property
shall have on file with the police department a signed consent form
authorizing the police department to enforce said ordinance. (Prior code §
3501)



10.20.230   Violation--Penalty.



   A.   Violation of any provision of Sections 10.20.190 through
10.29.194 shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as follows:



   1.   Upon the first conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00);



   2.   A second conviction within a period of one year after the first
conviction by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00);



   3.   For a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one
year after the second violation by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00);



   4.   For purposes of this subsection, the bail forfeiture shall be
deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged.



   B.   A violation of the provisions of Sections 10.20.210 or
10.20.220 shall be an infraction punished as follows:



   1.   The minimum penalty for a first conviction of parking is a
twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine;



   2.   For a second violation occurring within one year of a prior
violation that resulted in conviction, a fine not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.00);



   3.   For a third or any subsequent violation occurring within one
year of two or more prior violations resulting in convictions, a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 9807 § 2 (part), 1998; prior
code § 3502)



Chapter 10.24
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



Sections:



10.24.010   Designated truck routes and commercial vehicle prohibitions.



10.24.020   Advertising vehicles.



10.24.010   Designated truck routes and commercial vehicle prohibitions.



   A.   The following streets within the city are approved as
designated truck routes:



   1.   Mooney Boulevard (Hwy 63) between the southerly city limits and
Highway 198;



   2.   Locust Street (Hwy 63) between Noble Avenue and Northwest
Second;



   3.   Northwest Second (Hwy 63) between Locust Street and West Street;



   4.   West Street (Hwy 63) between Northwest Second and Houston
Avenue;



   5.   Court Street (Hwy 63) between Noble Avenue and Northwest Third;



   6.   Northwest Third (Hwy 63) between Court Street and West Street;



   7.   Dinuba Boulevard (Hwy 63) between Houston Avenue and the north
city limit;



   8.   Northeast Third between Court Street and Houston Avenue;



   9.   Ben Maddox Way between Caldwell Avenue and the north city limit;



   10.   All of Lovers Lane within the city limits;



   11.   Plaza Drive, between Highway 198 and the north city limit;



   12.   All of Caldwell Avenue in the city limits between Shirk Street
and Lovers Lane;



   13.   All of Highway 198 within the city limits;



   14.   All of Goshen Avenue within the city limits between Highway 99
and Shirk Road;



   15.   Houston Avenue between Santa Fe Street and the easterly city
limit.



   B.   The city council finds that the erection of signs on the
streets designated as truck routes shall best serve to give notice of this
chapter. The city engineer is authorized to designate such streets as truck
routes by the erection of appropriate signs.



   C.   All commercial vehicles in excess of fourteen thousand (14,000)
pounds gross vehicle weight shall be required to drive on a designated truck
route as specified in subsection (A) of this section while within the city.



   D.   Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (C) of this section, per
Section 35701 of the California Vehicle Code, commercial vehicles exceeding a
gross weight of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds, are prohibited the use of
the following street sections:



   1.   Demaree Road between Caldwell and Goshen;



   2.   Tulare Avenue between Akers Road and Woodland Street;



   3.   Tulare Avenue between Central Street and Locust Street;



   4.   Campus Avenue between Demaree Street and Woodland Street;



   5.   Burrel Avenue between Mooney Boulevard and Central Street;



   6.   Prospect Avenue between Mooney Boulevard and Conyer Street;



   7.   Ferguson Avenue between Dinuba Boulevard and Bridge Street;



   8.   Linwood Street between Caldwell Avenue and State Highway 198;



   9.   Chinowth Road between Whitendale Avenue and Highway 198;



   10.   County Center Drive between Caldwell Avenue and State Highway
198;



   11.   Woodland Street between Walnut Avenue and West Main Street;



   12.   Sallee Street between Beech Avenue and Walnut Avenue;



   13.   Mooney Boulevard between Goshen Avenue and Riggin Avenue;



   14.   Central Street between Mineral King Avenue and Burrel Avenue;



   15.   Giddings Street between Whitendale Avenue and Murray Avenue;



   16.   All of Giddings Street in the city limits between Houston
Avenue and Riggin Avenue;



   17.   Conyer Street between Walnut Avenue and School Avenue;



   18.   Court Street between Caldwell Avenue and Tulare Avenue;



   19.   Court Street between Houston Avenue and Sunnyview Avenue;



   20.   Burke Street between Paradise Avenue and Noble Avenue;



   21.   Beverly Drive between Mooney Boulevard and Divisadero Street;



   22.   Myrtle Avenue between Mooney Boulevard and Divisadero Street;



   23.   Kaweah Avenue between Mooney Boulevard and Divisadero Street.



   E.   The city council finds that the erection of signs along the
streets on which commercial vehicles exceeding a gross weight of fourteen
thousand (14,000) pounds are prohibited shall best serve to give notice of
this chapter. The city engineer is authorized to designate such streets by
the erection of appropriate signs.



   F.   This chapter shall not prohibit any commercial vehicles coming
from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and
from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or
delivery of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure
located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials
to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for
which a building permit has been obtained.



   G.   The chapter shall not apply to passenger buses governed by the
provisions of the Public Utilities Code Sections 1031 through 1036 or any
vehicle owned by public utilities.



   H.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
unlawful and shall be subject to the penalties established by California
Vehicle Code Section 42001 and as such section may be amended from time to
time. (Ord. 9802 § 2, 1998)



10.24.020   Advertising vehicles.



   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising
purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or
loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the Central
Traffic District. (Prior code § 3012(i))



Chapter 10.28
CRUISING



Sections:



10.28.010   Definitions.



10.28.020   Cruising prohibited.



10.28.030   Exclusions.



10.28.040   Penalty.



10.28.050   Severability.



10.28.010   Definitions.



   The following definitions should apply in this chapter:



   A.   Cruise or Cruising. Cruising is defined as driving a motor
vehicle on a highway past a traffic control point designated by the ranking
peace officer on duty, under conditions in which traffic is congested at or
near the control point, three or more times within a two-hour period, after
having driven past said control point twice within the same period and having
been given adequate written notice after the second passing, that passing the
control point a third time under conditions stated herein shall constitute a
violation of this section.



   B.   Highway and Motor Vehicle. “Highway” and “vehicle” are
defined by Sections 360 and 415 of the California Vehicle Code, respectively.



   C.   South Mooney Boulevard. The street that is also known as State
Route 63, bounded on the north by Noble Avenue, and on the south by Caldwell
Avenue. (Prior code § 3400)



10.28.020   Cruising prohibited.



   A.   As per California Vehicle Code Section 21100(k), cruising shall
be prohibited on South Mooney Boulevard.



   B.   No person shall be guilty of cruising unless that person has
been driving a motor vehicle past the same traffic control point three or
more times within a two-hour period and has, upon driving past the traffic
control the first time, been given notice that further driving past the
traffic control point shall be a violation of the Visalia Municipal Code.
(Prior code § 3401)



10.28.030   Exclusions.



   This chapter shall not apply to emergency vehicles in service, taxicabs
for hire and buses operated by a government agency and traveling along a
fixed route. (Prior code § 3402)



10.28.040   Penalty.



   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction
punished as follows:



   A.   The minimum penalty for a first conviction of cruising is a
twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine;



   B.   For a second violation occurring within one year of a prior
violation that resulted in conviction, a fine not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.00);



   C.   For a third or any subsequent violation occurring within one
year of two or more prior violations resulting in convictions a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Prior code § 3403)



10.28.050   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it
would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional.
(Prior code § 3404)



Chapter 10.32
ABANDONED VEHICLES



Sections:



10.32.010   Parking and storing prohibited.



10.32.020   Public nuisance.



10.32.030   Definitions.



10.32.040   Exception.



10.32.050   Supplement to other codes.



10.32.060   Enforcement.



10.32.070   Franchise.



10.32.080   Administrative costs.



10.32.090   Notice of intention.



10.32.100   Notice of hearing.



10.32.110   Public hearing.



10.32.120   Removal of vehicle.



10.32.130   Notice of removal.



10.32.140   Placing cost on tax roll.



10.32.150   Penalties.



10.32.010   Parking and storing prohibited.



   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park,
store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any
licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an inoperative,
abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled condition upon any private property or
public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess
of ten days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within
a building or located behind a solid fence six feet in height in a lawful
manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or
private property, or unless such vehicle is store or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard. (Prior code § 4080)



10.32.020   Public nuisance.



   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the
Vehicle Code to remove inoperative, abandoned, wrecked, or dismantled
vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council of the city
makes the following findings and declarations:



   A.   The accumulation and storage of inoperative, abandoned, wrecked
or dismantled vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property
including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value
of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage
for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or
dismantled vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property, except as
expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance
which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 4082(part))



10.32.030   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter:



   “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, public
maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel. Highway includes streets.



   “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the
vehicle, or parts thereof, is located as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll.



   “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal
owner of record. 



   “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Prior code §
4082 (part))



10.32.040   Exception.



   A.   This chapter shall not apply to:



   1.   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely within a building
in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; or located behind a solid fence six feet in height where it
is not visible from the street or other public or private property;



   2.   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.



   B.   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than
Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code
and this chapter. (Prior code § 4083)



10.32.050   Supplement to other codes.



   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of inoperative, abandoned,
wrecked or dismantled vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in
addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or
hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 4084)



10.32.060   Enforcement.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of the chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the housing and economic development
director or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as "enforcement
officer". In the enforcement of this chapter such enforcement officer and his
or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a
vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a
vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-05 § 2, 2009; Prior code § 4085)



10.32.070   Franchise.



   When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any
person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior code § 4086)



10.32.080   Administrative costs.



   The enforcement officer shall keep an accounting of the costs of
abating any such nuisance. Such costs may be recovered as administrative
costs under this chapter and, together with the costs incurred for the
removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, may become a special assessment
against the parcel of said land pursuant to Section 22660 of the California
Vehicle Code and Section 38773.5 of the California Government Code. In the
event a civil lawsuit is filed to enforce these provisions, then the
prevailing party shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees and
all costs. 



(Ord. 2009-05 § 3, 2009;Prior code § 4087)



10.32.090   Notice of intention.



   A.   Upon discovering the existence of an inoperative, abandoned,
wrecked or dismantled vehicle, or part thereof, on private property or public
property within the city, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to
cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure
described herein. A ten day notice of intention to abate and remove the
vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered
or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle,
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership.



   B.   The ten day notice of intention to abate or remove shall
contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the land and owner
of the vehicle, including the right of the owner of the land to appear in
person at a hearing on the question of abatement and removal, or to submit a
sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial in lieu of appearing.
(Ord. 2009-05 § 4, 2009; Prior code § 4088)



10.32.100   Notice of hearing.



   A.   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land,
either received by the enforcement officer within ten days after the mailing
of the notices of intention to abate and remove are made at the time of
signing a release waiving any interest in the vehicle, or parts thereof, a
public hearing shall be held before an administrative hearing officer
appointed pursuant to Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 1.13.  Requests for
appeal by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land shall be made
pursuant to Visalia Municipal Code Section 1.13.080.  The hearing shall
decide issues related to whether sufficient grounds under this Chapter 10.32,
existed to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as an inoperative,
abandoned, wrecked or dismantled vehicle, and the assessment of the
administrative costs and the cost of the removal of the vehicle or part
thereof against the property on which it is located.



   B.   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement
denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within
such ten day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a
hearing within such ten day period which does not require his presence.
Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days
before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle,
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership. If such a request for a hearing is not
received within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate
and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle
or part thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord.
2009-05 § 5, 2009; Prior code § 4089)



10.32.110   Public hearing.



   A.   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the
hearing officer appointed pursuant to Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 1.13. 
The hearing officer shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems
pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition
that the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its
location on the said private property or public property. The hearing officer
shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the
land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located may appear in person at
the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at
the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land with his or her reasons for such denial.



   B.   The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such
other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry
out the purpose of this chapter. He or she may delay the time for removal of
the vehicle or part thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances
justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing the hearing officer may
find that a vehicle or a part thereof is inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or
dismantled on private or public property and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and
determine that the administrative costs and the costs of removal be charged
against the owner of the land on which the vehicle or part thereof is
located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the
vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and vehicle
number of the vehicle, if available, at the site.



   C.   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed
on the land without the consent of the landowner and he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess costs of
administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such
landowner. (Ord. 2009-05 § 6, 2009; Prior code § 4090)



10.32.120   Removal of vehicle.



   Five days after the order declaring the vehicle or part thereof to be a
public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the
decision of such hearing, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed by
removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has
been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(Prior code § 4091)



10.32.130   Notice of removal.



   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part
thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles
identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall
be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of
registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of
title and license plates. (Prior code § 4092)



10.32.140   Placing cost on tax roll.



   If the administrative costs and cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.32.110 are not
paid within thirty (30) days of the order, or the final disposition of an
appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted
to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same
priority as other city taxes. (Prior code § 4093)



10.32.150   Penalties.



   A.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or
refuse to remove an inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled vehicle or
part thereof or refuse to abate such wrecked or dismantled vehicle or part
thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance
with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such law is
applicable. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter
as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the
prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an
infraction pursuant to Section 19(c) of the California Penal Code.



   B.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.



   C.   Any person convicted of any infraction of this chapter shall be
punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this chapter within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 4081)



Chapter 10.36
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



Sections:



10.36.010   Adoption of transportation demand management regulations.



10.36.010   Adoption of transportation demand management regulations.



   In compliance with the California Health and Safety Code Sections 40910
et seq., the city adopts Rule 9001 of the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air
Pollution Control District, as administered by, and as amended from time to
time by said district, as the transportation demand management regulation
within the city. (Prior code § 3600)



Chapter 10.40
BICYCLES



Sections:



10.40.010   Definitions.



10.40.020   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.



10.40.030   Obedience to traffic control devices.



10.40.040   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.



10.40.050   Emerging from alley or driveway.



10.40.060   Bicycle lanes.



10.40.070   Along bicycle lanes.



10.40.080   Leaving bicycle lane.



10.40.090   Walking bicycle.



10.40.100   Vehicles crossing bicycle path.



10.40.110   Signs.



10.40.120   License required.



10.40.130   License indicia.



10.40.140   Term of license.



10.40.150   Report of sale or transfer or change of address.



10.40.160   Bicycle sales.



10.40.170   Unlawful to destroy indicia.



10.40.180   License fee.



10.40.190   Fines.



10.40.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   “Bicycle” for the purposes of this chapter means any device upon
which an individual may ride, which is propelled by human power through a
system of belts, chains, or gears and which has wheels at least twenty (20)
inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches.



   “Bicycle lane” means that portion of a roadway set aside for the
use of bicycles and so designated.



   “Bicycle path” shall be contrived as a pathway for bicycles and
pedestrians paralleling a roadway.



   Curb, Right-Hand Side of the Road or Shoulder of the Roadway. If a
bicycle is separated from the traffic lane by a parking lane, then the edge
of the bicycle lane nearest the center of the roadway shall be deemed the
equivalent of the “curb” or the “right-hand side of the roadway” or
the “shoulder of the roadway” or any word or phrase in this code, or in
the state law, which word or phrase references the extreme right-hand side of
the roadway be created for purposes of compliance with local and state laws
which reference the right-hand side of the roadway for parking, emergency
parking, driving, and all other purposes. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior
code §§ 3376, 3385, 6450)



10.40.020   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a street shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by the laws of this State, declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their
nature can have no application, and except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. (Prior code § 3375)



10.40.030   Obedience to traffic control devices.



   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles and
bicycles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Prior code § 3377)



10.40.040   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.



   A.   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   B.   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than
two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for exclusive use
of bicycles. (Prior code § 3378)



10.40.050   Emerging from alley or driveway.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering a bicycle lane, shall yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles approaching on said roadway. (Prior code § 3379)



10.40.060   Bicycle lanes.



   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to
which or upon which bicycle lanes have been designated, except within such
bicycle lane or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 3380)



10.40.070   Along bicycle lanes.



   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bicycle lane in any
direction except that permitted of vehicular traffic traveling on the same
side of the roadway; provided, that bicycles may proceed either way along a
lane where arrows appear on the surface of the lane designating two-way
traffic. (Prior code § 3381)



10.40.080   Leaving bicycle lane.



   Once having entered a bicycle lane, no person riding or operating a
bicycle shall leave such lane except at intersections; provided, however,
that such person may leave a bicycle lane upon dismounting from a bicycle,
walking the same, and being subject then to all laws applicable to
pedestrians. Provided, further, that such person may leave the bicycle lane
between intersections in order to make a U-turn, where such a turn is
permissible for vehicular traffic or to turn into driveways on the right or
left-hand sides of the bicycle lane. Upon leaving a bicycle lane the rider or
operator of such bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and
shall not leave the bicycle lane until it is safe to do so. (Prior code §
3382)



10.40.090   Walking bicycle.



   Bicycles may be walked subject to all provisions of law applicable to
pedestrians. (Prior code § 3383)



10.40.100   Vehicles crossing bicycle path.



   No person shall drive a vehicle upon or across a bicycle lane except to
enter a driveway and except to park such vehicle or leave a parking space. No
person shall drive upon or across a bicycle lane as permitted by this section
except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane. (Prior
code § 3384)



10.40.110   Signs.



   The city traffic engineer, upon approval of the city council, is
authorized to erect or place signs upon any street or adjacent to any street
in the city indicating the existence of a bicycle lane and otherwise
regulating the operating and use of vehicles and bicycles with respect
thereto, so long as the same are consistent with this chapter. Before such a
sign is erected, the subject bicycle lane shall be designated on such street
by a raised curb, appropriate painting, or in such other manner as the city
traffic engineer, upon approval of the city council, shall determine will
provide sufficient notice of existence of such bicycle lane. When such signs
are in place, no person shall disobey the same. (Prior code § 3386)



10.40.120   License required.



   It is unlawful for any individual to operate or use a bicycle upon any
street, alley, public highway or other public property within the city unless
such bicycle is licensed in accordance with this chapter and Division 16.7 of
the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6451)



10.40.130   License indicia.



   The city shall provide license indicia as required by Division 16.7 of
the state Vehicle Code, and it shall be the duty of the fire department to
attach the required license indicia to the frame of each bicycle and to issue
a corresponding registration card for the licensee. Provided, however, that
the fire department may, with the approval of the city manager, allow any
business engaged in buying or selling bicycles to license bicycles from their
place of business in accordance with this chapter. Such license indicia shall
remain attached during the operative period of such bicycle license. The
police department shall receive a copy of the record as to date of issue of
each license, the number of the license, the serial number, the make, type
and model of the bicycle, the name and address of the licensee, and any
department during the period of validity of the license or upon notification
that the bicycle no longer is to be operated. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6452)



10.40.140   Term of license.



   The license shall be good for terms prescribed by Division 16.7 of the
state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6453)



10.40.150   Report of sale or transfer or change of address.



   A.   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this
chapter sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he/she shall, within ten
days, notify the police department of such disposition.



   B.   Any individual who purchases or otherwise acquires possession
of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter shall, within ten days of
taking possession, apply for the transfer of license to his/her name with
police department.



   C.   Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to this
chapter changes his/her address, he/she shall, within ten days, notify the
police department of the old and new address. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6454)



10.40.160   Bicycle sales.



   All entities engaged in the business of  buying second-hand bicycles
are required to make daily reports to the police department giving the name
and address of the individual from whom each bicycle is purchased, the number
of the license (if any), the serial number, the make, type and mode of the
bicycle. All entities engaged in the business of selling new or second-hand
bicycles are required to make a daily report to the police department giving
a list of the individual to whom sold, the serial number, the make, type and
model of the bicycle sold together with the license indicia attached thereto,
if any. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6455)



10.40.170   Unlawful to destroy indicia.



   It is unlawful to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy,  mutilate
or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter.
It is also unlawful for any individual to remove, destroy,  mutilate or
alter any license indicia, or registration card during the time in which such
license or registration card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in
this chapter shall prohibit the fire department from stamping numbers on the
frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which said
number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Ord. 9517
§ 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6456)



10.40.180   License fee.



   The license fee to be paid for each bicycle licensed pursuant to this
chapter shall be one dollar ($1.00) per term and shall be payable in
advance.  Pursuant to Section 10.40.150(B), such license may be transferred
when the ownership of said bicycle is transferred; there shall be no
additional charge for transfer. All fees collected under this chapter shall
be paid into the general fund of the city. (Ord. 9517 § 1 (part), 1995:
prior code § 6457)



10.40.190   Fines.



   No fine imposed for any violation of this chapter shall exceed the
maximum allowed under Division 16.7 of the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 9517 §
1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6458)



Chapter 10.44
SKATEBOARDS, IN-LINE SKATES,
ROLLERSKATES AND BICYCLES



Sections:



10.44.010   Definitions.



10.44.020   Riding skateboards, in-line skates,  rollerskates or bicycles
on posted property prohibited.



10.44.030   Warning signs posted.



10.44.040   Exception--State law.



10.44.050   Penalty.



10.44.060   Severability.



10.44.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   “Bicycle” is defined by the Section 231 of the California Vehicle
Code.



   “In-line skate” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any
number of wheels in a straight line attached to a shoe, or other foot gear,
which is designed to be, or can be, propelled by human power, and which is
not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term in-line
skate also includes motorized in-line skates.



   “Rollerskate” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any
number of wheels attached to a shoe, or other foot gear, which is designed to
be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle
by the California Vehicle Code. The term rollerskate also includes motorized
roller skates.



   “Skateboard” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any
number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person
may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be propelled
by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California
Vehicle Code. The term skateboard also includes motorized skateboards. (Ord.
2012-17 § 2 (part), 2013: prior code §§ 5801, 5802, 5803)



10.44.020   Riding skateboards, in-line skates,  rollerskates or bicycles
on posted property prohibited.



   The riding of skateboards, in-line skates, rollerskates, bicycles, or
other similar contrivances, as defined in Section 10.44.010 shall be
prohibited upon any private or public property when such property has been
posted pursuant to this section. Property owners and/or their managers are
authorized to post or erect signs, at their own expense, prohibiting the
riding of skateboards, in-line skates, rollerskates, bicycles, or similar
contrivances in or on those premises for which such a request has been made
to, and approved by, the chief of police or his/her designee. (Ord. 2012-17
§ 2 (part), 2013: prior code § 5800)



10.44.030   Warning signs posted.



   The property owner or its manager shall erect authorized signs giving
notice of the prohibition set forth in Section 10.44.020. above. Authorized
signs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches, with
one-inch letters, posted adjacent to the entrances to the subject property.
These signs may be erected in such a position to prevent vandalism or theft.
The property owner, or manager, shall have on file with the police department
a signed consent form authorizing the police department to enforce said
ordinance.



   Example Sign: “NO SKATEBOARDING, BICYCLE RIDING, ROLLERBLADING, OR
ROLLER SKATING ON SIDEWALK, V.M.C. 10.44.020, EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXEMPT"
(Ord. 2012-17 § 2 (part), 2013: prior code § 5804)



10.44.040   Exception--State law.



   Section 10.44.020 shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts
which are prohibited by any statute of the state of California. (Prior code
§ 5805)



10.44.050   Penalty.



   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall
be punishable as hereinafter provided:



   A.   A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).



   B.   On the 5th calendar day following the date  indicated on the
citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:



   1.   Payment of bail;



   2.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section;



   3.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency;



the citation shall be deemed delinquent and a fine of five dollars ($5.00)
shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsection (A) of this
section.



   C.   On the 40th calendar day following the date indicated on the
citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:



   1.   Payment of bail;



   2.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section;



   3.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency;



the citation shall be deemed delinquent and an additional fine of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under
subsections (A) and (B) of this section. (Prior code § 5806)



10.44.060   Severability.



   It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are
distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs,
clauses, and/or phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid, or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses, or phrases of this chapter.
(Prior code § 5807)



Title 11
RESERVED



Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Chapters:



12.04   Adoption of Specific Plans



12.06   Street and Facility Names



12.08   Street and Sidewalk Use Regulations



12.12   Excavations



12.16   Annexations



12.20   Street Trees and Parkway Landscaping



12.24   Oak Tree Preservation



12.28   Sidewalk Dining Permits



12.32   City Parks and Recreation Areas



12.34   Off-Leash Dog Areas



12.36   Park and Recreation Development Fees



12.40   Open Space Maintenance Districts



12.44   Blinder Racks



12.48   Special Events



12.52   Conduct on Public Property



12.56   City Parks as Drug Free Zones



12.60   Skate Parks



12.61   Downtown Newsrack District



Chapter 12.04
ADOPTION OF SPECIFIC PLANS



Sections:



12.04.010   Adoption.



12.04.020   Application to ordinances of city council.



12.04.030   Rules and regulations.



12.04.040   Boards in aid of administration.



12.04.050   Street improvement--Conformance with plan.



12.04.060   Open space and landscaping--Conformance with plan.



12.04.070   Improvements--Cost distribution.



12.04.010   Adoption.



   A.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any
specific plan, or amendment to any specific plan, and submit their findings
and recommendation to city council.



   B.   City council shall reject or adopt by resolution the specific
plan, or specific plan amendment, by a majority vote. (Prior code § 7197.0)



12.04.020   Application to ordinances of city council.



   Nothing in this chapter applies to the adoption or amendment of any
ordinance by the legislative body, except ordinances expressly adopting or
amending a specific plan initiated pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code §
7197.1)



12.04.030   Rules and regulations.



   The city council may determine and establish administrative rules and
procedures for the application and enforcement of specific plans and
regulations, and may assign or delegate such administrative functions, powers
and duties to the planning or other agency as may be necessary or desirable.
(Prior code § 7197.2)



12.04.040   Boards in aid of administration.



   The city council may create boards of review, appeal, and adjustment,
in connection with any portion of the specific plan. (Prior code § 7197.3)



12.04.050   Street improvement--Conformance with plan.



   No street shall be improved and no sewers or connections or other
improvements shall be laid or authorized in any street within any territory
for which there is an adopted specific street or highway plan until the
matter has been referred to the planning commission for a report as to
conformity with such specific street or highway plan unless one of the
following conditions applies:



   A.   The street has been accepted, opened or has otherwise received
the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the plan;



   B.   It corresponds with streets shown on the plan;



   C.   It corresponds with streets shown on a subdivision map or
record of survey approved by the legislative body;



   D.   It corresponds with streets shown on a subdivision map
previously approved by the planning commission;



   E.   It is a local residential street not shown on the specific plan
and is approved by the site plan review committee. (Prior code § 7197.4)



12.04.060   Open space and landscaping--Conformance with plan.



   No street shall be improved, no sewers or connections or other
improvements shall be laid or public building or works, including school
buildings, constructed within any territory for which the Council has adopted
a specific plan regulating the development of the use of open-space land and
landscaping until a finding has been made that the open space and landscaping
are in substantial compliance with the adopted specific plan. (Prior code §
7197.5)



12.04.070   Improvements--Cost distribution.



   The cost of all public improvements of specific benefit to the area for
which there is an adopted specific plan may be distributed among all
properties in the plan area based on benefit. City council shall assess the
cost of improvements to each property, based on the benefit to that property.
The assessment process shall include public hearing affording each property
owner affected an opportunity to be heard. The public hearing process may be
waived on any parcel where the property owner has voluntarily agreed to the
assessment. This agreement shall be recorded and run with the property
ownership. The parcel assessment may be collected at the time of building
permit issuance and may replace other existing fees where the same
improvements are paid for through a new collection method. (Prior code §
7197.6)



Chapter 12.06
STREET AND FACILITY NAMES



Sections:



12.06.010   Street names.



12.06.020   Facility names.



12.06.010   Street names.



   A.   The following criteria shall be followed when naming or
renaming streets:



   1.   Street names must be pleasant sounding and correct in terms of
spelling and grammar.



   2.   Street names must be easy to spell, read and pronounce so the
public, especially children, can speak the name correctly in an emergency.



   3.   Street names shall not duplicate the spelling or phonetic sound
of any existing street name within the city's 911 emergency response area.



   4.   Streets that are in reasonable alignment with an existing
street, although not directly connected, must have the same name.



   5.   Streets may be named for the purpose of honoring, or calling
attention to, deceased persons or geographical locations having special
prominence and significance to the culture or history of the city.



   6.   For a street to be named after a person, that person must have
been deceased for at least five years.



   7.   If a street is named after a person, it shall only be the
persons surname.



   8.   Street names may not be numerical, alphabetical, frivolous,
unconventionally spelled, or related to religion.



   9.   Names of streets in a north-south alignment shall be followed
by the designation "STREET," and the names of streets in an east-west
alignment shall be followed by the designation "AVENUE."



   10.   Cul-de-sac streets shall be followed by the designations of
"COURT." Curvilinear streets shall be followed by the designation "DRIVE."
Streets completing a loop may be followed by the designation "CIRCLE."



   B.   The following procedures shall be followed when naming new
streets:



   1.   The property developer will have the responsibility of naming
new streets and new subdivisions. These names will be submitted through the
site plan committee process, and the subdivision maps identifying the new
streets will be submitted through that process for final approval by the
public works director.



   2.   The public works department will prepare a staff report after
circulating the proposed street name to the city police, fire and engineering
departments. When appropriate, the public works department may also circulate
the proposed street name to the Tulare County planning department and
optional interested groups and organizations.



   3.   The public works director, or designee, will approve or reject
the proposed street name.



   4.   Any appeal must be made to the city council by an authorized
representative of the initiating party within thirty (30) days of the public
works director's decision.



   5.   The city council will approve or reject the appeal within
thirty (30) days of the date the appeal was filed.



   C.   The following procedures shall be followed when renaming
streets:



   1.   The city council, planning commission, property owner, group or
individual may initiate the renaming of a street.



   2.   To initiate the renaming process, a petition signed by property
owners or tenants representing at least two-thirds of the parcels, dwelling
units, or businesses located along the affected street must be submitted to
the public works director.



   3.   A non-refundable application fee, established by the city
council, will be charged to the property owner, group or individual at the
time the petition is submitted.



   4.   The public works department will prepare a staff report after
circulating the proposed street name to the city police, fire and engineering
departments and receiving their input. When appropriate, the public works
director may also circulate the proposed street name to the Tulare County
planning department, Tulare County public works and optional interested
groups and organizations for their input.



   5.   A public hearing will be scheduled before the planning
commission within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition.



   6.   Written notice of time and place of the public hearing shall be
given ten (10) days in advance to all property owners and tenants abutting
the affected street.



   7.   The planning commission will approve or reject the proposed
street name within thirty (30) days of the public hearing.



   8.   The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the
city council within ten days of the planning commission's decision. (Ord.
9607 § 3 (part), 1996: prior code § 7100)



12.06.020   Facility names.



   A.   The final selection of names for all city-owned or
city-controlled facilities, buildings and parks shall rest with the city
council.



   B.   The city council shall not select a name for any city-owned or
city-controlled facility, building or park without first obtaining a
recommendation from the park and recreation commission, in the case of any
park or recreation facility, or from the citizens advisory committee, in the
case of any other city building or facility.



   C.   Before making a recommendation to the city council regarding
the naming of any city-owned or city-controlled facility, building or park,
the park and recreation commission or the citizens advisory  committee, as
the case may be, shall solicit nominations from the public. Such
solicitations may include, but are not limited to, requests for nominations
through:



   1.   Notices or ads in newspapers;



   2.   City commissions and committees;



   3.   Residents of the surrounding neighborhood;



   4.   Local organizations;



   5.   User groups;



   6.   Appropriate web pages.



   D.   The city council shall establish, by resolution, a policy
entitled "Guidelines For Selection of Names for City-Owned or City-Controlled
Facilities, Buildings and Parks." Such policy shall, among other things,
create guidelines for the selection of names based on proposed financial
donations.  Such policy shall be made available to the park and recreation
commission and the citizens advisory committee and shall be followed by those
bodies in the consideration and making of any recommendation to the city
council regarding the selection of names for facilities, buildings or
parks.  Such policy may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
city council.



   E.   In the event the city council selects a name for a facility,
building or park pursuant to this section that has been proposed by a person
or entity desiring to make a monetary contribution in support of the proposed
name, such contribution shall be made payable to the parks and recreation
foundation.  Any such funds donated to the parks and recreation foundation
pursuant to this section shall be used only on projects identified and
approved by the city manager or his or her designee.  The city manager or
designee may require the parks and recreation foundation to comply with
financial accounting or auditing standards in connection with monies received
pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 2003-12 § 2, 2003; Ord. 9607 § 3 (part), 1996: prior code § 7110)



Chapter 12.08
STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS



Sections:



12.08.010   Display of goods on sidewalks and obstruction of streets.



12.08.020   Street banners.



12.08.030   Pennants.



12.08.010   Display of goods on sidewalks and obstruction of streets.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or occupy any
public sidewalk in the city for the display of goods, wares of merchandise,
or to use the exterior walls of any building abutting upon any public
sidewalks, street, alley or passageway, for the display of goods, wares,
merchandise, boxes, barrels, trucks or other articles upon any street or
public sidewalks or a portion thereof in the city; provided, however, that
the above restrictions shall not apply when said goods, wares, merchandise,
boxes, barrels or other articles are in actual process of being loaded into
or discharged from a vehicle. The actual loading of such articles shall not
consume a period of time in excess of thirty (30) minutes. (Prior code §
3200)



12.08.020   Street banners.



   The following regulations are for the placement of street banners and
to authorize the director of public works to issue permits allowing the
display of banners over public right-of-ways:



   A.   All requests for display of banners must be received by the
office at least ten working days prior to the requested installation date.
The request must outline the proposed dates for display, description of the
sponsoring organization and a photo or other illustration that shows all
wording and graphics on the banner.



   B.   Banners shall primarily advertise the civic, charitable,
municipal or educational events. A commercial statement indicating the
sponsor of the event may be shown on the banner; provided, it is of limited
size and there is only one statement or logo per banner. The lettering of the
statement shall be no more than three inches high and a logo shall be no more
than twelve-(12) inches by twelve (12) inches, or one hundred forty-four
(144) square inches in area.



   C.   Placement of banners shall be on a first come, first served
basis except by mutual agreement among parties involved and with the approval
of the director of public works.



   D.   A banner can be displayed for a maximum period of fourteen (14)
consecutive calendar days, beginning and ending on Monday. The city may limit
the frequency of displaying banners by the same applicant(s) and/or featuring
the same related event. The city may grant an additional fourteen (14) day
extension.



   E.   All banners shall be constructed in accordance with the
standard specifications of the department of public works. No banner will be
installed that does not meet the specifications.



   F.   The city shall to be responsible and applicant(s) shall hold
the city harmless for any damage or loss from storage, transportation, or
handling of banners. A Certificate of Insurance with a minimum comprehensive
liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), naming the city as
additional insureds, must be on file with the risk manager.



   G.   Banners approved for installation must be delivered to the
city, located at 336 N. Ben Maddox Way, three working days prior to
installation, and must be picked up within three working days after removal.



   H.   The city will charge a minimum fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), for the installation and removal of banners.



   I.   The fee will be deposited in the city's general fund. (Ord.
9520 §1, 1995: prior code § 3250)



12.08.030   Pennants.



   A.   Pennants or signs which are attached to street light poles
shall primarily advertise the civic, charitable, educational or municipal
events. A commercial statement indicating the sponsor or the event may be
shown on the pennant in any size or shape that the applicant desires. All
past policies are null and void and this policy takes precedent.



   B.   Permission must be obtained from the public works department
ten days prior to the requested installation date.



   C.   Pennants or signs shall be installed and removed by the
applicant. They may be displayed a maximum of fourteen (14) days. An
additional fourteen (14) days may be granted.



   D.   Applicant shall apply and secure an encroachment permit form
the public works department prior to installation.



   E.   Encroachment permits require a certificate of insurance. (Ord.
9520 § 2, 1995: prior code § 3251)



Chapter 12.12
EXCAVATIONS



Sections:



12.12.010   Permit required.



12.12.020   Obtaining permit.



12.12.030   Certificate of insurance.



12.12.040   Minimum cover.



12.12.050   Public protection and convenience.



12.12.060   Repair and compaction.



12.12.070   State and county highways.



12.12.080   Fees waived.



12.12.090   Emergency excavations.



12.12.100   Notice to underground utilities.



12.12.110   Maintenance responsibility.



12.12.120   Contract operation damage.



12.12.130   Failure to have valid permit and fees.



12.12.140   Fee schedule.



12.12.010   Permit required.



   An encroachment permit shall be obtained for all work performed in the
public rights-of-way and utility easements in the city where the city has
accepted the streets and easements for maintenance. This includes, but not
limited to, any excavation or cutting of pavement, and the construction of
curb and/or gutter, driveways or sidewalks. Tree trimming and fence
construction within the public right-of-way will require a permit. All work
done and materials used shall be in accordance with the City of Visalia
Engineering Standard Specifications and Engineering Standard Details, current
edition.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.020   Obtaining permit.



   A permit for the necessary work is to be obtained from the engineering
department, City Hall, Visalia, California. Permit shall be obtained prior to
the starting of any work, and permittee shall notify the engineering
department a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours before the work is to be
started. All permits will expire fourteen (14) days from the date they were
issued, unless otherwise indicated by the applicant. The application shall
indicate the location of rights-of-way, property lines, curb and gutter, and
sidewalk in relation to where the facilities or improvements are being
constructed, removed or relocated. Whoever is doing the work will have the
permit issued in their name only. (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.030   Certificate of insurance.



   A.   Every person, firm, company, corporation, or organization
applying for a permit shall file with the engineering department a policy,
true copy thereof, or certificate of insurance, accompanied by an endorsement
signed by the underwriter or an authorized representative, as evidence that
the applicant has obtained and maintains and shall require all of its
subcontractors to maintain the following insurance requirements:



   1.   Comprehensive general liability coverage with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.  Such
insurance shall include coverage for Premises and Operations, Contractual
Liability, Personal Injury Liability, Products and Completed Operations
Liability, Broad Form Property Damage (if applicable), Independent
Contractor's Liability (if applicable).



   2.   Commercial automobile liability insurance with a combined
single limit of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence.  Such insurance shall include coverage for owned, hired, and
non-owned automobiles and shall be provided by a business automobile policy.
Applicants whose transportation operations are governed by the public
utilities commission shall possess limits as required by the commission.



   3.   Worker's compensation coverage with statutory limits, and
employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident.



   4.   At sole discretion of the city, projects of significant size,
complexity, or cost may have increased liability coverage of more than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00).



   B.   The contractor shall agree to indemnify and hold the city and
its officers, agents, employees, and assigns, harmless from any liability
imposed for injury (as defined by Government Code Section 810.8), whether
arising before or after completion of the work hereunder or in any manner
directly or indirectly caused, occasioned or contributed to, or claimed to be
caused, occasioned or contributed to, in whole or in part, by reason of any
act or omission, including strict liability or negligence of the contractor,
or of anyone acting under the contractor's direction or control or on its
behalf, in connection with or incident to or arising out of the performance
of this work.



   C.   It is the intent of the parties that the contractor will
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents,
employees, and assigns from any and all claims, demands, costs, suits, or
actions as set forth above, regardless of the existence of passive concurrent
negligence, on the part of the city or anyone acting under its direction or
control or on its behalf.



   D.   It is agreed that any insurance maintained by the City of
Visalia shall apply in excess of and not contribute with insurance provided
by this policy.



   E.   This insurance shall not be canceled, limited in scope or
coverage, or non- renewed until after thirty (30) days prior written notice
has been given to the Engineering Department, 315 E. Acequia, Visalia CA
93292.



   F.   Franchised public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of
the California Public Utilities Commission are exempt from the provisions of
this section for work performed by their own forces.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.040   Minimum cover.



   All underground facilities installed shall have a minimum cover of
twenty-four (24) inches for installation within the traveled way between
curbs, unless otherwise determined by the city engineer. In the parkway and
sidewalk area the cover may be reduced to such minimums as approved by the
city engineer.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.050   Public protection and convenience.



   A.   The operation shall be conducted in a manner to interfere with
traffic as little as possible. All arterial and collector status streets
shall be bored unless otherwise determined by the city engineer. The
permittee shall comply with the California Vehicle Code and the City of
Visalia Engineering Standard Specifications and Engineering Standard Details,
current edition. A traffic control plan, in detail appropriate to the
complexity of the work project, shall be prepared and understood by all
responsible parties before the site is occupied. Any changes in the traffic
control plan shall be approved by the city engineer or designee that is
trained in safe traffic control practices. Not more than one-half of the
public street shall be closed at any one time unless otherwise determined by
the city engineer. Temporary access shall be provided for all owners. An open
trench shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in business and commercial
districts or three hundred (300) feet in other districts unless authorized,
in writing, by the city engineer. All trenches must be backfilled or covered
up by nightfall at the direction of the city engineer.



   B.   Two-inch minimum temporary patching will be required on all
trenches in the travel lane. Temporary patching on arterial and collector
streets must be replaced with permanent paving within twenty-one (21)
calendar days. Temporary patching on residential streets must be replaced
with permanent paving with forty-two (42) calendar days. The contractor shall
maintain the temporary patch. Should the contractor fail to maintain the
temporary patching, the city shall maintain the trench and charge double the
cost back to the contractor.



   C.   Dust control shall be maintained during construction by use of
water or dust palliative or both. At the conclusion of the work, all dirt
shall be removed from the street and the entire area left in a dirt and dust
free condition. Should the contractor fail to control dust, the city will
furnish the men and equipment to control the dust and charge double the cost
back to the contractor. (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.060   Repair and compaction.



   A.   Pavement and base shall be replaced in accordance with the
requirements of the City of Visalia Engineering Standard Specifications and
Engineering Standard Details, current edition.



   B.   All surfacing material removed for the work proposed is to be
disposed of off the public right-of-way. The backfill is to be compacted in
accordance with the requirements of the City of Visalia Engineering Standard
Specifications and Engineering Standard Details, current edition All
necessary compaction and materials tests are to be paid for by the permittee
unless it is called out as the responsibility of a contractor working on
behalf of the city.



   C.   No pavement shall be replaced until the backfill and base have
been inspected and approved by the city engineer or designee.  (Ord.
2013-07, 2013)



12.12.070   State and county highways.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to work on state and
county highways where the permit is issued by the state or county and
inspection is performed by the state or county.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.080   Fees waived.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all city departments
except that the requirements for permits and fees are waived. Fees will be
waived for public utility work required in conjunction with a city-initiated
public works projects.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.090   Emergency excavations.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any
person, firm or corporation, from maintaining any pipe or conduit in any
public street, alley or other public place, by virtue of any law, ordinance
or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the
preservation of life or property or for the restoration of electric, gas,
water, communication facilities, or emergency and governmental services. When
such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the city are
closed, the person, firm or corporation making such excavation shall apply
for a permit therefore within twenty-four (24) hours after the city is first
opened subsequent to the making of such excavation.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.100   Notice to underground utilities.



   A.   Every permit for any excavation in or under the surface of any
public street, alley or other public place shall be granted subject to the
right of the city or of any person, firm or corporation entitled thereto, to
use that part of such street, alley or other public place for any purpose for
which such street, alley or other public place may lawfully be used, and to
prior rights for utility installations previously authorized by the city. The
permittee shall conduct his operations in a prudent and careful manner to
avoid damage to all adjacent public and private improvements.



   B.   The permittee shall contact an "underground service alert"
(USA) prior to any construction activities. Sufficient notice must be given
to all utilities and the city in order to avoid damage to existing facilities
and to permit relocation if necessary. The permittee shall pursue his work
with care and caution so as to not damage any existing facility.  (Ord.
2013-07, 2013)



12.12.110   Maintenance responsibility.



   The permittee shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area of
the excavation or trench and the repaved area for a period of one year after
pavement replacement. A fee will be assessed at the time the permit is issued
to maintain the trench after one year.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.120   Contract operation damage.



   Where contract operations damage the paved area to a condition such
that repairs are not practicable, the permittee may pay to the city a sum
equal to the value of the repaving of the trenched area plus an agreed upon
amount for unusual damage. Upon payment of such sum to the city the permittee
will be relieved of the requirement of pavement restoration and
maintenance.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.130   Failure to have valid permit and fees.



   Failure of any person, firm or corporation to have a valid permit and
fees paid in full for work covered by this chapter shall be the basis for
refusal to issue any additional permits until work is covered by permits with
fees paid plus investigation fees. Continued violation of this section shall
be unlawful and constitutes an infraction of Section 19(c) of the California
Penal Code. A person, firm or corporation convicted of an infraction under
this code shall be punishable by fines in accordance with the applicable
sections of the Visalia Municipal Code. In addition, each day such violation
continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. Continued failure
to ignore shall constitute not being allowed to continue to perform any work
in the city.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



12.12.140   Fee schedule.



   The fee schedule for issuing utility cut permits and inspection fees
payable to the city shall be as are adopted and amended by resolution of the
city council.  (Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



Chapter 12.16
ANNEXATIONS



Sections:



12.16.010   Charges for publication.



12.16.020   Responsibility for public improvement installation in annexed
areas.



12.16.010   Charges for publication.



   All petitioners for annexation of uninhabited property to the city may
be billed for an amount sufficient to cover all publication, advertising
costs and legal fees occurring from the necessary processing of said
annexation petitions. (Prior code § 7025)



12.16.020   Responsibility for public improvement installation in annexed
areas.



   The owners and/or developers of all parcels of land annexed to the city
shall be individually and/or jointly responsible for the installation of all
necessary sewers, storm drainage facilities, street improvements, bridges,
culverts and other public facilities as required by the city for the general
public welfare and for proper annexed area development. The city will not
participate financially in any such development or public facility
construction except where extension of relief sewers incidentally aid annexed
area development. (Prior code § 7026)



Chapter 12.20
STREET TREES AND PARKWAY LANDSCAPING



Section



12.20.010   Purpose.



12.20.020   Definitions.



12.20.030   Street tree guidelines.



12.20.040   Protection and maintenance of street trees.



12.20.050   Topping.



12.20.060   Protection during construction.



12.20.070   Responsibility for care and maintenance.



12.20.080   Trimming heights.



12.20.090   Trimming specifications.



12.20.100   Protection of rights-of-way.



12.20.110   Quality of street trees.



12.20.120   Replacement of street trees.



12.20.130   Removal of stumps.



12.20.140   Responsibility for repair to curb, gutter and sidewalk.



12.20.150   Responsibility for repair to sewer laterals.



12.20.160   Plantings in new developments.



12.20.170   Street trees under utility lines.



12.20.180   Public health, safety and welfare.



12.20.190   City’s right to remove street trees.



12.20.200   City’s right to perform maintenance.



12.20.210   Utility company’s right to perform maintenance.



12.20.220   City right to remove obstructions in right-of-way.



12.20.230   Street tree removal permits.



12.20.240   Appeal to council.



12.20.250   Liability.



12.20.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote and regulate the planting,
long term care, maintenance, and protection of street trees within the city.
(Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.020   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used herein are
defined as follows:



   “Crown Dripline” means the outer perimeter of a tree’s canopy.



   “Director” means director of public works or his/her designee.



   “Parkway” means that area of the public right of way that is
between the back of curb, or edge of pavement if no curb, and the right of
way line that is not covered by sidewalk.  A parkway can also mean a tree
well that is within a sidewalk. 



   “Person” means individuals, associations, corporations, public
agencies, joint ventures, partnerships, contractors, and other agents or
employees.



   “Property Owner” means the owner of property directly adjacent to
the public right-of-way.



   “Street Tree” means any tree that is located between the curb and
sidewalk or within a tree well in the sidewalk within the public right of
way, or any tree within a street tree easement in or adjacent to the public
right-of-way.



   “Top” means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three (3) inches in diameter within a tree’s crown dripline to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  (Ord.
2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.030   Street tree guidelines.



   The director is authorized to develop and administer guidelines for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
street trees.  The guidelines shall include an authorized species list,
spacing guidelines for each authorized species, specifications for street
tree planting, and specifications for nursery stock quality of street trees.
The guidelines shall be periodically reviewed as updated as needed. (Ord.
2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.040   Protection and maintenance of street trees.



   No street tree shall be altered, pruned, or removed except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the authorized street tree
guidelines. No person shall cause any substance or material to be on or near
a street tree which shall restrict its natural growth or shall cause it
damage.



(Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.050   Topping.



   Except as necessary to insure public safety or as authorized by the
director, no person shall top any street tree or other tree located on public
property.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section at the discretion of the
director. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.060   Protection during construction.



   Street trees shall be protected to the extent possible from damage
during construction, sidewalk repair, repair of utility structures and
facilities above and below ground, and other similar activities by the person
conducting the construction or activity.  The zone of protection shall
include the ground beneath the crown dripline of the tree.  Protection
measures shall be included in building permit applications when building
permits are required for construction. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.070   Responsibility for care and maintenance.



   All watering and trimming of street trees for maintenance and beauty
shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner, unless these
responsibilities are fulfilled by a funding program authorized by the city,
such as, but not limited to, a Homeowner’s Association or through a
Landscape and Lighting Act District. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.080   Trimming heights.



   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, property owners shall
keep street trees adjoining their property and all private trees trimmed up
to a height of not less than fourteen (14) feet over a street or alley, and
up to a height of not less than eight (8) feet over the parkway and sidewalk.
(Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.090   Trimming specifications.



   All street trees shall be pruned in accordance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 standards, as amended from time to time.  A
copy of the standards shall be maintained by the director and made available
for review upon request. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.100   Protection of rights-of-way.



   Property owners shall keep public rights-of-way adjacent to owner’s
property clear of debris. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.110   Quality of street trees.



   New plantings of street trees shall be in accordance with the street
tree guidelines for nursery stock quality. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.120  Replacement of street trees.



   Street trees removed by the director or by natural causes shall be
replaced on a one-for-one basis.  The location and species of any
replacement tree shall be determined by the director. (Ord. 2004-21 (part),
2004)



12.20.130   Removal of stumps.



   All stumps of removed street trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.140    Responsibility for repair of curb, gutter and sidewalk.



   Repair and/or replacement of curb, gutter, and sidewalk damaged by a
tree is the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 2004-21
(part), 2004)



12.20.150   Responsibility for repair of sewer laterals.



   Repair and/or replacement of sewer laterals damaged by a tree shall be
the responsibility of the damaged property owner. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.160   Plantings in new developments.



   In new residential, commercial, and industrial developments, the
developer shall plant street trees in the size, number, manner, and type
required by the street tree guidelines and the city  improvement
standards.  Funding for long term maintenance and care of the street trees
in new developments shall be provided through a Homeowner’s Association or
a Landscape and Lighting Act District. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.170   Street trees under utility lines.



   Street trees planted under utility lines shall be of an approved
species specified in the street tree guidelines.  (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.180   Public health, safety and welfare.



   The director shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, spray and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within public rights-of-way, as may be
necessary to insure public safety and pedestrian clearance, and the long term
health of the trees. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.190   City’s right to remove street trees.



   The director may remove or cause to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is
injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, curbs,
gutters, streets, utilities, or other public improvements, or is affected
with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest.  The city shall not incur
any financial obligation for the removal and/or replacement of street trees.
(Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.200   City’s right to perform maintenance.



   The director shall have the right to prune a tree overhanging any
street or right-of-way within the city so that branches shall not severely
obstruct the light from any street lamp or intersection, and so that there
shall be a clear space of fourteen (14) feet  above street surface or eight
(8) feet above the parkway and sidewalk surface.  The director may enter
upon and may prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight
triangle at intersections.



(Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.210   Utility company’s right to perform maintenance.



   Tree limbs growing near overhead lines and utility facilities may be
pruned to clear such facilities by the affected utility company in compliance
with applicable franchise agreements with the city. (Ord. 2004-21 (part),
2004)



12.20.220    City right to remove obstructions in right-of-way.



   If, in the director's opinion, a real and significant vehicular site
line or pedestrian obstruction or hazard is created by shrubs, hedges, and
similar vegetation, within the parkway, the adjoining property owner shall be
required upon notification, to satisfactorily correct the situation within
thirty (30) days. Upon failure of the property owner to comply with written
notice, the director will cause such obstructions to be removed and will bill
the property owner for all costs involved. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.230   Street tree removal permits.



   The director shall establish a permit system to be used to authorize
street tree removal. The director shall use his or her discretion with
respect to tree removal permits as governed by this chapter and by the street
tree guidelines. No person will be authorized to remove trees covered by this
chapter without first having received a permit to do such work. Permits shall
not be valid for a period longer than thirty (30) days from issuance date.
Exceptions, in the discretion of the director, shall be those permits issued
to public utilities serving the area, which permits may be valid for a period
of one year. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.240   Appeal to council.



   Any interested person may appeal, in writing, a decision of the
director regarding a removal permit, setting forth his/her reason(s) for such
appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk
within ten (10) business days after the director’s decision.  The appeal
shall be placed on the agenda of the Council’s next regular meeting after
the appeal is filed.  If the appeal is filed within ten (10) business days
of the council’s next regular meeting, the appeal shall be placed on the
agenda of the council’s second regular meeting following the filing of the
appeal.  The council shall consider the appeal and uphold, reverse, or
modify the decision of the director.  The decision of the council shall be
final. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



12.20.250   Liability.



   Nothing in this chapter shall impose any liability upon the city, or
members of the council, or any of its officials or employees, nor relieve the
property owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep his
or her private property, sidewalks, and rights-of-way abutting such private
property in a safe condition. (Ord. 2004-21 (part), 2004)



Chapter 12.24
OAK TREE PRESERVATION



Sections:



Article 1. Purpose and Definitions



12.24.010   Purpose.



12.24.020   Definitions.



Article 2. Destruction Prohibition - Removal Permit Requirements



12.24.025   Willful destruction of oak trees prohibited.



12.24.030   Oak tree removal permit required.



12.24.035   Removal standards.



12.24.037   Mitigation requirements.



12.24.040   Notice of action and appeals.



12.24.050   Emergencies.



Article 3. Pruning Standards and Requirements



12.24.060   Pruning notice required.



12.24.070   I.S.A. pruning standards.



12.24.080   Copies of standards on file.



12.24.090   Enforcement.



12.24.100   Public assistance for property owners.



12.24.110   Oak maintenance fund.



Article 4.  Development Proposals; Protection of Oak Trees



12.24.120   Encroachment into drip-line of oak trees during construction.



12.24.130   Building permits.



12.24.140   Willful destruction of oak trees.



12.24.150   City projects.



Article 5. Enforcement



12.24.155   Enforcement.



12.24.160   Nuisances.



12.24.170   Abatement.



12.24.180   Notice of hearing to abate.



12.24.190   Form of proper service of notice.



12.24.200   Hearing by city council.



12.24.210   Service on owner of resolution to abate.



12.24.220   Record of cost for abatement.



12.24.230   Hearing and proceedings.



12.24.240   Assignment of costs against property--Lien.



12.24.250   Authority.



12.24.260   Penalties.



12.24.270   Severability.



Article 1.  Purpose and Definitions



12.24.010   Purpose.



   A.   In order to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare, to enhance the beauty of Visalia and to complement and strengthen
zoning, subdivision and land use standards and regulations, while at the same
time recognizing individual rights to develop private property, the city
council finds it necessary to establish basic standards, measures and
compliance requirements for the preservation and protection of native Valley
oak trees and landmark trees.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter are enacted to:



   1.   Enhance natural scenic beauty;



   2.   Assist in the overall goal of preservation, maintenance and
regeneration of a healthy urban forest and tree cover;



   3.   Promote the conservation of energy resources and regulation of
temperature through the provision of shade, evaporative cooling and wind
break provided by trees;



   4.   Improve the quality of air, water, and soil resources;



   5.   Sustain and enhance property values;



   6.   Promote the well-being of the community;



   7.   Provide for recreational settings, wildlife habitat, and
ecological balance;



   8.   Provide for safety through responsible and safe standards for
the trimming and/or removal of oak trees;



   9.   Promote Visalia's unique identity.  (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part),
2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   “City Manager” means the city manager of the city or his or here
designated representative.



   "Crown-drip-line" means the outer perimeter of an oak tree's canopy.



   "Oak tree" means Valley Oak Tree (Quercus lobata), with a trunk
diameter of two inches or greater at a point 4.5 feet above the root crown
(Also referred to as "2 inches Diameter Breast Height (D.B.H.)"). "Oak tree"
may also mean a "landmark tree." "Landmark tree" means any native or
non-native tree recognized by city council resolution for its age, size,
location, outstanding habitat value, superior beauty, historical, and/or
cultural significance.



   "Person" means individuals, associations, corporations, public
agencies, joint ventures, partnerships, independent contractors, and other
agents and employees.



   "Pruning standards" means those pruning standards established by the
Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture dated 1995, as
revised by the Society from time to time, and as amended by this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 2003-07 § 1, 2003; Ord. 9907 § 2
(part), 1999)



Article 2.  Destruction Prohibition - Removal Permit Requirements



12.24.025   Willful destruction of oak trees prohibited.



    It is unlawful for any person to willfully remove, destroy, damage,
mutilate, poison, or attempt to kill an oak tree in the city, except as may
be allowed pursuant to a removal permit as provided for in Section 12.24.030
of this Chapter, or as designated in a notice to prune an oak tree that
satisfies of Article 3 of this Chapter.  As used in this section, the term
"damage" shall include the pruning of an oak tree in a manner that is
inconsistent with the pruning standards as established by section
12.24.070.  (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007)



12.24.030   Oak tree removal permit required.



   A.   Any person desiring to destroy or remove an oak tree on private
or public property must first apply for and obtain a removal permit. Such
application shall be in writing to the city clerk, who shall forward such
application to the city manager of the city. The application shall contain
the number, size and location of the oak trees and a brief statement of the
reason of the requested action. The city manager shall charge a fee for said
permit, to be established by the city council's annual designation of city
fees.



   B.  Within five calendar days of receipt of such application, the city
manager shall post a notice on the subject tree, in a manner reasonably
intended to inform the general public, stating that an application for
removal of the tree has been filed and is pending with the city manager. 
Within fourteen calendar days of receipt of such application, the city
manager shall inspect the premises whereon such oak trees are located, and
shall issue an intended decision in writing as to whether or not the
application will be approved, and if so, what mitigation shall be required as
a condition to approval, consistent with Section 12.24.035 below; provided,
however, that failure to render an intended decision within such period shall
not be deemed approval.



   C.   The city manager shall not grant a removal permit unless one of
three findings enumerated in Section 12.24.035 can be made based on
substantial evidence and, where necessary, expert advice of a certified
arborist.  The applicant may submit his or her own supporting material,
including a report of an independent certified arborist, for consideration by
the city manager.  However, the City manager shall retain the discretion for
determining the weight and value to be given to such independent reports.



   D.   Upon determination that one of the three findings enumerated in
Section 12.24.035 can be met and a removal permit may be granted, the city
manager shall establish mitigation requirements in a manner consistent with
the policy to be developed and implemented pursuant to Section 12.24.037. No
mitigation shall be required for oak trees removed pursuant to subsections A.
or C. of section 12.24.035, unless the city manager determines that the
applicant's negligence or willful conduct contributed to the decline of the
health of the oak tree.  The mitigation requirements established by the city
manager shall attach to the permit as conditions, and shall be enforceable as
a lien against the applicant's real property.  In no event shall the
availability of mitigation measures, or the willingness of the applicant to
agree to such measures, be a factor in determining whether removal of the
tree is warranted.  (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part),
1999)



12.24.035   Removal standards.



   No removal permit shall be granted pursuant to section 12.24.030 of
this Chapter unless the city manager determines that substantial evidence
supports one of the following three findings:



   A.   The general health of the oak tree warrants removal.  A
removal permit may be granted based on the health of the tree only if one of
the following tests can be satisfied:



   1.     The oak tree is in danger of falling or is deemed to be
structurally unsound, according to generally accepted arboricultural
standards, and is in proximity to existing or proposed structures; or



   2.    The oak tree is a host for plant, pest, or disease endangering
other species of trees or plants with infection or infestations.



   B.   Removal of the oak tree is necessary to allow construction of
new improvements or the repair or protection of pre-existing improvements
that have been interfered with by the oak tree, or otherwise allow the
reasonable enjoyment of private property.  The city manager shall apply the
following factors in determining the necessity of removal of an oak tree for
purposes of this subsection:



   1.   The size and age of the oak tree to be removed, and its
historic, aesthetic or cultural value; a larger, older and more historically,
aesthetically, or culturally valuable tree may be removed only if each of the
other factors weigh heavily in favor of removal.



   2.   The necessity of the removal of the oak to the enjoyment of the
property by the property owner or protection of preexisting improvements. 



   3.    The lack of any reasonable alternative to the proposed
improvement that does not require removal of the oak tree.  The availability
of funds from the Oak Tree Maintenance Fund to assist the property owner in
repairing or reconfiguring improvements in a manner to save an oak tree
should be taken into account in determining whether reasonable alternatives
to removal exist such that a permit on this grounds should not be granted.



   C.   Urban forestry or land management practices warrant removal of
the oak tree.  An oak tree may be removed based on urban forestry or land
management practices if one of the following conditions exist:



   1.   Removal of the oak tree will substantially benefit the
topography of the land and the soil retention, water retention, and diversion
or increased flow of surface waters.



   2.   Removal of the oak tree will not be detrimental to the general
public because the number, species, size, and location of existing trees in
the area offset the removal of the oak tree, and the removal will not have an
adverse effect on shade areas, air pollution, historic values, scenic beauty,
and the general welfare of the city as a whole.



   3.     Removal of the oak tree is consistent with good urban
forestry practices such as, but not limited to, the number of healthy trees
the subject parcel of land will support.



   4.   The property owner proposing to remove the tree can establish
by adequate proof that the subject tree did not exist prior to the current
owner's purchase of the property; this provision shall only apply to trees
with a DBH of six (6) inches or less.  (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007)



12.24.037    Mitigation requirements.



   In recognition and furtherance of the purposes of this Chapter, as
enumerated in Section 12.24.010, it is the policy of the City of Visalia that
property owners who are granted a permit to remove an oak tree pursuant to
Subparagraph B. of section 12.24.035 offset the loss of the oak tree by
either replacing the oak tree removed with new oak trees on the same property
(in-kind mitigation) or by paying mitigation fees intended to be used for the
establishment of new oak trees on other property or on public property for
the benefit of the general public (in-lieu mitigation).  In furtherance of
this policy, the city manager shall develop an Oak Tree Mitigation Policy
establishing in-kind and in-lieu mitigation measures to be required for oak
tree removals.  The Oak Tree Mitigation Policy, and any subsequent amendment
thereto, shall be submitted to the city council for approval by resolution. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007)



12.24.040   Notice of action and appeals.



   A.   Notice of the city manager’s  intended decision on a permit
application submitted pursuant to section 12.24.030 shall be given by
personal delivery or first class mail to the applicant and to any person
filing a written request with the  city manager for notice of all permit
approvals under this ordinance.  Further, notice of the intended decision
shall be posted on the subject tree in a manner reasonably intend to inform
the general public of the decision, and the right to appeal.



   B.   Any person aggrieved or affected by the city manager’s
intended decision, or any member of the city council, may appeal the intended
decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the
city clerk within ten business days, excluding weekends and holidays, after
the delivery or mailing of the notice. Any such notice of appeal shall be
accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount specified by the city council.



   C.   If no appeal is filed within such time, the city manager shall
promptly implement the intended decision by denying or issuing the permit,
with or without conditions. An appeal automatically stay execution of the
implementation of the intended decision until the appeal has been considered
and decided by the city council. (A member of the city council shall be
exempt from the requirement of an appeal fee).



   D.   The city clerk shall place all such appeals on the agenda of
the next regular council meeting and shall give notice to the applicant
and/or appellant. The city council shall consider and decide all issues
raised in the appeal, and the decision of the council shall be final. (Ord.
2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.050   Emergencies.



   A.   In the case of emergency caused by the dangerous condition of
an oak tree requiring immediate action for the protection of life or
property, a tree may be cut down in whole or in part on the order of the city
manager or any on-duty public works or public safety personnel.



   B.   Public utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the Public
Utilities Commission of the state of California may also take such action as
may be necessary to maintain a safe operation for their facilities. (Ord.
2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



Article 3.  Pruning Standards and Requirements



12.24.060   Pruning notice required



   A.   Except in cases of emergencies as described in Section
12.24.050, no person shall prune or cause to be pruned any oak tree limb of a
diameter of two inches or greater within the city without first submitting a
completed oak tree intent to prune notice with the city manager, as provided
herein.



   B.   The notice shall be delivered to the city manager prior to the
start of the work to be performed.



   C.   The notice shall be in a form as provided by the city manager
and shall include the following information:



   1.   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner.



   2.   The name, address and telephone number of the person(s)
intending to prune the tree.



   3.   The date(s) of the pruning.



   4.   A description of the tree(s) to be pruned including the
approximate size and location of the tree with sufficient specificity to
enable the city manager to precisely locate and identify the subject tree(s).



   5.   If the work is to be performed in any public right-of-way,
proof of insurance coverage for general liability, property damage, and
workers' compensation in case of injury or damage to person or property.



   6.   Proof of the possession of a valid city business license.



   D.   A copy of the notice must be in the possession of the person
pruning the oak tree at all times during the course of the work being
performed. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.070   I.S.A. pruning standards.



   That certain document known and designated as ANSI A300 Pruning
Standards and the International Society of Arboriculture Best Management
Practices for Tree Pruning, as amended from time to time, is adopted by the
council of the city as the standards for pruning trees located within the
city to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every
section, paragraph, sub-paragraph, word, phase, clause or illustration
contained therein were fully set forth herein except for the deletion of any
provisions as provided for in the chapter. A copy of such standards shall be
on file with the city clerk and shall be available for purchase in the office
of the city clerk. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part),
1999)



12.24.080   Copies of standards on file.



   Reference is made to three copies of said standards filed in the office
of the city clerk of the city which are now so filed for full particulars of
said pruning standards. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.090   Enforcement.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the director in his or her capacity as
enforcement officer. In the enforcement of this chapter such enforcement
officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to
examine any oak tree, and may issue citations for any violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.100   Public assistance for property owners.



   A.   If the city manager determines that a property owner, who has
submitted a notice of intent to prune an oak tree, cannot properly prune his
or her oak tree without the assistance of a professional tree trimmer, and
that said property owner cannot afford to hire a professional tree trimmer
because he or she does not have the financial resources to pay for such
services, the city manager may provide financial assistance to said property
owner for the purpose of pruning the tree or trees, if all the following
conditions are met and funds are available:



   1.   The property owner uses the property where the tree(s) is
located as his or her principal place of residence;



   2.   The aggregate gross income of all persons eighteen (18) years
of age or older residing on the property does not exceed the minimum amount
as may be set from time to time, by resolution of the city council, pursuant
to this subdivision; and



   3.   The city manager determines that it is necessary to prune the
tree to remove hazardous conditions, remove disease, rot, pests, other
harmful conditions, or promote healthy growth of the tree(s).



   B.   Such financial assistance may include, but not be limited to,
low interest loans, work done by the city with the cost borne in part or in
whole by the property owner, work done by the city with the cost borne by the
city to be repaid by the property owner upon such terms as the city and
property owner shall agree, or any combination thereof. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2
(part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.110   Oak maintenance fund.



   For purposes of providing such financial assistance as described in
Section 12.24.100, and for accomplishing the oak tree mitigation goals as
described in the Oak Tree Mitigation Policy developed pursuant to Section
12.24.037, it is established the "oak maintenance fund" which shall be funded
either in part or in whole by those portions of fines which may be assessed
by the courts, or through the administrative penalty process, known as "civil
penalty assessments" for violations of this chapter, and by mitigation fee
payments ordered pursuant to the Oak Tree Mitigation Policy established
pursuant to Section 12.24.037.  The Oak Tree Maintenance Fund shall be
managed as described in the Oak Tree Mitigation Policy. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2
(part), 2007; Ord. 9907 §2 (part), 1999)



Article 4.  Development proposals; protection of oak trees



12.24.120   Encroachment into drip-line of oak trees during construction.



   A.   With respect to any application for a building or development
permit, all encroachment by permanent structures into the crown drip-line of
a Valley Oak is prohibited unless approved by the City Manager or his/her
designee.  If encroachment into the crown drip line is approved, the city
shall require special construction techniques to be employed, as determined
by the city manager.



   B.   The existing ground surface within crown-drip-line (measured
horizontally) of the trunk of any oak tree shall not be cut, filled,
compacted or paved without the consent of the city manager. Tree wells may be
used when advisable. Excavation adjacent to any oak tree shall not be
permitted where material damage to the root system will result.



   C.   The city council shall, by resolution adopt guidelines for
commercial, industrial, and residential development and construction on
property within the city, and city-initiated projects, where any oak tree is
located. Such guidelines adopted pursuant to this subsection shall be made a
part of this subsection and shall be enforced as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 2003-07 § 2, 2003; Res. 2003-61
(part), 2003; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.130   Building permits.



   A.   When any building permit, grading permit, or development permit
is applied for pursuant to the city code and a proposed structure or
construction project would require the destruction, removal, or pruning of an
oak tree, or encroachment into the crown-drip-line of an oak tree, said
permit shall not issue until the city manager has confirmed that all
requirements of this chapter, including the obtaining of a removal or pruning
permit or the imposition of encroachment conditions, can be met  In no event
shall any disturbance of the premises, disturbance of the oak trees, or
encroachment into the crow-drip-line be allowed until all requirements of the
chapter are met and a building permit with appropriate conditions and oak
tree removal permit are issued.  The issuance of a building permit
notwithstanding this section shall in no event serve as a defense to a
violation of any provision of this Chapter.



   B.   In the event a permit to destroy or remove an oak tree is
issued in order to enable the applicant to carry out some project of
development or improvement of the property, such permit shall be valid and
effective only in connection with the actual accomplishment of such project.



   C.   In the event conditions related to removal or pruning of oak
trees, or encroachment into the crown-drip-line, are attached to a building,
grading or development permit, a minimum $10,000 deposit (or amount deemed
necessary by the city manager) shall be posted and maintained to ensure
compliance with such conditions.  The deposit shall be posted in a form
approved by the City Attorney prior to any grading or movement of heavy
equipment onto the site or issuance of any permits.  Each violation of any
condition regarding tree preservation shall result in forfeiture of a portion
or the entirety of the deposit, at the discretion of the city manger.  No
deposit shall be required where the potential impacts to oak trees, and the
required conditions to avoid such impacts, although present, are minimal. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.140   Willful destruction of oak trees.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, mutilate, poison,
or attempt to kill an oak tree in the city. Exceptions to this section are to
be found in Section 12.24.050 which provides for emergency destruction,
removal, or pruning of an oak tree. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.150   City projects.



   City-initiated projects should comply with standards referred to in
Section 12.24.120. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part),
1999)



Article 5.  Enforcement



12.24.155   Enforcement.



    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the city manager in his or her capacity
as enforcement officer. In the enforcement of this chapter such enforcement
officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to
examine any oak tree, and may issue citations for any violations of this
chapter.  (Ord. 2007-02 §  2 (part), 2007)



12.24.160   Nuisances.



   A.   It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning,
leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises in the city which has one
or more oak trees located thereon to intentionally, negligently accidentally,
or otherwise maintain said premises in such a manner so as to cause harm to
and of said oak trees, by reason of any of the following conditions:



   1.   Water saturation or deprivation;



   2.   Nailing, screwing, stapling, bolting, or otherwise attaching
boards, fences, signs, placards, posters, or other material which might cause
injury to the oak tree;



   3.   Neglect in the pruning or trimming of overgrown, diseased,
decaying, dead, or rotting limbs, branches and foliage.



   B.   In addition to enforcing provisions of this code that
constitute a public nuisance through criminal citations, civil action or
administrative enforcement, the city manager may enforce against and abate
any and all nuisances declared pursuant to this section in a manner
consistent with applicable provisions of the Visalia Municipal Code
pertaining to the procedure for abatement of nuisances, or absent such
provisions, in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of California
pertaining to abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord.
9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.170   Abatement.



   All premises or oak trees declared to be such public nuisances and
ordered to be abated may be abated by watering, conditioning the soil,
constructing berms, pruning or trimming, or removing offending materials
affixed to the tree which might cause injury to said tree, pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this code. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.180   Notice of hearing to abate.



   A.   Within thirty (30) days of the passage of said resolution, the
city clerk shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the premises, where the
oak tree(s) are located, a certified copy of the resolution of the city
council, which said notices shall be titled: "NOTICE OF HEARING" in letters
of not less than one inch in height and shall be substantially in the
following form:



NOTICE OF HEARING



TO ABATE NUISANCE



   Notice is hereby given that on the       day of     ,     , the
City Council of the City of Visalia passed a resolution declaring that
certain Oak Tree(s) located or standing upon that certain lot, piece or
parcel of land, situated in the City of Visalia, State of California, known
and designated as, in said City, and more particularly described as Lot No.,
Tract No., or name of subdivision in said City, constitutes a public nuisance
and must be abated by the rehabilitation of such premises by the watering,
pruning, trimming, or other methods; otherwise said nuisance will be abated
by the municipal authorities of the City, in which case the cost of such
rehabilitation, watering, pruning or trimming will be assessed upon the land
on which said Oak Tree(s) is or are located and such cost will constitute a
lien upon such land until paid. (Reference is hereby made to said resolution
for further particulars.)



   B.   The city clerk shall cause to be served upon the owner of each
of the oak tree(s) declared to be a public nuisance and sought to be
rehabilitated by watering, pruning or trimming one copy of said notice and a
certified copy of the resolution of the city council, in accordance with
these provisions.



   C.   Said notices and resolutions must be posted and served as
aforesaid, at least thirty (30) days before the time fixed for the hearing
before the city council and proof of posting and service of such notices and
resolutions shall be made by affidavit which shall be filed with the city
council. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.190   Form of proper service of notice.



   Proper service of said notice and resolution shall be by personal
service upon the person owning the property as such person's name and address
appears on the last equalized assessment roll, if he is found within the city
limits, or if he is not to be found within the city limits, by depositing a
copy of said notice and resolution in the U.S. post office properly enclosed
in a sealed envelope and with the posting thereon fully prepaid. Said mail
shall be registered or certified and addressed to said owner at the last
known address of said owner. The service is complete at the time of deposit.
(Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.200   Hearing by city council.



   A.   At the time stated in the notices, the city council shall hear
and consider all objections or protests, shall receive testimony and other
evidence from owners, witnesses and parties interested relative to such
alleged public nuisance and as to rehabilitation of such premises by the
watering, pruning or trimming, or by other abatement thereof, and may
continue the hearing from time to time.



   B.   Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the city council shall
allow or overrule any or all of said protests. If the city council finds that
good and sufficient cause does exist why said premises should be
rehabilitated, or oak tree(s) should be watered pruned, trimmed, or treated,
the city council shall prepare and file a report of such findings with the
city clerk.



   C.   Following said public hearing, the city council may by
resolution order the director to abate said nuisance, after a period of
thirty (30) days, by having the oak tree(s) watered, pruned, trimmed,
treated, or the nuisance otherwise abated, and the director and his or her
authorized representatives are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon
private property for that purpose. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.210   Service on owner of resolution to abate.



   A copy of said resolution ordering the director to abate said nuisance
shall be served upon the owner of said property in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall contain a detailed list of needed
corrections. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such oak
tree(s) watered, pruned, trimmed, treated, or the nuisance otherwise abated
at his or her own expense, provided the same is completed prior to the
expiration of the time set forth in said resolution. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part),
1999)



12.24.220   Record of cost for abatement.



   The director shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental
expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot, or parcel of land
where the work has been done and shall render an itemized report in writing
to the city council showing the cost of watering, pruning, trimming, or
treating said oak tree(s), and incidental expenses, on each separate lot or
parcel of land; provided, that before said report is submitted to the city
council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five days upon the
premises or property upon which such oak tree(s) are situated, or the
nuisance committed, together with a notice of the time when said report shall
be submitted to the city council for confirmation; and a copy of said report
and notice shall be served upon the owner of said property, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter at least five days prior to submitting
the same to the council; proof of said posting and service shall be made by
affidavit and filed with city clerk. The term "incidental expenses" shall
include, but not be limited to the expenses and costs of the city in the
preparation of notices, specifications and contacts, and in inspecting the
work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 9907 §
2 (part), 1999)



12.24.230   Hearing and proceedings.



   At the date and time fixed for receiving and considering said report
the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the director,
together with any objection or protests which may be raised by any of the
owners of property liable to be assessed for the work of abating such
nuisance any other interest persons. Thereupon, the city council may make
such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just,
after which by resolution the report, as submitted, or as revised, corrected
or modified, shall be confirmed; provided that said hearing or consideration
may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city council on all
protests and objections which may be made, shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.240   Assignment of costs against property--Lien.



   The amount of the costs of abating such nuisance upon any lot or parcel
of land, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special
assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land, and as thus keep a
lien on said property for the amount of such assessment. After the
confirmation of said report, a copy shall be turned over to the assessor and
the tax collector of the county of Tulare, acting on behalf of the city,
whereupon it shall be the duty of said assessor and tax collector to add the
amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular bills of taxes
levied against the said respective lots and parcels for land for municipal
purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and
in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and
sale in case of delinquency as provided for other municipal taxes. (Ord. 9907
§ 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.250   Authority.



   Any and all nuisances declared and abated hereunder shall be processed
pursuant to the authority set forth in Sections 38771 et seq., of the
Government Code of the state of California, in the manner described herein
above. (Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.260   Penalties.



   A.   Unless otherwise noted herein, a violation of any provision of
this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   B.   Any violation of any provision of Sections 12.24.060 and
12.24.070 shall be deemed an infraction and be punishable upon conviction as
hereinafter set forth.



   C.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or
six months in the county jail. Each day that a violation continues shall be
regarded as a separate offense.



   D.   Any person convicted of an infraction of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day the
violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.



   E.   Upon a person being convicted of any violation under this
chapter, the court shall, in addition to, or in lieu of, the above penalties,
or any other penalty provided and imposed under this chapter, order the
defendant to pay a civil penalty assessment to the City of Visalia to be used
in the manner described in the Oak Tree Maintenance Fund, as described in
Section 12.24.110 herein, which Civil Penalty is designed as restitution to
compensate the city and the community for the loss or diminution of economic,
aesthetic, environmental, and property values resulting from the loss of any
oak tree or portion thereof, and for the city's costs and attorney's fees in
prosecuting the matter. In cases of un-permitted removal of an oak tree in
violation of Section 12.24.025, such civil penalty shall be calculated by
doubling the in-lieu mitigation amount as indicated in the Oak Tree
Mitigation Policy implemented pursuant to Section 12.24.037, which would have
been imposed for the specific tree had a permit been obtained. In cases of
purposeful damage to an oak tree in violation of Section 12.24.025, the civil
penalty imposed shall be calculated by multiplying one half times the in-lieu
mitigation amount as indicated in the Oak Tree Mitigation Policy implemented
pursuant to Section 12.24.037, which would have been imposed for the specific
tree had a removal permit been obtained.



   F.   Any violation of any provision of this chapter may result in
the immediate suspension of any permit previously issued for the construction
and/or development of property upon which said violation occurred, until
compliance with all mitigation measures required by this ordinance is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager.



(Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



12.24.270   Severability.



   A.   If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this chapter, or any part thereof.



   B.   If the application of any provision of this chapter or any
person, property, or circumstance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid
or ineffective in whole or in part by any court or tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person,
property, or circumstance immediately involved in the controversy, and the
application of any such provision to other persons, properties or
circumstances shall not be affected. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord.
9907 § 2 (part), 1999)



Chapter 12.28
SIDEWALK DINING PERMITS



Sections:



12.28.010   Purpose.



12.28.020   Definitions.



12.28.030   Outdoor dining permit and encroachment permit required.



12.28.040   Where permissible.



12.28.050   Required sidewalk width.



12.28.060   Alcoholic beverages.



12.28.070   Health standards.



12.28.080   Hours of operation.



12.28.090   Special closures.



12.28.100   Permit issuance, findings and conditions.



12.28.110   Term.



12.28.120   Revocation.



12.28.130   Appeal procedure.



12.28.140   Enforcement.



12.28.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of the regulations and standards in this chapter are to
allow increased business and pedestrian traffic by providing safe and
visually appealing opportunities for outside dining in public rights-of-way
in the downtown areas zoned C-DT.  Nothing in this chapter is intended to
prohibit or regulate outdoor dining as may be permitted in the zoning
ordinance. Provisions of the smoking ordinance will apply. (Prior code §
3700)



12.28.020   Definitions.



   "Outdoor dining," as applied in this chapter, means the use of
sidewalks and public rights-of-way by an eating establishment for the serving
and consumption of food and/or beverages. (Prior code § 3701)



12.28.030   Outdoor dining permit and encroachment permit required.



   Outdoor dining is not allowed in public rights-of-way without an
outdoor dining permit and an encroachment permit as set forth in Section
12.28.100. (Prior code § 3702)



12.28.040   Where permissible.



   Outdoor dining is not permitted where the speed, volume or proximity of
vehicular traffic is not compatible with sidewalk dining. All outdoor dining
areas must be adjacent to and incidental to the operation of an indoor
restaurant. Use of the sidewalk must be confined to the actual sidewalk and
public right-of-way frontage of the indoor restaurant building and must be
clearly delineated from adjacent businesses and pedestrian traffic, utilizing
sidewalk striping or other nonpermanent methods. (Prior code § 3703)



12.28.050   Required sidewalk width.



   Outdoor dining is permitted only where the sidewalk is wide enough to
adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the
operation of the proposed activity. The outdoor dining area shall leave not
less than five consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point which is
clear and unimpeded for pedestrian traffic. (Prior code § 3704)



12.28.060   Alcoholic beverages.



   The service of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted solely to
on-premise consumption by customers within the outdoor dining area. Each of
the following standards apply to alcoholic beverage service:



   A.   The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to and
abutting the indoor restaurant which provides it with food and beverage
service;



   B.   The outdoor dining area must be clearly delineated from
pedestrian traffic;



   C.   The operator shall post a written notice to customers that the
drinking or carrying of an open container of alcohol is prohibited and
unlawful outside the outdoor dining area;



   D.   The outdoor dining operation must be duly licensed by the state
department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Prior code § 3705)



12.28.070   Health standards.



   The operator shall not permit the following outside the building: food
preparation, tables preset with utensils, glasses, napkins, condiments,
busing service stations, or trash and garbage storage. All exterior surfaces
within the outdoor dining area shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept
clean at all times by the permittee. Restrooms sufficient for indoor and
outdoor dining shall be provided in the adjoining indoor restaurant. The
permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area,
including the sidewalk surface and furniture and adjacent areas, in a clean
and safe condition. (Prior code § 3706)



12.28.080   Hours of operation.



   Hours of operation for outdoor dining areas are to coincide with those
of the adjoining indoor restaurant. (Prior code § 3707)



12.28.090   Special closures.



   Outdoor dining is an interruptible or terminable privilege. The city
shall have the right and power, acting through the city manager or his/her
designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor dining area at any time
because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the
sidewalk area.  Such problems and conflicts may arise from, but are not
limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, or parades or marches, or
repairs to the street or sidewalk, or from demonstrations or emergencies
occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given
prior notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor
dining area will be prohibited by the city. (Prior code § 3708)



12.28.100   Permit issuance, findings and conditions.



   A.   Applicants for outdoor dining permits shall be required to go
through the site plan review process, as provided in Chapter 17.28.  The
application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city
council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application.  The
decision of the site plan review committee shall include the following
mandatory findings:



   1.   That the proposed operation meets the limitations of this
chapter;



   2.   That the configuration of the outdoor dining area, including
table placement and the method of delineation from pedestrian traffic, and
signage meets the minimum standards of this article.



   B.   In addition, requirements or conditions consistent with this
chapter may be added as deemed necessary by the committee.



   C.   The director of public works or his/her designee is authorized
to issue the necessary encroachment permit. The director of public works
shall condition the permit on:



   1.   Execution of an agreement holding the city harmless against
claims from the applicant, patrons of the outdoor dining area, and
pedestrians, in a form acceptable to the city attorney;



   2.   Applicant's insurance meeting the requirements contained in
Section 12.12.030 (certificate of insurance), excluding commercial automobile
liability. The city shall be listed as additional insured on the endorsement
and tied to the permit number to specify location and circumstances;



   3.   Such other conditions as are necessary for public safety or to
protect public improvements, as determined through site plan review;



   4.   Conditions necessary to restore the appearance of the sidewalk
to its original condition on termination of use. (Prior code § 3709)



12.28.110   Term.



   The outdoor dining permit shall run with the land and shall continue to
be valid upon a change in ownership of the dining establishment, subject to
the conditions of approval. (Prior code § 3712)



12.28.120   Revocation.



   An outdoor dining permit may be revoked by the site plan review
committee following notice to the permittee. The permit may be revoked if one
or more conditions of the permit or of this chapter have been violated or if
the outdoor dining area is being operated in a manner which constitutes a
nuisance, or the operation of the sidewalk dining area unduly impedes or
restricts the movement of pedestrians past the outdoor dining area. Following
revocation of an outdoor dining permit, no application for the same site
shall be filed within six months from the date of revocation. (Ord. 9605 §
25(part), 1996: prior code § 3713)



12.28.130   Appeal procedure.



   In accord with the following provisions, any applicant or other
interested person dissatisfied with any decision made under this chapter may
appeal such decision:



   A.   The decision of the site plan review committee may be appealed
to the planning commission and city council as provided in Sections 17.28.050
and 17.28.060.



   B.   Unless otherwise indicated, all appeals shall be made in
writing and state the reason(s) for appeal. Such appeals shall be filed with
the community development director or the city clerk as provided in Sections
17.28.050 and 17.28.060.



   C.   The receipt of a written appeal shall stay all actions, or put
in  abeyance all permits or other discretionary approvals which may have
been granted, pending the effective date of the decision of the body hearing
the appeal.



   D.   Appeals shall be scheduled for the earliest regular meeting of
the hearing body, not less than fifteen (15) days or more than forty-five
(45) days after the date of filing an appeal, consistent with the agenda
preparation procedures and schedule of the hearing body.



   E.   All appeals shall be considered in a public meeting consistent
with the procedures set forth in Sections 17.28.050 and 17.28.060. All
decision-making bodies hearing appeals shall consider the project in its
entirety.



   F.   All appeals shall be accompanied by a fee, set by resolution of
the city council, sufficient to cover the cost of handling the request. (Ord.
9605 § 25(part), 1996: prior code § 3716)



12.28.140   Enforcement.



   The community development director and zoning compliance inspector, or
other person authorized by the city manager, shall be authorized to enforce
provisions of this chapter and to take such action as may be necessary to
ensure compliance with the regulations, general provisions or conditions
imposed upon the outdoor dining permit. (Prior code § 3717)



Chapter 12.32
CITY PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS



Sections:



Article 1. Definitions and Severability



   12.32.010   Definitions.



   12.32.015   Severability.



Article 2. Park Preservation and Permits



   12.32.020   Park and recreation facility uses requiring a permit.



   12.32.025   Application for use.



Article 3. Closure of Parks and Recreation Facilities During Designated Hours



   12.32.030   Designated hours for closure of park and recreation
facilities.



   12.32.035   Exemptions.



   12.32.040   Temporary change of designated hours of closure of park
and recreation facilities.



   12.32.045   Signs identifying hours of closure.



   12.32.050   Temporary closure of park and recreation facilities.



   12.32.055   Penalty.



Article 4. Prohibiting Alcoholic Beverages



   12.32.060   Purpose.



   12.32.065   Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages on
city- owned parks and recreation areas prohibited.



   12.32.070   Warning signs posted.



   12.32.075   Exceptions.



   12.32.080   Penalties for violations.



Article 5. Prohibited Acts in Parks and Recreation Facilities



   12.32.085   Purpose.



   12.32.090   Camping in parks and recreation facilities prohibited.



   12.32.095   Storage of personal belongings prohibited.



   12.32.100   Tents and other enclosed temporary structures prohibited.



   12.32.105   Fires prohibited in parks.



   12.32.110   Fireworks prohibited in parks.



   12.32.115   Firearms, air guns and other weapons prohibited in parks.



   12.32.120   Commercial advertising prohibited in parks.



   12.32.125   Littering, personal waste and dumping prohibited in
parks.



   12.32.130   Swimming, bathing, washing and fishing prohibited in
park water features.



   12.32.135   Nudity prohibited in parks.



   12.32.140   Smoking prohibited in parks.



   12.32.145   Operation of vehicles in parks.



   12.32.150   Vandalism of park amenities prohibited.



   12.32.155   Animals in city parks.



   12.32.160   Golfing prohibited.



   12.32.165   Hazardous games and devices prohibited.



   12.32.170   Glass containers prohibited.



   12.32.175   Loud music/amplified sound prohibited.



   12.32.180   Generators and small engines prohibited.



   12.32.185   Commercial activities prohibited.



   12.32.190   Tennis and pickleball courts – prohibited activities.



   12.32.195   Prohibition of carts in park facilities.



   12.32.200   Prohibition of inflatable play structures.



Article 6. Removal and Suspension from Park and Recreation Facilities



   12.32.205   Removal from parks.



   12.32.210   Suspension from parks for disorderly conduct.



   12.32.215   Penalty.



Article 1. Definitions and Severability



12.32.010   Definitions.



   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall
have the following meanings:



   "Abandoned personal property" means personal property to which the
owner surrenders, relinquishes or disclaims all right, title, claim and
possession, with intention of not reclaiming it or resuming its ownership,
possession or enjoyment. Indicia of abandoned personal property shall
include, but not be limited to, the act of leaving the personal property in a
public park/recreation area so that it may be appropriated by the next comer.



   "Alcoholic beverages" as used herein means and includes alcohol,
spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol,
spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of
alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when
diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.



   "Available shelter" means a public or private shelter or similar
accommodation, with an available overnight space, open to an individual or
family unit experiencing homelessness, at no charge. A shelter shall not be
considered available when the individual cannot occupy said space due to
overcapacity, exhaustion of stay limitations, or when religious observance is
required as a condition of gaining shelter. If the individual refuses
available shelter or otherwise cannot utilize the available shelter space due
to voluntary actions including, but not limited to, intoxication, drug use,
unruly behavior, or violation of shelter rules, the overnight shelter space
shall be considered available.



   "Camp," "Camping" or "Camping facilities" means placing, setting up or
utilizing camping equipment such as tents, tarpaulins, temporary shelters
whether commercially produced or improvised from random materials, cooking
facilities, hammocks, ground cover, bedding, sleeping bags or other equipment
of a similar nature used for living accommodation or lodging purposes in the
outdoors.  Camping does not include use of umbrellas or sun shades during
the time the park is open to the public or the use of temporary structures
pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.  An activity shall
constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the
circumstances, the participants in conducting these activities are in fact
using the area as a sleeping or living accommodation regardless of the intent
of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may
also be engaging. "Camping" shall not include merely sitting, lying or
sleeping outside in a public park/recreation area or the use of a blanket,
towel or mat in a public park/recreation area during the time the park is
open to the public.



   "Camp equipment" or "Camp paraphernalia" means tents, tarpaulins,
lean-tos, huts, cardboard boxes, or similar make-shift temporary shelters
constructed from random materials, as well as cooking facilities, hammocks,
ground cover, bedding, sleeping bags, or other similar equipment used for
living in the outdoors.



   "Commercial activities" means the conduct of a business, profession,
trade, occupation and all and every kind of calling carried on with or
without the intent of making a profit.



   "Inflatable play structure" means any inflatable structure used for
recreational purposes that, when filled with air, provides a suitable surface
or space for jumping, bouncing or sliding.



   "Park amenities" means any man-made structure, monument, statue, vase,
fountain, pole, wall, fence, railing, bench, picnic table, trash receptacle,
arbor, shade structure, playground, building, landscaping, natural
vegetation, lighting system, sprinkler system, and walking or biking trails,
paths or walkways, and waterways.



   "Park and recreation facilities" and "Public park/recreation areas"
means all parks and their associated open spaces, pedestrian and biking
trails, park amenities, buildings and recreation centers used by the public
within the boundaries of the city limits of the city, and which are owned,
operated and/or maintained by the city.



   "Personal property" means tangible personal belongings or possessions,
which shall include any movable or tangible thing that is subject to
ownership; property or chattels that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or
touched, including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances, camping
facilities, camping paraphernalia, money, and/or books.



   "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, or by which the
human voice, music, or any other sound is amplified.  Sound amplifying
equipment shall exclude vehicle radios, portable music players and stereo
equipment when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which
same is installed or by the intended users.  Sound amplifying equipment
shall exclude devices on authorized emergency vehicles or other warning
devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.



   "Store", "Stored" or "Storage" means to put aside personal property in
a public park/recreation area or accumulate it for use when needed; to place
personal property in a public park/recreation area for safekeeping; and/or to
leave personal property unattended in a public park/recreation area.



   "Tent" means shelter or structure that is not entirely open on all
sides.



   "Umbrellas or sun shades" means any canopy or cover that is open on all
sides, from ground level to the top of the structure, and consists of pliable
tent-like material such as canvas, nylon or other synthetic fabric, and that
is held aloft by one or more supporting metal, plastic or wooden poles.



(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32. 015   Severability.



   The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter,
sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph and section by section, and does
hereby declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable and, if for
any reason any sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be held
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts
of this chapter.



(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



Article 2. Park Reservation and Permits



12.32.020   Park and recreation facility uses requiring a permit.



   A.   Park and recreation facilities are open to the public
generally, however, certain areas or spaces within city park and recreation
facilities, as designated by the City Manager or designee, may be made
available by reservation for exclusive use by persons and groups subject to
issuance of a permit and payment of applicable fees. Any designated areas and
spaces within city park and recreation facilities may be used by the public
on a first come, first served basis; however, those designated areas and
spaces must be vacated at the time permitted persons or groups arrive.



   B.   A permit is required within the boundaries of any public
park/recreation area where any person or group seeks to:



   1.   Reserve a designated area for the purpose of a private
gathering or private event.



   2.   Reserve a designated area for the purpose of a private
gathering or private event that includes the possession and consumption of
alcoholic beverages.



   3.   Reserve a designated area to hold a play, performance, sporting
event, or organized practice which would infringe on the typical use or
capacity of a designated area.



   4.   Reserve a designated area for the purpose of a private
gathering or private event that includes the utilization of temporary,
portable amenities, including but not limited to such things as inflatable
play structures or temporary staging.



   5.   Utilize sound amplifying equipment in excess of the limits set
forth in Section 12.32.180.



   6.   Utilize any park and recreation facilities for any activities
involving a group event or coordinated gathering of fifty (50) or more
persons, except as provided by subsection C. below.



   7.   Engage in any other activity that would otherwise infringe on
or impede the typical use and capacity of a designated area or otherwise
hinder, threaten or impede the public health and safety of the public use of
park or recreation facilities.



   C.   Special events and expressive events, as defined in Section
12.48.020, conducted in parks, open space, trails, or recreation areas shall
require review and approval in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
12.48.  Special events typically include any parade, march, procession,
pageant, review, ceremony, festival, assembly or exhibition on property owned
or controlled by the city and which are planned or likely obstruct, delay,
impede, impair or interfere with the usual, normal and free use of the
location and implicate significant government interests. Expressive events
typically include any special event organized or conducted solely or
primarily for the purpose of engaging in speech protected by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of the
California Constitution.



(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.025   Application for use.



   A.   The City Manager or designee shall reserve the right to grant
or deny all applications for the use of city parks or recreation facilities.
All applications for use of city parks or buildings shall be signed by an
adult eighteen (18) years of age or over who shall be responsible for
compliance with the terms of the permit. Permits where the proposed use
includes the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages must be made
in person by an adult twenty-one years of age.



   B.   Requests for use shall be made a minimum of three (3) days
prior to the date of requested use. Applications may be modified up until one
(1) business day prior to the date of the requested use.



   C.   The application for a permit shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:



   1.   Name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization(s), and name
of the person in charge of the proposed activity.



   2.   Address and telephone number of applicant(s).



   3.   Park or building being applied for and the area involved.



   4.   Starting and finishing times of the proposed activity, and
number of persons expected.



   5.   Nature of the proposed activity or activities, proposed site
plan depicting the proposed layout for the event and locations for any
equipment or temporary structures that may be brought into the park, duration
of the event, and a description of the nature of the use of any sound
amplifying equipment.



   6.   Notice of requirement of certificate of co-insurance for public
liability, in the form of attachment to application, if required. All
commercial owners, operators, and vendors of temporary portable amenities
identified in Section 12.32.020B.4. utilized within park and recreation
facilities shall require the following: (1)  maintain liability insurance
covering bodily and property injury in the minimum amount specified by the
city and name the city and its officials, agents and employees as an
additional insureds on the liability insurance policy; (2) submit to city
prior to issuance of a permit a certificate of insurance naming city and its
officials, agents and employees as additional insureds and stating that the
insurance coverage will not be modified or canceled without prior written
notice to the city; and (3) provide to evidence of a current city-issued
business license.



   D.   Denial of an application shall be based on the following
criteria:



   1.   When there is a conflict with a prior reservation or a building
or a park with the required capacity for the proposed activity is not
available.



   2.   Refusal by an applicant to agree in writing to conditions of
the permit.



   3.   Failure of an applicant to file an application in sufficient
time for administrative review.



   4.   Failure to agree to provide personnel determined by the city to
be necessary to properly police and protect the activity and other users of
the facility or area due to the size or nature of proposed activity.



   5.   The filing of more than one application for the same facility
at the same time. Under these circumstances, the City Manager or designee
will give consideration to the application first completed.



   6.   When usage of facility may damage, destroy or detract from the
city park or recreation facility and/or cause harm, injury, discomfort or
displeasure to the other persons in or near the park or recreation facility.



   7.   Record of applicant or event not complying with regulations of
this chapter.



   E.   An applicant may appeal a decision to deny an application for a
permit to utilize park and recreation facilities. The applicant must file
such appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) days of the denial for a
final determination, which shall be forthcoming within fifteen (15) days from
the date the appeal is filed with the City Manager.



   F.   Fees and deposits may be levied to offset city expenses
incurred in providing services associated with or that otherwise may be
required pursuant to the issuance of a permit. Basic rates for use of
facilities are established by resolution adopted by the city council and are
subject to change by the city council.



   G.   All persons to whom a permit is granted must agree in writing
to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability
for injury to persons or property occurring as the result of the activity
sponsored by permittee, and said persons shall be liable to the city for any
and all damages to parks, equipment and buildings owned or controlled by the
city which result from the activity or permittee or is caused by any
participant in said activity. A person exercising any of the privileges
authorized by this policy does so at his own risk without liability on the
part of the city for any injury to persons or property resulting therefrom.



   H.   To ensure proper use and control of facilities and equipment, a
security guard shall be required when an event constitutes the major use of a
facility. Additional security measures may be required to protect the general
public and city property.



   I.   Permit may be revoked if any terms or conditions of the permit
are violated by the permittee or any agent or employee of the permittee. Said
permit may be revoked by the City Manager with or without notice to the
persons to whom the permit was issued.



(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



Article 3. Closure of Parks and Recreation Facilities During Designated Hours



12.32.030   Designated hours for closure of park and recreation facilities.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to remain in park and recreation
facilities (except as noted in Section 12.32.035) during the designated hours
of closure. Except as provided by subsection B., the designated hours of
closure for park and recreation facilities shall be between the hours of
10:00 p.m. to and through 5:00 a.m. of the following day.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in Lincoln Oval
Park, Pappas Park, Provident Skate Park, Recreation Park, Rotary Park and
Seven Oaks Park (except as noted in Section 12.32.035) from  8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m. during the summer season and from 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during
the winter season. The changes in park hours shall coincide with daylight
savings time. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2014-10 § 2 (part),
2014: prior code § 5290)



12.32.035   Exemptions.



   A.   Section 12.32.030 shall not apply to any person in a park or
recreation facility when such a person is participating in, going to, or
coming from an activity which is either sponsored or co-sponsored by a public
entity, or is carrying on such activity pursuant to a valid permit or license
issued by the city. Said Section 12.32.030 shall further not apply to any
peace officer or other duly authorized public employee acting within the
course and scope of his/her employment.



   B.   An individual or family unit experiencing homelessness may not
be cited for violation of Section 12.32.030 unless it is confirmed that there
is available shelter as defined in Section 12.32.010. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2
(part), 2019: Ord. 2014-10 § 2 (part), 2014: prior code § 5291)



12.32.040   Temporary change of designated hours of closure of park and
recreation facilities.



   The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to change the
designated hours of closure required by Section 12.32.030 for a designated
period of time or indefinitely. In the event that the designated hours for
any park and recreation facility are changed pursuant to this section, the
hours of closure designated by this section shall be posted in accordance
with the requirements of Section 12.32.045. Said action shall be taken when
the City Manager determines that circumstances exist justifying the
modification of the designated hours of closure for any park and recreation
facility in order to prevent the occurrence of dangerous, unlawful, or
impermissible activities. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: prior code § 5292)



12.32.045   Signs identifying hours of closure.



   Each park and recreation facility subject to closure during specified
hours pursuant to this article shall be properly and appropriately posted.
Signs setting forth the hour and time of closure and reopening of the park
and recreation facility as provided in this article shall be posted at or
near entrance ways to said park and recreation facility, or in otherwise
conspicuous locations as determined by the City Manager or designee. Said
signs shall be not less than one square foot in area and shall contain
lettering, not less than one-half inch in height, identifying the hours
during which the park and recreation facility shall be closed, and further
advising the public that entry to the park and recreation facility or
remaining on the facilities' grounds between the designated hours is a
violation of law. In the event that there are no clear and obvious entrance
ways or natural or manmade barriers which prohibit access to or entry upon a
park or recreation facility subject to this article, signs shall also be
posted at intervals of every three hundred (300) feet along the perimeter of
the facility accessible to the public. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: prior
code § 5293)



12.32.050   Temporary closure of park and recreation facilities.



   The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to temporarily
close any park and recreation facility or portion thereof and require the
exit of all persons therein when the City Manager or designee determines that
conditions exist at or in said park and recreation facility or portion
thereof which present a hazard to the park and recreation facility or to the
health and safety of the public, or for the purposes of constructing or
maintaining park and recreation facilities and/or associated park amenities.
The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to temporarily close
any park and recreation facility or portion thereof  at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals, and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the City Manager or designee
shall find reasonably necessary to achieve the objectives of this section.
(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.055   Penalty.



   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.010. 
(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2014-10 § 2 (part), 2014: prior code
§ 5294)



Article 4. Prohibiting Alcoholic Beverages



12.32.060   Purpose.



   A.   The purpose of this article is to prohibit the possession and
consumption of all alcoholic beverages in all city parks and recreation
facilities except in specially designated city parks with a permit.



   B.   Police officers responding to all calls for assistance at city
parks and recreation facilities have frequently encountered intoxicated and
on some occasions, belligerent individuals and groups. The consumption of
alcoholic beverage often makes control of such situations, which are already
tense, very difficult. In addition, the excessive consumption of alcoholic
beverage in and of itself often results in the need for law enforcement
intervention. This results in increased costs to the city, impedes criminal
investigations, and reflects negatively on the good image of the city.



   C.   The purpose of this article is, therefore, to:



   1.   Minimize community exposure to certain negative behavior and
incidents that are associated with the consumption of alcoholic beverages;



   2.   Reduce the expenditure of time spent by law enforcement
officers dealing with the aforementioned type of issues; and



   3.   To maintain an environment which is conducive to, and reflects
the community commitment to a safe and healthy public environment. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 9904 § 2, 1999: prior code § 5600)



12.32.065   Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages on
city-owned parks and recreation areas prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to possess and/or consume any alcoholic
beverage within the boundaries of every public park/recreation area. The City
Manager or designee shall maintain a listing of the park and recreation
facilities where possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be
allowed with a permit issued pursuant to Article 2. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2
(part), 2019: prior code § 5601)



12.32.070   Warning signs posted.



   Each park or recreation area shall be clearly posted with a warning
sign at all common entry points, and a sign shall be posted every three
hundred (300) feet when a park or recreation area's boundary is adjacent to a
public street. Signs posted at park and recreation facilities where
possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be allowed by permit
shall state the following:



   "Possession and/or consumption of any alcoholic beverage without a
permit is prohibited by City Ordinance Section 12.32.065."



   Signs posted at all remaining parks shall state the following:



   "Possession and/or consumption of any alcoholic beverage is prohibited
by City Ordinance Section 12.32.065."



(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 9904 § 3, 1999: prior code § 5603)



12.32.075   Exceptions.



   A person may be exempt from this article if the following is applicable:



   A.   A person (group/activity representative) must have applied for,
been granted and be in possession of and compliance with a permit issued
pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter to possess and consume alcoholic
beverages.



   B.   The permit must be presented to any park official or police
officer upon request. Such permit shall state the designated park and
specific group/activity area reserved for the permit. The person who has
applied for and is in possession of such permit, shall be responsible for
notifying those persons in the group/activity of such designated areas of use
and any other restrictions associated with the permit, and shall be
responsible for ensuring that those individuals consuming alcoholic beverages
are of legal age to do so. The permit shall expire according to the terms of
the permit, or in the absence of a designated expiration time, at the
conclusion of the sanctioned event or designated hour for park closure,
whichever occurs first.



   C.   Attendance at facilities which have controlled access and/or
are physically separated from the remainder of a city park/recreation area by
a common barrier or fence, and provided such facilities are being utilized
for their intended purposes (i.e. golf courses, race tracks, softball fields,
sports complex, etc.) may be exempted from time to time from this prohibition
of no possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages if so designated by
the City Manager or designee. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 9904 §
4, 1999: prior code § 5604)



12.32.080   Penalties for violations.



   Any person, violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by the
imprisonment in the county of Tulare jail for not more than six months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. The city attorney or his/her designee will
have the discretion to reduce said violation to an infraction. The penalty
for aninfraction shall be a fine of a maximum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per violation. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: prior code § 5605)



Article 5.  Prohibited Acts in Parks and Recreation Facilities



12.32.085   Purpose.



   A.   The purpose of this article is to maximize the community
enjoyment of park and recreation facilities and to prohibit activities and
behavior which interfere with this objective to the detriment of the public
health, welfare and safety. 



   B.   This article shall apply to conduct in public park/recreation
areas and be enforceable notwithstanding the exceptions provided in Section
8.36.070A. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.090   Camping in parks and recreation facilities prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to
establish, maintain, or operate a camp or occupy camp facilities, and to
utilize camping equipment or camping paraphernalia while camping or occupying
camping facilities, in any public park/recreation areas. "Establish" means
setting up or moving camping equipment or camp paraphernalia in park and
recreation facilities to camp or operate camp facilities.  "Maintain" means
keeping or permitting camping equipment or camping paraphernalia to remain in
a park or recreation facility in order to camp or operate camping
facilities.  "Operate" means participating or assisting in establishing or
maintaining a camp or camping facilities.



   B.   An individual or family unit experiencing homelessness may not
be cited for violation of subsection A. between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. unless it is confirmed that there is available shelter as defined
in Section 12.32.010.



   C.   Notwithstanding the exemption provided for in subsection B.,
camping facilities, camping equipment, and camping paraphernalia may not be
affixed or attached to, or constructed upon or with, or otherwise located
within ten (10) feet from, any park amenities.



   D.   Notwithstanding the exemption provided for in subsection B.,
camping facilities, camping equipment, and camping paraphernalia may not be
located or utilized within any waterways or riparian areas, as defined in
Section 12.52.010, and to the extent waterways and riparian areas exist in
park and recreation facilities, those areas shall be subject to the
prohibitions set forth in Chapter 12.52 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   E.   Camping may be permitted in park and recreation facilities in
conjunction with any city sponsored and approved event. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2
(part), 2019)



12.32.095   Storage of personal belongings prohibited.



   A.   It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to
store personal property in any public park/recreation area, except as
otherwise approved in writing by the City Manager or designee or by
resolution of the City Council. Personal property stored in public
park/recreation areas in violation of this section shall be impounded
pursuant to the requirements of this section. Any personal property left in
any public park/recreation area at the time the public park/recreation area
is closed to the public, whether or not the personal property is unattended,
shall be immediately impounded, pursuant to this section. Notwithstanding
these prohibitions, an individual or family unit experiencing homelessness
may not be cited for violation of this section between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless it is confirmed that there is available shelter as
defined in Section 12.32.010.



   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to abandoned
personal property, which shall be disposed of forthwith.



   C.   The Chief of Police or the City Manager, or their designees,
are authorized to impound personal property pursuant to the provisions this
section, and shall make provisions for the receipt and safekeeping of
personal property coming into his or her possession pursuant to this section.
A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such personal property,
unless the personal property was found in the course of employment by an
employee of the city. The Chief of Police or the City Manager, or their
designees, shall notify the owner of the personal property if his or her
identity is reasonably ascertainable, or, if the identity of the owner is not
reasonably ascertainable, cause a notice to be left in a prominent place on
or near the location of the personal property for any personal property
impounded pursuant to this section, advising that the city is in possession
of the personal property and the location where it may be claimed.



   D.   Notice prior to impoundment.



   1.   Stored personal property may be impounded without notice if
there is a reasonable belief that it is abandoned, presents an immediate
threat to public health or safety, is evidence of a crime, is evidence in a
criminal investigation, or is contraband.



   2.   The city may erect signs in public parks/recreation areas
stating that any personal property stored in those areas will be impounded.
Those signs shall serve to provide the notice required by this section.



   3.   If neither subsection 1. nor subsection 2. apply, personal
property unlawfully stored in public parks/recreation areas shall be
impounded only after a notice is provided to the owner of the personal
property or left at or near the location of the personal property advising
that the personal property will be impounded if it is not removed. This
notice will specify a time when the personal property will be impounded if it
is not removed.



   E.   If, after any notice required by subsection D. is given,
personal property remains unlawfully stored in a public park/recreation area,
that personal property may be impounded. The person impounding the personal
property shall leave a notice in a conspicuous place at or near where the
personal property was located prior to being impounded, advising where the
personal property is being kept and when and where it may be claimed by its
owner.



   F.   Personal property coming into possession of the city pursuant
to this section shall be deposited in a safe place for a period of at least
ninety (90) days. If the personal property consists of money, it shall be
deposited with the Finance Director or designee for a period of not less than
ninety (90) days, unless sooner claimed by its owner. In the event the
personal property or money is not claimed within ninety (90) days, it shall
be deemed to be abandoned personal property, subject to disposition as
provided in this section.



   G.   During the time that any personal property is held by the city,
it may be delivered or paid to its owner as follows:



   1.   The personal property shall be delivered upon proof of
ownership satisfactory to the Chief of Police or the City Manager, or their
designees, after ten (10) days' notice by mail to any other person(s) who
have asserted a claim of ownership at any address given by such person(s).



   2.   If the personal property consists of money, it shall be paid to
the owner upon written order from the Chief of Police or the City Manager, or
their designees, to the Director of Finance. The Chief of Police or City
Manager, or their designees, shall make such order upon the same proof of
ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of personal
property.



   3.   If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the
Chief of Police or the City Manager,  or their designees, he or she may
refuse to deliver the personal property or refuse to order the payment of
such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   H   Upon expiration of the ninety-day period, any personal property
received by the city and not delivered to the owner may be appropriated to
the use of the city upon order of the City Manager or his or her designee, on
his or her finding that the personal property is needed for a public use, and
any personal property not appropriated to city use may be disposed of or sold
at public auction to the highest bidder. All unclaimed money received by the
Chief of Police, and not delivered to the owner during the ninety-day period,
shall thereafter be deposited in the general fund.



   I.   Subject to the provisions of subsection I. below, any personal
property coming into the possession of the Chief of Police or designee may be
disposed of immediately and without notice, in a manner that the Chief of
Police or designee determines to be in the public interest, when such
personal property is perishable, contraband, or constitutes an immediate
threat to the public health or safety.



   J.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to real or
personal property or money subject to confiscation pursuant to state or
federal law, to personal property that constitutes evidence of a crime,
evidence in an ongoing criminal investigation and/or civil proceeding
pursuant to state or federal law. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.100   Tents and other enclosed temporary structures prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to set up and utilize a tent or
similar temporary shelter or improvised make-shift structure from random
items, that is not open on all sides in a public park/recreation area, except
as when authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Article 2.  Only the use
of umbrellas or sun shades is permissible in a public park/recreation area.



   B.   Notwithstanding these prohibitions, an individual or family
unit experiencing homelessness may not be cited for violation of this section
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless it is confirmed that
there is available shelter as defined in Section 12.32.010. (Ord. 2019-07 §
2 (part), 2019)



12.32.105   Fires prohibited in parks.



   No person shall kindle or build a fire in any park or recreation
facility, including the use or portable fire rings or any other receptacle or
park amenity for the purpose of creating or containing a fire, unless a
permit is issued pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter or as part of a city
sponsored function.  A fire that is lighted and maintained in a bbq grill
being utilized for cooking purposes only, and only in designated areas, shall
be exempt from this prohibition. Installed park grills are designed for
charcoal-based cooking, and no other flammable material may be used in them.
Grill fires shall be completely extinguished before leaving the park and
recreation facility. Fires solely for the purpose of personal warmth are not
allowed, and park grills shall not be used as a trash receptacle. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.110   Fireworks prohibited in parks.



   A.   No person shall bring, possess or set off in any public
park/recreation area any firecrackers, rockets, or other fireworks or
explosives, including so-called "safe and sane" fireworks. No person shall
discharge any firecracker, torpedo, rocket, flare or other firework or
explosive that lands in any public park/recreation area.



   B.   Organizations may discharge fireworks as part of a public
gathering or patriotic celebration, provided a permit for such discharge or
display has been obtained pursuant to Article 2. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part),
2019)



12.32.115   Firearms, air guns and other weapons prohibited in parks.



   No person other than peace officers in the discharge of their duties
shall use, maintain, possess, fire, or discharge any firearm, air gun, spring
gun, flare gun, or other weapon potentially dangerous to wildlife or human
safety in park and recreation facilities, except in areas, at times, and
under conditions designated by the City Manager or designee for such use.
(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.120   Commercial advertising prohibited in parks.



   No person, business or organization shall display, post or distribute
placards, handbills, pamphlets, fliers, circulars, books or other writings
containing commercial advertising matter in parks and recreation facilities
without the prior written approval of the City Manager or designee. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.125   Littering, personal waste and dumping prohibited in parks.



   A.   No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause
to be placed in the waters of any park facility's fountain, pond, lake,
stream, or other body of water or in any tributary, stream or drain flowing
into such waters, any substance, matter, or thing, liquid or solid,
including, but not limited to, particles or objects made of paper, metal,
glass, garbage, rubbish, rubber, fuel/oil, food matter, wood, fiber, and
plastics.



   B.   Receptacles are provided for trash related to park activities.
Park users shall throw their trash in designated receptacles. Should provided
trash receptacles fill up, park users may leave their remaining refuse
immediately adjacent to the full trash receptacle.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to enter, occupy or sleep in any trash receptacle.



   C.   No person shall bring and leave refuse, furniture or surplus
material from another property, including home-based litter and refuse and/or
business-related refuse, for the purpose of dumping it.



   D.   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited urine, fecal
matter, or other bodily discharges within park and recreation facilities,
with the exception of within the normal use of designated restrooms.  Park
and recreation facility restrooms and washrooms are designated single-use,
unisex facilities, to be used by one person at a time for their designated
purpose and for a reasonable time period. This rule shall not apply to
children under the age of eight (8) years, or persons with special needs, who
may be accompanied by a person responsible for that child or person. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.130   Swimming, bathing, washing and fishing prohibited in park
water features.



   No person shall swim, fish, bathe, wash personal items or clothing,
wade, row, sail or operate any boat, radio-controlled or non-radio-controlled
water toy or model, craft, or other device, on or in any pond, lake, stream,
splash pad or other water feature within a park and recreation facility,
except at such place and/or time period designated and provided by the City
Manager or designee for such use. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.135   Nudity prohibited in parks.



   No person over the age of eight (8) shall appear, swim, bathe,
sunbathe, change clothes, disrobe, walk or be in any public park/recreation
area in a state of undress, so as to possibly cause a public nuisance. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.140   Smoking prohibited in parks.



   No person shall smoke any substance or dispose of any lighted match or
cigarette, cigar, or pipe ashes or any flaming or glowing substance in any
park and recreation facilities. This rule includes processes known as
"vaping". (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



12.32.145   Operation of vehicles in parks.



   A.   Except as permitted by the City Manager or designee, it is
unlawful for any person, other than when engaged in the performance of duties
as a city employee, to drive or park any motor vehicle in or upon any public
park/ recreation area, golf course, greenbelt, or other open space area
except for those areas specifically designated for vehicular traffic.



   B.   It is unlawful for any vehicle with a gross weight of over
fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or a maximum width of over one hundred and
two (102) inches to use the road in any public park/recreation area except
when specifically authorized for the delivery of goods.  This rule shall not
apply to parks, maintenance, or emergency vehicles.



   C.   Electric-powered and unpowered single or multi-wheeled bicycles
and personal conveyances may be utilized on designated trails, provided noise
levels are within limits (see Section 12.32.180). Such vehicles are not to be
operated in a negligent, unsafe, or reckless manner, so as life, limb or
property may be endangered. Pedestrians shall retain the right of way on
trails.



   D.   Except for licensed, operational vehicles in designated
roadways and parking areas, gas-powered vehicles or conveyances are
prohibited in all other areas of park and recreation facilities. This
provision shall not apply to city personnel acting in their official
capacity, or those provided express permission of the City Manager or
designee.



   E.   No person shall abandon any motorized vehicle within the
boundaries of a park and recreation facility.



   F.   No person shall wash or repair any automobile or other
motorized vehicle within the boundaries of any park and recreation facility.
(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.150   Vandalism of park amenities prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to destroy, mutilate, damage or
deface any park amenities in any public park/recreation area.



   B.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to prosecution for vandalism pursuant to California Penal Code
Section 594. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.155   Animals in city parks.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to bring, have, allow, or free
any animal within the perimeter of any public park/recreation area, including
but not limited to, any horse, fowl, bovine or other domestic animal, or any
reptile or other wild animal except:



    1.   When prior approval has been given by the City Manager or
designee;    



   2.   When authorized in designated off-leash dog areas pursuant to
Chapter 12.34;



   3.   When dogs or other permitted animals are restrained by leash or
similar device; and



   4.   Law enforcement dogs acting in the performance of their duties,
or otherwise participating in a city authorized training event or exhibition.



   B.   It is unlawful in any manner to tease, annoy, disturb, molest,
catch, injure or kill, throw at or strike with any object, any animal, bird,
or fowl in any public park/recreation area.



   C.   A dog may be released from its leash only within the confines
of a designated off-leash area.  The owner and animal must comply with all
rules and regulations as outlined in Section 12.34, Off-Leash Pet Areas.
(Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.160    Golfing prohibited.



   It is unlawful for any person to play, practice, putt or otherwise
engage in the game of golf within the confines of any public park/recreation
area, except for those park/recreation areas specifically designated by the
City Manager as a “golf course.” Disc or Frisbee Golf is exempted from
this rule, provided it is played within designated areas. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2
(part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.165    Hazardous games and devices prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use remote controlled
recreational devices (including wheeled or flying vehicles) in any public
park/recreation areas. Park users shall refrain from solid or liquid fueled
rocket use, archery, paintball, air gun, sling shot, hardball or any similar
games of a hazardous nature in public park/recreation areas, except at such
places and times as shall be specifically established by the City Manager or
designee. While using designated areas for any activity listed above, use of
such devices shall not be disruptive to wildlife, to park patrons, or to park
property and such use shall comply with all applicable federal or state
regulations. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.170   Glass containers prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful to possess any container made of glass in any
public park/recreation area or to bring, carry, or transport any container
made of glass into any public park/recreation area. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2
(part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.175   Loud music/amplified sound prohibited.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person to emit from their vehicle,
personal electronic music player, or other amplified sound device, music or
noise which exceeds sixty (60) decibels at fifty (50) feet and interferes
with other uses in any public park/recreation area unless a permit
authorizing the use of amplified music has been issued pursuant to Article 2
of this chapter.



   B.   It is unlawful for any person to use, operate any loudspeaker
or sound amplifying equipment in fixed or moveable position for the purposes
of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, or lectures or for
transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons, in or upon any
public park/recreation area without first obtaining a permit authorizing such
use pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to
law enforcement personnel of government agencies acting in their official
capacity.  (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.180   Generators and small engines prohibited.



   It is unlawful to use generators and small engine motors in any public
park/recreation area that emit noise which exceeds sixty (60) decibels at
fifty (50) feet without first obtaining a permit authorizing such use
pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter.  This provision shall not apply to
city personnel acting in their official capacity. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part),
2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.185   Commercial activities prohibited.



   It is unlawful to conduct commercial activities in any public
park/recreation areas without prior authorization from the City Manager or
designee. Such authorization shall include either a special event permit, a
sidewalk vendor permit, or a concession agreement, temporary access license
or similar binding written authorization. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019:
Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.190    Tennisand pickleball courts – prohibited activities.



   A.   It is unlawful for any person upon any tennis, pickleball,
basketball, volleyball, racquetball or other sport court owned or controlled
by the city to engage in any activity other than playing or practicing the
sport for which the court is intended and/or so designated, including, but
not limited to, roller skating or riding upon a skateboard, powered or
unpowered unicycle or bicycle, or personal conveyance device, without the
prior authorization of the City Manager or designee.



   B.   The City Manager or designee may authorize, at certain
designated times and locations, by posting a sign or by issuing a permit, the
use of the tennis, pickleball, basketball, volleyball, racquetball or other
sport courts owned or controlled by the city for an activity other than
playing or practicing the sport for which the court is intended and/or so
designated, so long as such activity will not interfere with organized city
recreation programs, risk damage to the courts or cause annoyance or
disturbance to the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019:
Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



12.32.195   Prohibition of carts in park facilities.



   Within the boundaries of all public parks/recreation areas, no person
shall use a shopping cart, basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar
device that is primarily used for the purpose of transporting goods of any
kind.  The only exception shall be carts being utilized for recreational
equipment, wheeled ice chests that are being used for food product, pursuant
to a permit issued pursuant to Article 2, or as otherwise authorized by the
City Manager or designee. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2013-06 § 2,
2013)



12.32.200   Prohibition of inflatable play structures.



   A.   Use of inflatable play structures at park and recreation
facilities is prohibited without a permit issued pursuant to Article 2 of
this chapter.



   B.   The use of inflatable play structures in city park or
recreational facilities by any person or entity obtaining a permit is
permitted only under the following conditions: (1) permittee must operate the
inflatable play structure in compliance with all local and state statutes,
rules, codes and regulations; (2) permittee shall ensure that adults will, at
all times, supervise the use of bounce houses by children; (3) permittee
shall ensure that inflatable play structures will be in good and safe working
order and utilized in accordance with all manufacturer guidelines and
limitations (e.g., weight and occupancy restrictions); (5) inflatable play
structures and related equipment will be used in such a manner that they do
not pose a threat to the public (e.g., generators will not be placed in
walkways or other areas that would cause a tripping hazard); (4) as a
condition of using inflatable play structures in park or recreational
facilities, the permittee and all persons who utilize bounce houses will
indemnify, defend, and hold the city and its officials, agents and employees
harmless from any and all losses, damages, injuries, death, and claims that
may result from the use of bounce houses in city parks or recreational areas.



   C.   Use of inflatable water features such as water slides,
wading/swimming pools or slip and slides or other similar features on city
parks or properties is prohibited. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019)



Article 6. Removal and Suspension from Park and Recreation Facilities



12.32.205   Removal from parks.



   Any person who interferes with any city employee or obstructs or
interferes with a peace officer in the performance of his or her duties, or
who by his or her conduct, interferes with the use of any public
park/recreation area by any other person, or who has committed any public
offense within any public park/recreation area, shall be required to leave
the public park/recreation area. No person who has been required to leave a
public park/recreation area pursuant to this section shall return to or enter
any public park/recreation area until the public park/recreation area reopens
the following day. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2 (part), 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part),
2004)



12.32.210   Suspension from parks for disorderly conduct.



   A.   The Council finds that disorderly conduct in a public/park
recreation areas that is dangerous, harmful, offensive, disruptive, or that
is a public nuisance obstructs or interferes with the enjoyment of the park
and negatively impacts the community and should be prevented through
suspensions of the privilege of enjoying the city’s public parks/recreation
areas.



   B.   The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to suspend
the individual committing the following offenses from utilizing park areas
for a period of up to twelve (12) months:



   1.   Unlawful possession of a controlled substance or illegal drug
paraphernalia in a public park/recreation area; (as set forth in Division 10
of the California Health and Safety Code).



   2.   Possession of a deadly weapon (as set forth in Part 6 of the
California Penal Code) in a public park/recreation area.



   3.   Commission or solicitation of an act of prostitution in a
public park/recreation area (as set forth in Chapter 2.5 of Division 15 of
Title 1 of the California Penal Code).



   4.   Commission of an act of criminal assault or battery (as set
forth in Chapter 9 of Division 8 of Title 1 of the California Penal Code) on
another person in a public park/recreation area.



   5.   Commission of an act of vandalism in a public park/recreation
area (as defined by California Penal Code Section 594).



   6.   Commission of an act of indecent exposure in a public
park/recreation area (as defined by California Penal Code Section 314).



   7.   Commission of any other violation of the Visalia Municipal Code
or state law on three (3) separate occasions within a thirty (30) day period
within a park or park area.



   C.   The City Manager or designee shall make the determination to
impose a suspension pursuant to this section on the basis of substantial
evidence.  A record of arrest or citation for any of the above qualifying
acts or violations, regardless of whether a conviction has resulted, may be
considered substantial evidence sufficient to support a suspension under this
section.  The City Manager or designee shall consider any other relevant
evidence available.



   D.   In imposing a suspension pursuant to this section, the City
Manager or designee shall provide notice of suspension, by serving written
notice on the person receiving the suspension in a manner permitted by
Visalia Municipal Code Section 1.13.070.  Persons receiving notice of
suspension may request an administrative appeal hearing as described in
Visalia Municipal Code Section 1.13.080 within ten (10) days of receiving
notice of suspension.  The suspension shall not be stayed pending the appeal
process.  At the hearing the rules applicable to administrative hearings
under the Visalia Municipal shall apply.  The individual may present
evidence to demonstrate why the suspension should not be issued, which, may
include but is not limited to: questioning witnesses; providing evidence
showing the underlying acts did not occur; or providing evidence as to why
the underlying acts were not dangerous, harmful, offensive, disruptive, or
otherwise constitute a public nuisance.  The hearing officer shall have the
authority to uphold any issued suspension, reverse the suspension, or reduce
the term of any suspension.



   E.   Suspended persons are not allowed by the city to use public
park/recreation areas during the term of suspension or to obtain a permit for
the use of public park/recreation areas from the city.  Violators may be
cited for a violation of this section and must immediately leave the public
park/recreation area. (Ord. 2019-07 § 2, 2019: Ord. 2014-10 § 3, 2014)



12.32.215    Penalty.



   A.   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in Section
1.12.010. 



   B.   Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this
article as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the
provisions of this article, the trial court, upon recommendation of the
prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charge of the offense from a misdemeanor
to an infraction pursuant to Section 19 of the California Penal Code. (Ord.
2019-07 § 2, 2019: Ord. 2004-11 § 2 (part), 2004)



Chapter 12.34
OFF-LEASH DOG AREAS



Sections:



12.34.010   Designated off-leash dog areas.



12.34.020   Definitions.



12.34.030   Regulations.



12.34.040   Hours of operation.



12.34.050   Signage identifying off-leash dog areas, hours of operation
and regulations



12.34.060   Penalty for violations.



12.34.070   Severability.



12.34.010   Designated off-leash dog areas.



   The City of Visalia, to meet the needs of dog owners, has identified
and designated off-leash dog areas for use by dog owners.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   “Adult” means anyone over the age of eighteen (18) years.



   “Handler” means the person who has control and responsibility of
the dog(s) while at the park or separate facility.



   “Heat” means the season when a female can accept a male and become
impregnated.



   “Leash” means a strap attached to a dog's collar  by a hook with a
handle or loop at the end for ease in handling/holding by the owner.



   “License” means a current license attached to the dog's collar
which shall be worn by the dog while in the park.



   “Off-leash dog area” means a posted, fenced area within a park or a
separate facility in the city limits of Visalia and/or under the control of
the city, created specifically for dog owners to allow their dog(s) to roam
freely while within the confines of the fenced area and within sight of their
owner.



   “Owner” means the legal owner of a licensed dog.



   “Regulations” means rules under which the park is operated and to
which users must adhere adopted by the community services director.



   “Vaccination” means an inoculation of virus required to receive a
license as required by Visalia Municipal Code Section 6.12.070.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.030   Regulations.



   The community services director of the City of Visalia is authorized to
adopt and amend regulations for the use of off-leash dog areas. A copy of
said regulations shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and
community services director. Said regulations include, but are not limited to:



   1.   Owners are legally responsible for their dog(s) and any
injuries caused by their dog(s). Use of the dog area is at owner's risk.



   2.   No dog under the age of four (4) months shall be allowed in an
off-leash dog area.



   3.   All dog(s) must have current vaccinations as required in
Section 6.12.070 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   4.   All dog(s) must be licensed. All licenses must be on the dog's
collar and the collar must be on the dog at all times.



   5.   No dog(s) in heat are allowed within the off-leash dog area.



   6.   Owners may not have more than three (3) dogs with them in the
off-leash area at any given time.



   7.   Dogs are required to wear a basic flat buckle collar, training
collar, or harness with identification tags at all times.



   8.   Dogs shall be escorted to and from the off-leash area on a
leash which does not exceed six (6) feet in length.



   9.   Owners are responsible for the immediate removal of fecal
matter deposited in the off-leash area by their dog. All feces must be
properly disposed of in the receptacles provided within the off-leash area.



   10.   No aggressive dogs are allowed within the off-leash dog area.
A dog displaying aggressive behavior to people or dogs is required to
immediately leave the park for that day.



   11.   No children under the age of ten (10) are allowed in the
off-leash dog area. Children ages ten (10) to fourteen (14) must be
accompanied by an adult.



   12.   Sports activities, bicycles, picnics, etc. are not permitted
in the off-leash dog area.



   13.   Valley Oak SPCA employees shall have the right to enter an
off-leash dog area and enforce all animal control regulations by the
authority given to them under Chapter 6.04 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   14.   Violators of the above stated rules may be removed from the
park and park privileges may be suspended.



   15.   The City of Visalia reserves the right to close the off-leash
dog areas.



   16.   Dog(s) shall not be left unattended in the off-leash area.
Handler must be with the dog(s) at all times.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.040   Hours of operation.



   The off-leash dog area shall be open from dawn to dusk daily subject to
city's right to close such areas in its discretion. Hours of operation shall
be posted at entrances to the off-leash dog area.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.050   Signage identifying off-leash dog areas, hours of operation
and regulations.



   Signs shall be clearly posted at the entrance to the off-leash dog area
and between on- and off-leash dog areas. Signs shall identify the off-leash
dog area, regulations for use, and the hours of operation.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.060   Penalty for violations.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or regulations
adopted hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and if convicted subject
to the penalties set forth in Section 1.12.010.



   Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, may reduce the charge of the offense from a misdemeanor to an
infraction pursuant to California Penal Code Section 19(c)



   In addition to the above penalties, any person violating the provisions
of this chapter will be prohibited from using the park for a period
determined by the community services director in his/her discretion.
Notification of this prohibition shall occur by mail to the address indicated
on the citation and shall be deemed valid notice whether or not received.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



12.34.070   Severability.



   The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter
sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and section by section, and
does hereby declare that the provisions of this chapter are severable and, if
for any reason any sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be
held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
parts of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-28 § 2 (part), 2002)



Chapter 12.36
PARK AND RECREATION DEVELOPMENT FEES



Sections:



12.36.010   Purpose.



12.36.020   Definitions.



12.36.030   Requirements.



12.36.040   Timing of fee payment.



12.36.050   General standards.



12.36.060   Acquisition and development costs.



12.36.070   Fee credits.



12.36.080   Acquisition fee credit.



12.36.090   Development fee credit.



12.36.100   Land dedication.



12.36.110   Limitation on the use of fees.



12.36.010   Purpose.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority under the Government
Code of the state of California and the charter of the city for the
construction of park and recreation facilities and for the payment of fees to
construct such facilities in accordance with the conservation, open space and
recreation element of the general plan of the city adopted by the city.
(Prior code § 7060)



12.36.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Dwelling unit" means each single-family dwelling in each unit, an
apartment, duplex, multiple dwelling structure, condominium, cooperative or
planned unit development, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and
Professions Code of the state of California, or each stall, space or site, or
location for a mobile home or trailer in a mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision.



   "Park and recreation facilities" means parks or other such
improvements, equipment or capital facilities which serve to directly meet
the park and recreation needs of residents of the city. (Prior code § 7061)



12.36.030   Requirements.



   Prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of a new
dwelling unit, as defined herein, or recordation of a final map or parcel
map, where applicable, a fee shall be paid to the city for the purpose of
constructing park and recreation facilities. Such fees shall be composed of
an acquisition fee and a development fee to be paid as follows:



   A.   The acquisition fee shall be paid at the time of filing (filing
map approval) of final map or parcel map which is filed subsequent to city
approval of a residential development as defined herein.  The amount of the
acquisition fee payable at the time of approval referenced herein shall be
determined by multiplying the number of each type of dwelling unit planned
for the parcels of the final map or parcel map times the acquisition fee for
each type of dwelling unit in effect at the time of approval.  Where no
parcel map or final map is recorded prior to issuance of a building permit
for a residential development, the acquisition fee shall be paid at the time
of issuance of the building permit or permits according to the acquisition
fee schedule in effect of the time of issuance of such building permit.



   B.   The development fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of a
building permit or permits according to the development fee schedule in
effect at the time of issuance of the building permit. (Prior code § 7062)



12.36.040   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 12.36.030, the city
council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 12.36.030.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection (A) of this
section the city council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this chapter will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this chapter will not
materially effect the ability of the city to deliver its five year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection (A) of this
section, the city council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid,
provided that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first; and



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies; and



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit.  If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the fee payer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designee and the city attorney; and



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred, on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee
by the point in time specified in said resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay said deferred fees by the
point in time specified in said resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which said party has a financial
interest. (Prior code § 7062.1)



12.36.050   General standards.



   A.   It is found and determined that to provide for the public
interest, convenience, health and welfare that four acres of city park and
recreation facilities be provided for each one thousand (1,000) residents.
This standard has been established based on the city's park and recreation
facility needs documented in the open space, conservation, and recreation
element of the general plan.



   B.   The amount of land required for each type of dwelling unit
shall be based on the average number of persons per household for each
dwelling unit type which has been estimated by the most recent federal census
or a State census taken pursuant to Section 40200 et seq., of the Government
Code. The amount of land required for park and recreation facilities for each
dwelling unit type are established as follows:



 

Dwelling Type
 
Zoning District
 
Average Persons Per Household
 
Acres/Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 
R-1
 
3.1
 
.0124


Multiple Family
 
R-M
 
2.4
 
.0096


Mobile Homes
 
 
2.4
 
.0096



 



(Prior code § 7063)



12.36.060   Acquisition and development costs.



   A.   The amount of the acquisition fee and the development fee for
each type of dwelling unit shall be based on the average number of persons
per household for each dwelling type and the cost of acquisition and
development for park and recreation facilities.



   B.   The city shall establish by resolution the estimated per-acre
cost of land acquisition and park development. The schedule of fees shall be
those amounts as established by Resolution No. 97-39 of the city council and
shall remain in effect until July 1, 1998. Effective July 1, 1998, and each
succeeding July 1 thereafter, said schedule of fees shall be adjusted in
accordance with the following criteria:



   1.   On April 1st of each year the city engineer shall review the
current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the
cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco, CA. When the average of such indices
differs from the average of the indices for the preceding April 1st, the
factor of increase or decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees. Such
factor shall be computed by dividing the average ENRCCI for the current April
1st by that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual park fee
rates may be multiplied by the factor to determine the adjusted schedule of
fees. The engineer shall present the new fee schedule for adoption by
resolution of council after at least one public hearing.



   2.   If in the determination of the engineer the adjustment of the
schedule of fees produced by the procedure in subdivision 1 of this
subsection is not representative of the actual change in costs of the planned
park and recreation facilities, the engineer may, in lieu of the procedures
set forth in said paragraph, compute a new schedule of fees for adoption by
resolution of the council. The city council may adopt the new fee schedule
upon a majority vote after at least one public hearing. (Ord. 9719 § 6, 1997)



12.36.070   Fee credits.



   Residential developments subject to this chapter may receive a credit,
as determined by the city council, against the required acquisition fee and
development fee. The credits for each of the fees are established as in the
following sections. (Prior code § 7065)



12.36.080   Acquisition fee credit.



   A credit shall be given for the fair market value of any property
dedicated to the city for public park and recreation facilities which are in
conformity with the open space, conservation and recreation element of the
general plan. Where such dedication is in excess of the land dedication
requirement for the planned residential development, compensation shall be
provided to the landowner for the fair market value of the land dedicated in
excess of the requirement specified herein. (Prior code § 7065.1)



12.36.090   Development fee credit.



   A credit against the development fee may be given for the following
recreation improvements:



   A.   An amount equal to the value of any improvements and any
equipment which are in conformity with the open space, conservation and
recreation element of the general plan which are dedicated to the city along
with dedicated park land.



   B.   Private park and recreation facilities, subject to review and
approval by the parks and recreation commission, which meet the  standards
described below.



   1.   That yards, court areas, and other open areas required by the
city zoning regulations and the Uniform Building Code, shall not be included
in the computation of park and recreation area;



   2.   Ongoing maintenance of the area is provided;



   3.   That the use of the private area is restricted for park and
recreation purposes and that the legal documents be recorded which will run
with the land in favor of the future property owners of the property; and
that when a portion of a private recreational area is also reserved for storm
drainage purposes, that portion of the private recreational area as
determined by the city engineer, shall not be considered for credit;



   4.   That the private area is reasonably adequate for park and
recreational purposes;



   5.   That developments containing four or more acres of private
recreational areas must contain at least four of the following improvements,
of which at least two improvements shall be from the active list;



 




Active Recreational Areas



Facility
 
Acres


   a.   Children's play area with apparatus
 
.50


   b.   Court game areas (i.e., volleyball, basketball, handball,
tennis, shuffleboard or other similar hard-surfaced areas for court games)
 
.25


   c.   Turfed open play spaces for active recreation such as soccer,
golf, softball, etc., with associated facilities, etc.
 
1.0


   d.   Swimming pool with adjacent deck and lawn area
 
.25


   e.   Recreation and/or social center
 
.15


   f.   Other active park and recreational facilities as approved by
the park and recreation commission
 




 



 




Passive Recreational Areas



Facility
 
Acres


   a.   Family picnic areas
 
.25


   b.   Pathways and trails (well-drained landscaped corridors with 6'
to 10' wide paths/trails) along waterways and/or to open spaces within the
development
 
N/A


   c.   Landscaped open space with "quiet" areas (shade trees, benches,
etc.)
 
.50


   d.   Turfed areas for open or free play
 
1.0


   e.   Natural area preservation/enhancement (waterways, oak trees,
and groves, etc. including buffers/transition areas)
 
Site Specific


   f.   Other passive park and recreational facilities as approved by
the park and recreation commission
 




 



   6.   That developments containing less than four acres of private
recreational area shall have at least one of the above active or passive
improvements for each acre developed. If the area required for open space is
two acres or more, at least one of the above active improvements shall be
required;



   7.   That the private open space exceeds five percent of the net
site area as defined in the zoning regulations;



   8.   That phased developments with private park and/or recreational
facilities, shall conform to subsection (B)(5) of this section, in the
aggregate, as each phase in combination with any previous phase is developed.



   C.   The park and recreation commission may consider allowing
development fee credits to subdivisions and PRD's approved prior to adoption
of the ordinance only when it can be demonstrated that the private park
and/or recreational facilities have been made accessible (visually and/or
physically) to the general public. Methods to consider in evaluating requests
include, but are not limited to:



   1.   Siting public vs. private uses adjacent to waterways or natural
features (i.e., Valley Oaks singly or in clusters) using "single-loaded",
loop or cul-de-sac streets to promote access;



   2.   Prohibiting back-on and side-on lot development adjacent to
waterways or natural resource areas;



   3.   Establishing development setbacks along waterways and/or
natural resource areas including space for trails and bikeways;



   4.   Restoring/enhancing habitat along waterways and/or natural
resource areas.



   D.   When the park and recreation commission has determined that a
previously approved development qualifies for development fee credit
consideration, based on the guidelines above, the commission shall conduct a
public hearing to evaluate the request for consistency with all the standards
outlined in Section 12.36.090(B). The park and recreation commission shall
make written findings and forward a recommendation to the city council for
final action.



   E.   The amount of the development fee credit for private park and
recreation facilities shall be equal to the fraction of the total required
land acquisition which is provided in the private park and recreation
facilities, as specified in Section 12.36.050, multiplied times the total
development fee for the residential development. The development fee credit
for private park and recreation facilities shall not exceed seventy-five (75)
percent of the required development fee.



   F.   The city council may reduce, waive or supplement the
acquisition fee and/or development fee where it finds that such waiver or
reduction will promote the construction of housing for low- and
moderate-income households where it makes a finding that other monies are
available to construct the necessary park and recreation facilities.



   G.   All fee credits provided for under this section shall be
implemented through a development agreement as provided for in Chapter 17.60.
(Prior code § 7065.2)



12.36.100   Land dedication.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the city's ability
to require dedication of park land for park and recreational purposes in
accordance with the conservation, open space and recreation element of the
general plan. Where such dedications are required and made, a fee credit may
be provided to a residential development as provided for in Sections
12.36.070, 12.36.080 and 12.36.090. (Prior code § 7066)



12.36.110   Limitation on the use of fees.



   The lands and fees received under this chapter shall only be used for
the purpose of providing park and recreation facilities at any location
conforming to the conservation, open space and recreation element of the
general plan. (Ord. 9519 § 1, 1995: prior code § 7067)



Chapter 12.40
OPEN SPACE MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS



Sections:



12.40.010   Purpose.



12.40.020   Definitions.



12.40.030   Procedure as additional alternative.



12.40.040   Formation of districts.



12.40.050   Contents of petition.



12.40.060   Insufficient signature on petition.



12.40.070   Preliminary report to council.



12.40.080   Resolution of intention.



12.40.090   Publication.



12.40.100   Termination of proceedings.



12.40.110   Parcels and/or lots not benefitted.



12.40.120   Protests.



12.40.130   Resolution ordering formation.



12.40.140   Designation of district.



12.40.150   Annexation.



12.40.160   Collection.



12.40.170   Late charges.



12.40.010   Purpose.



   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means whereby the
city may form open space maintenance districts within which owners of
property may be charged the cost and expenses of the maintenance of street
lighting, landscape services normally provided by the city, and which are of
direct benefit to the open space district, the property owners of the
district and the inhabitants of the district. It is the intent of this
chapter to establish and provide procedures by which open space land may be
maintained either in its natural state or appropriately landscaped for scenic
purposes or for passive or active park and recreational purposes. This
chapter is intended to provide a method for the maintenance of the
landscaping which serve localized interests but which are not susceptible to
administration in funding by the typical homeowner's association, and which
should not be imposed as a burden upon the general taxpayers of the city.



   B.   The city council of the city, in establishing the purpose and
intent, declares the open space areas to be maintained are of special benefit
to the property owners within the district. (Prior code § 7073)



12.40.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   Cost. The annual maintenance cost shall be calculated by the city
public service department. The cost shall be based on a separate entity
performing the work and shall include all direct and indirect expenses, such
as, but not limited to, labor, materials, and overhead.



   Incidental Expenses. "Incidental expenses" means and includes:



   1.   The cost of preparation of any report, including plans,
specifications, estimates, diagrams, and estimating service charges;



   2.   The cost of printing, advertising, and the giving of published,
posted, or mailed notices;



   3.   Compensation of any engineer or attorney employed to render
services in proceedings pursuant to this part;



   4.   Any other expenses incidental to the maintenance of the open
space areas.



   Maintenance. "Maintenance" means the furnishing of services and
materials for the ordinary and usual upkeep, operation, and servicing of any
of the improvements, including but not limited to:



   1.   Repair, removal, or replacement of all or any part of the
improvement;



   2.   Providing for the life, growth, health, and beauty of
landscaping including cultivation, irrigation, trimming, spraying,
fertilizing, or treating for disease, or injury;



   3.   The removal of trimmings, rubbish, debris, and other solid
waste.



   Property Owner. "Property owner" means any person who owns a parcel of
land and is shown as said owner on the last equalized county assessment roll;
when such person is no longer the owner, any person entitled to be shown as
owner on the next county assessment roll, if such person is known to the
local agency; where residence is subject to recorded written agreement of
sale, any person shown therein as purchaser. 



   Public Lighting Facilities. "Public lighting facilities" means all
works or improvements used or useful for the lighting of any public places,
including ornamental standards, luminary poles, supports, tunnels, man holes,
vaults, conduits, pipes, wires, switches, fasteners, capacitors, meters,
communication circuits, appliance attachments, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, braces, transformers, insulators, contacts and appurtenances.



   Public Places. "Public places" means one or any combination of the
following:



   1.   Any public street, highway, road, alley, lane, boulevard,
parkway, or other way dedicated to or used for public use;



   2.   Any public property, right-of-way, easement or leasehold
interest which is in use in the performance of a public function and which
adjoins any of the ways described in Part 1 above.



   Public Utility. "Public utility" means any public utility subject to
the jurisdiction and regulated by the public utilities commission.



   Service or Servicing. "Service" or "servicing" means the furnishing of:



   1.   Electric current, or energy, gas, or other illuminating agent
for any public lighting facilities or for the lighting or operation of any
other improvements;



   2.   Water for the irrigation of any landscaping, the operation of
any fountains, or the maintenance of any other improvements. (Prior code §
7073.1)



12.40.030   Procedure as additional alternative.



   The procedure established herein for the maintenance of street
lighting, landscaping and other improvements shall be additional or
alternative to any of the other procedures established by ordinance of the
city or state law; provided, however that in the proceeding pursuant to this
chapter only the provisions contained herein need be followed. It is
understood that open space developments undertaken pursuant to this chapter
shall serve to augment any other open space programs including park land
dedication requirements in new subdivisions or in lieu payments therein, and
shall not be considered as a substitute therefore. (Prior code § 7073.2)



12.40.040   Formation of districts.



   A.   Proceedings for the formation of an open space district may be
initiated by petitions signed by the property owner of the separately
assessed parcels and lots in the proposed district, who own at least fifty
(50) percent of the parcels or lots within the district, or said proceedings
may be initiated by resolution of city council. The petition shall be filed
with the city clerk. The city clerk shall check or cause such a petition to
be checked. If it is signed by the requisite number of qualified signers, the
clerk shall certify to that effect and shall present the petition and
certificate to the legislative body.



   B.   A district shall only be formed to maintain street lighting,
landscaping, and other open space improvements which are in addition to the
services normally provided by the city, and which are of direct benefit to
the open space district, the property owners of the district and the
inhabitants of the district. (Prior code § 7073.3)



12.40.050   Contents of petition.



   The petition which may consist of one instrument, or any number of
separate instruments, shall contain:



   A.   A general description of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed district(s) for reference to the attached map showing such
boundaries;



   B.   A general description of the open area(s) proposed to be 
maintained by the district;



   C.   A general description of the maintenance desired, including but
not limited to the maintenance of bikeways, pathways, pedestrian walks,
street landscaping and lighting and drainage facilities;



   D.   A statement that the petition is filed pursuant to this chapter
and is intended to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Prior code §
7073.4)



12.40.060   Insufficient signature on petition.



   If the petition is not signed by the requisite number of qualified
signers, the clerk shall certify to the council that said petition is
insufficient. If the petitions is insufficient, supplemental petitions may be
filed within six months from the date of certificate of insufficiency. (Prior
code § 7073.5)



12.40.070   Preliminary report to council.



   Before city council considers the adoption of a resolution of intention
to form the district, a report shall be filed with the city clerk and
forwarded to the planning commission and city council for review. The report
shall contain:



   A.   An analysis of the information contained in the petition;



   B.   An estimate of the annual cost and expense of maintenance of
the open space areas which benefit property within the proposed district;



   C.   A diagram or map showing the boundaries of the district
proposed to be assessed and generally locating the improvements to be
constructed and/or maintained. (Prior code § 7073.6)



12.40.080   Resolution of intention.



   After reviewing the preliminary report the city council may require
revisions take place to the proposed district. If the legislative body
determines that the public interest and convenience require the formation of
an open space district, it may adopt a resolution declaring its intention to
form a district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The resolution of
intention, in addition to making the foregoing determination, shall also
contain:



   A.   All contents set forth in the preliminary report;



   B.   A statement of the service charge necessary to finance the
maintenance of the items specified in Section 12.40.050(C) as estimated,
which is subject to change periodically by city council based upon
documentation of increasing maintenance costs;



   C.   A statement regarding the method of collection of the service
charge which is subject to change based upon city council approval;



   D.   The day, hour and place for the hearing by the council of
protests and objections to the formation of the proposed district. A
statement that any owner of any separately assessed parcel or lot liable to
be assessed a service charge for the maintenance, may protest the formation
of the proposed district, or the extension of the district boundaries, or
both, by filing a written protest with the clerk at any time not later than
the hour fixed for the hearing. The time for the hearing shall not be less
than ten or more than sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption by the
council of the resolution of intention. (Prior code § 7073.7)



12.40.090   Publication.



   Notice of the adoption of the resolution of intention shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, by the clerk to each person who owns a separately assessed
parcel or lot within the district as shown on the last equalized county
assessment roll. (Prior code § 7073.8)



12.40.100   Termination of proceedings.



   If after the hearing has been closed it appears that the owners of more
than one-half of the separately assessed parcels or lots within the proposed
district and subject to the assessment have made objection in writing to the
formation of the district, the council shall so find. Thereafter, the
legislative body shall not proceed further under the resolution of intention
and the proceedings shall be terminated unless a four-fifths vote by council
is in favor of proceeding with the district. A new hearing may be held no
sooner than one year after such finding. (Prior code § 7073.9)



12.40.110   Parcels and/or lots not benefitted.



   Any separately assessed parcels or lots which, in the judgment of
council will not be benefitted shall not be included within the district.
(Prior code § 7073.10)



12.40.120   Protests.



   A.   Withdrawal of Protest. Any protest or objection made pursuant
to this chapter, or any signatures to such objection protests, may be
withdrawn by written withdrawal signed, by the person or persons who sign the
protest or objection and filed with the clerk at any time prior to the
determination by the council as to whether or not a majority protest exists.
Any protest, objection, or signature withdrawn shall not be counted in
computing a majority protest.



   B.   Waiver of Protest. Any objections or protests not made at the
time and in the manner provided by this chapter are deemed waived voluntarily.



   C.   Determination of Protest. Except in the case of the majority
protest, the council may sustain or deny by resolution any or all objections
and protests, and its determination is final. (Prior code § 7073.11)



12.40.130   Resolution ordering formation.



   Unless the power to proceed has been terminated pursuant to this
chapter, at the conclusion of the hearing the council, by resolution, may
find and determine that the public interest and the necessity require the
maintenance described in the resolution of intention and may order the open
space district formed. At such time council shall also fix and establish the
boundaries of the district and declare that the district is formed pursuant
to this chapter. (Prior code § 7073.12)



12.40.140   Designation of district.



   Each open space district formed pursuant to this chapter shall be
numbered and the designation of the district shall be substantially (using
the appropriate number) "Open Space District Number               of
the City of Visalia". (Prior code § 7073.13)



12.40.150   Annexation.



   Any land subject to subdivision and/or additional parcels or lots may
be annexed to an existing maintenance district by following the procedures of
this chapter. The parcels or lots or area to be annexed shall be created as a
separate district and the district merged after council passes the resolution
ordering the formation of the new district. (Prior code § 7073.14)



12.40.160   Collection.



   The method of fee collection and amount charged for maintenance shall
be established by resolution of the city council in accord with the procedure
and requirements specified in California Constitution, Article XIII(C) and
(D), or successor statute. (Ord. 2001-01 § 2, 2001: prior code § 7073.15)



12.40.170   Late charges.



   A.   In the event that any property owner shall fail to pay any
billing within seventy-five (75) days from the beginning of the calendar
month which the billing covers, a late charge as set by resolution of the
city council for each such billing month shall be added to the bill, and the
city shall have no authority to accept any payment thereafter without
collecting the late charge. This charge shall be collected to defray the cost
of billing and bookkeeping involved in late payments.



   B.   In addition or in the alternative, and at the option of the
city, the city may file a civil action for the collection of any amounts due
and unpaid. This remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to the remedy of
means of enforcing payment of the sum required to be paid by this chapter
stated in subsection (A) of this section.



   C.   As an alternate means of collection of amounts due and unpaid:



   1.   Once a year the city council shall cause to be prepared a
report of delinquent fees and late charges. The council shall fix a time,
date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto;



   2.   The council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to
the landowners listed on the report not less than ten days prior to the date
of the hearing;



   3.   At the hearing the council shall hear any objections or
protests of landowners liable to be charged for delinquent fees. The council
may make such revisions or corrections  to the report as it deems just,
after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed;



   4.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special charges against the respective parcels of land and are a
lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees. A certified copy
of the confirmed report shall be filed with the county auditor for the
amounts of the respective charges against the respective parcels of land as
they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches, upon
recordation, in the office of the county recorder a certified copy of the
resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary county ad valorem property taxes are
collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure
and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws
applicable to the service charge, collection and enforcement of county ad
valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment, except that if
any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the
date on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent,
then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not
attach to such real property and the delinquent fees, as confirmed, relating
to such property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection;



   5.   The city may, at its discretion, issue separate bills for such
special fees and separate receipts for collection on account of such fees.
(Prior code § 7073.16)



Chapter 12.44
BLINDER RACKS



Sections:



12.44.010   Definitions.



12.44.020   Limitations upon display of certain materials.



12.44.030   Violations--Infraction.



12.44.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Display" means to place in plain view.



   "Harmful matter" means matter, taken as a whole, which to the average
person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient
interest, and is a matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a
patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks
significant literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.



   1.   When it appears from the nature of the matter or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is
designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, the appeal of the matter
shall be judged with reference to its intended recipient group;



   2.   In prosecutions under this chapter, where  circumstances of
production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity
indicate that matter is being commercially exploited by the defendant for the
sake of its prurient appeal, that evidence is prohibitive with respect to the
nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter lacks
significant literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.



   "Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other
printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion
picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or
any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical
reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or materials.



   "Minor" means any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age.
(Prior code § 5401)



12.44.020   Limitations upon display of certain materials.



   No person, including any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, cooperative association or other legal entity shall display
harmful matter in a public place, other than a public place from which minors
are excluded, without placing a device commonly known as a blinder rack in
front of such matter, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not
exposed to view. (Prior code § 5400)



12.44.030   Violations--Infraction.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, and upon conviction is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding
fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one
year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each
additional violation of this chapter within one year. A person who violates
the provisions of Section 12.44.030 shall be deemed to be guilty of a
separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation
continues. (Prior code § 5402)



Chapter 12.48
SPECIAL EVENTS



Sections:



12.48.010   Purpose.



12.48.020   Definitions.



12.48.030   General provisions.



12.48.040   Applications for non-expressive special events.



12.48.050   Applications for expressive events.



12.48.060   Application contents.



12.48.070   Spontaneous expressive events.



12.48.080   Special event authorization.



12.48.090   Rejection and notice.



12.48.100   Insurance, indemnification, risk mitigation.



12.48.110   Interference with a special event.



12.48.120   Appeal.



12.48.130   Cleanup deposits for certain special events.



12.48.140   Duties of applicant.



12.48.150   Severability.



Section 12.48.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the city's interest in
regulating competing uses of public fora, in regulating the streets to
protect the safety, comfort, and convenience of the public, and in ensuring
adequate public safety and other city services. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part),
2018)



Section 12.48.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Applicant" shall mean any person, firm, organization, association, or
corporation, and their authorized designees, that has submitted an
application for authorization to conduct, sponsor, or organize an event
governed by this chapter. An applicant must be 18 years of age or older.



   "Special Event" shall mean any parade, march, procession, pageant,
review, ceremony, festival, assembly or exhibition consisting of persons,
animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof which:



   1.   Is likely to be, planned to be, or actually conducted in, upon,
or along, any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way, or other property owned or controlled by the city;



   2.   Is likely to, planned to, or actually does obstruct, delay,
impede, impair or interfere with the usual, normal and free pedestrian use,
vehicular use, or other lawful use of the location; or is likely to, planned
to, or actually does not comply with traffic controls or other applicable
law; and



   3.   Provided, however, that a special event shall not include any
association of persons which does not present serious traffic, safety, or
competing use concerns beyond those presented on a daily basis by ordinary
use of the streets and sidewalks, or which does not otherwise implicate
significant government interests.



   "Expressive Event" shall mean any special event organized or conducted
solely or primarily for the purpose of engaging in speech protected by the
First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of
the California Constitution.



   "Spontaneous Expressive Events" shall mean any expressive event
occasioned by news, affairs, or circumstances coming into public knowledge
less than five days prior to the date of such event.



   "Application Fee" shall mean the fee to be paid by the applicant for a
special event at the time the application is filed with the special events
committee, or its authorized designee. A fee schedule shall be authorized or
established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the actual full
costs (or a portion thereof) of processing special event applications.



   "Chief of Police" shall mean the chief of police of the City of
Visalia, or his/her authorized designee.



   "City Manager" shall mean the city manager of the City of Visalia, or
his/her authorized designee.



   "Special Events Committee" or "Committee" shall mean the committee
responsible for authorizing special events pursuant to this chapter, or its
authorized designee. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.030   General provisions.



   A.   It is unlawful for any individual, entity, firm, association or
corporation to conduct, aid, or participate in any special event unless it
has been approved by the committee, and said authorizing documents issued by
the city are carried by an individual present at the special event and
responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   It is unlawful for any individual, entity, firm, association or
corporation to participate in any special event with the knowledge that the
sponsor of the special event has not been authorized by the committee or that
the sponsor has failed to comply with the conditions of the authorizing
documents.



   C.   A special event approved by the committee authorizes the
applicant to conduct only such special event as is described in the
authorizing documents, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of
said documents. It is unlawful for the applicant to willfully violate the
terms and conditions of the authorizing documents, or for any special event
participant with knowledge thereof, to willfully violate the terms and
conditions of the authorizing documents.



   D.   Any person willfully violating any provision of this chapter
shall be subject to the remedies provided under Chapter 1.13 of the Visalia
Municipal Code. In addition to the remedies provided under Chapter 1.13 of
the Visalia Municipal code, or as an alternative thereto, such person may
also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000) for each violation. Violations may also be
addressed by civil action in which the violator shall be liable for the full
amount of actual costs incurred by the city in connection with the provision
of any city service for, or because of, the special event, including, but not
limited to, police services, fire services, emergency services, park
services, traffic safety services, and public works services.



   E.   The committee shall not process any application for a special
event until the application fee, as set forth in the fire department's rates
and fees schedule, has been paid in full. However, the committee shall waive
the application fee if:



      1.   The applicant presents a verified statement certifying,
under penalty of perjury, that:



         a.   First Amendment expression is the sole or primary
purpose of the special event for which the authorization is sought; and



         b.   Payment of the application fee would be so
burdensome that in the absence of a waiver the applicant would be precluded
from exercising its First Amendment rights.



      2.   The applicant describes the nature of the event in
narrative form, including details supporting the conclusion that the special
event's sole or primary purpose is First Amendment expression; and



      3.   The applicant explains why payment of the application fee
would preclude the applicant's exercise of First Amendment rights.



      4.   The committee finds by a preponderance of the evidence
that:



         a.   All information required by this subsection (E) of
this section has been provided; and



         b.   The statement does not contain any material
falsehoods or misrepresentations; and



         c.   Requiring payment of the application fee would
burden the applicant to such an extent that the applicant would likely be
precluded from exercising its First Amendment rights. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2
(part), 2018)



Section 12.48.040   Applications for non-expressive special events.



   A.   Unless otherwise specified, the following provisions do not
apply to any application for an expressive event.



   B.   An application for a non-expressive special event shall be
submitted at least one month prior to the planned date of the event and no
more than one  year prior to the planned date of the event, except that
applications must be submitted at least two months prior to the planned date
of the event if:



      1.   The event is likely to be, or planned to be, in, upon, or
along any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way; or



      2.   The event is likely to have, or planned to have, more
than one thousand (1,000) persons in attendance.



   C.   After submitting an application for a non-expressive special
event, the applicant shall schedule at least one meeting with the committee,
either in person or via telephone, to coordinate with the city on the conduct
of the non-expressive special event and to review the requirements for
processing the application.



   D.   Additional applications materials required by the committee for
non-expressive special events must be received and the application deemed
complete no later than seven business days prior to the planned date of the
event, except that applications must be complete no later than fourteen (14)
business days prior to the planned date of the event if:



      1.   The event is likely to be, or planned to be, in, upon, or
along any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way; or



      2.   The event is likely to have, or planned to have, more
than one thousand (1,000) persons in attendance.



   E.   An application is complete if the committee has received all
information required by Section 12.48.060 (Application contents).



   F.   If an applicant for a non-expressive special event fails to
comply with the requirements of this section, the committee shall deny the
application in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 12.48.090
(Rejection and notice). (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.050   Applications for expressive events.



   A.   An initial application for an expressive event shall be
submitted at least five business days prior to the planned date of the event
and no more than one year prior to the planned date of the event, except that
applications must be submitted at least seven  business days prior to the
planned date of the event if:



      1.   The event is likely to be, or planned to be, in, upon, or
along any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way; or



      2.   The event is likely to have, or planned to have, more
than one thousand (1,000) persons in attendance.



   B.   After submitting an application for an expressive event, the
applicant shall schedule at least one meeting with the committee, either in
person or via telephone, to coordinate with the city on the conduct of the
event and to review the requirements for processing the application.



   C.   For an expressive event not requiring a special event
encroachment permit as part of the authorizing documents, and not likely to
have, or planned to have, more than one thousand (1,000) persons in
attendance, a final decision regarding the authorization of said expressive
event shall be made within three business days of the committee's receipt of
a complete application.



   D.   For expressive events that require a special event encroachment
permit as part of the authorizing documents, or are likely to have, or
planned to have, more than one thousand (1,000) persons in attendance, a
final decision regarding the authorization of the expressive event shall be
made within five business days of the committee's receipt of a complete
application.



   E.   Applicants shall be notified of the committee's decision within
one business day after the decision is made.



   F.   In determining whether to authorize an expressive event, or any
terms or conditions imposed thereon, the committee shall not, under any
circumstances, consider the message of the event, the content of speech, the
identity or associational relationships of the applicant, or make any
assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused
in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the event.



(Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.060   Application contents.



   A.   Except for spontaneous expressive events, any applicant
desiring to conduct a special event or an expressive event shall complete and
file with the committee all application documentation provided or otherwise
available to the applicant from the city. The applicant shall also provide
any additional information required by city for the committee to make the
findings required by Section 12.48.080. The city shall assist the applicant
should such additional information be required.



   B.   In addition to the information required by subdivision (A), if
a special event is likely to be, or planned to be, conducted in, upon, or
along, any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way, the applicant shall also submit the following information:



      1.   A special event encroachment permit application; and



      2.   A plan that demonstrates how the applicant intends to
comply with the city's good neighbor policy; and



      3.   A traffic control plan and, where applicable, a logistics
schedule.



   C.   In addition to the information required by subdivision (A), if
an expressive event is likely to be, or planned to be, conducted in, upon, or
along, any portion of any city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public
right-of-way, the applicant shall also submit the information specified in
subdivision (B), except such applicants shall not be required to comply with
the city's good neighbor policy. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.070    Spontaneous expressive events.



   A.   An authorization pursuant to this chapter is not required to
conduct, aid, or participate in any spontaneous expressive event that
complies with the provisions of this section.



   B.   Prior to the start of the event, the organizer of a spontaneous
expressive event shall notify the committee of the event and, to the extent
reasonably practicable under the circumstances, respond to all appropriate
requests for information.



   C.   A spontaneous expressive event must not present a substantial
safety or traffic hazard and must not unduly impede, obstruct, impair, or
interfere with the public's use of the street or other public property, the
operation of emergency vehicles, the provision of city services, or any
lawful competing use of the location where the event is located.



   D.   If a spontaneous expressive event presents a substantial safety
or traffic hazard, or unduly impedes, obstructs, impairs, or interferes with
the public's use of the street or other public property, the operation of
emergency vehicles, the provision of city services, or any lawful competing
use of the location where the event is located:



      1.   Unless the spontaneous expressive event's location has
special communicative value to the purpose of the event and such value would
be lost by moving the event to another location, the event's organizer must
make a diligent and good faith effort to relocate the event, and its
participants, to another location that does not present a substantial safety
or traffic hazard, or unduly impede, obstruct, impair, or interfere with the
public's use of the street or other public property, the operation of
emergency vehicles, the provision of city services, or any lawful competing
use of the location where the event is located.



      2.   If the spontaneous expressive event cannot be relocated
due to the special communicative value of the event's location or the
unavailability of another location, then the chief of police shall take
appropriate action to the extent reasonably necessary to eliminate the
hazard, risk, interference, or impairment; provided, however, that the chief
of police shall not order the area cleared or the cessation of spontaneous
expressive activities unless reasonably necessary to avoid imminent danger to
person or property. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.080   Special event authorization.



   A.   A special event shall be authorized if, after consideration of
the application documentation provided by or requested of the applicant,
along with any other relevant information in the committee's possession, the
committee finds that:



      1.   The conduct of the special event is not likely to
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous
to the area or streets where the proposed event is to be held;



      2.   The conduct of the special event is not likely to require
the diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police
the streets and area being used, as to prevent normal police protection to
the city;



      3.   The concentration of individuals, animals, and vehicles
is not likely to unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of,
or ambulance services to the area, or areas contiguous thereto;



      4.   That the applicant has provided for an adequate number of
monitors to control the orderly conduct of such event;



      5.   The conduct of such special event is not likely to cause
injury to individuals or property;



      6.   If the special event is a parade, that it will likely
move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and
without unreasonably stopping in route;



      7.   The special event is not to be held for the sole purpose
of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or event, and is not
designed to be held purely for private profit;



      8.   If the applicant has previously received a special event
authorization, that the applicant complied with all provisions of this
chapter and with all conditions placed on the authorization, has timely paid
all applicable fees, charges, and penalties imposed in relation to the
authorization, or has entered into a repayment plan for all unpaid amounts
and is current on all payments under such plan.



      9.   The special event complies with the provisions set forth
in Section 12.48.100 (Insurance, indemnification, risk mitigation).



   B.   Terms or conditions placed on a Special Event by the Committee
shall only be included to the extent that:



      1.   The term or condition is necessary for the Committee to
make the findings required by subdivision (A) above; or



      2.   The term or condition is necessary to defray municipal
expenses reasonably incurred as a direct result of authorizing the special
event. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.090   Rejection and notice.



   A.   If an applicant fails to comply with the requirements specified
in Sections 12.48.040, 12.48.050, and/or 12.48.060, the committee shall deny
the application and notify the applicant in writing of the committee's action.



   B.   If, after receiving a complete application, the committee is
unable to make the findings required by Section 12.48.080, the committee
shall notify the applicant why, based on the information in the committee's
possession, the committee was unable to make the required findings and shall
request additional information that could enable the committee to make the
required findings.



   C.   Any notice of denial shall state with specificity the reasons
for the application's denial and shall identify the provision or provisions
of this chapter upon which the denial is based.



   D.   All notices sent pursuant to this section shall be deposited in
the United States post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to the
applicant at his/her address as provided in the application, or be sent via
electronic mail to the address provided in the application. (Ord. 2018-05 §
2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.100   Insurance, indemnification, risk mitigation.



   A special event authorization shall not be made unless:



   A.   The applicant has obtained adequate insurance, both in type and
amount, as determined by the city's risk manager or designee, which
determination shall be based upon the logistics, size and other factors
associated with the conduct of the special event. The determination made by
the city's risk manager or designee shall be reasonably calculated to protect
the city from any liability which may be incurred by the city pursuant to its
authorization of the special event.



   B.   The applicant obtains a waiver for insurance coverage, as
provided below.



      1.   The committee shall waive the requirement for insurance
coverage if the applicant presents a verified statement, certifying under
penalty of perjury, with sufficient information to establish that:



         a.   First Amendment expression is the sole or primary
purpose of the special event; and



         b.   The cost of obtaining insurance is so burdensome
that in the absence of a waiver the applicant would be precluded from
exercising its First Amendment rights.



         c.   The applicant has been unable to obtain insurance
coverage, including the name and address of at least two insurance agents or
other sources contacted to determine insurance premium rates.



      2.   The applicant signs an agreement to reimburse the city
for any costs the city incurs in connection with the special event
proximately caused by the actions of the applicant, its officers, employees,
or agents, or any person who was, under the applicant's control insofar as
permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that the applicant shall
hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, its officials, members, agents
and employees against any claims, costs, damages, demands, liability and
notices, or any of these, arising or resulting from any damage or injury
proximately caused by actions of the applicant in connection with the special
event, regardless of whether the city is actively negligent or passively
negligent, except for those claims, costs, damages, demands, liability and
notices, or any of these, caused solely by the negligence or willful
misconduct of the city. Persons who merely join in a parade or event are not
considered by that reason alone to be "under the control" of the applicant;
and



      3.   The applicant agrees to cooperate with the city to
respond to risks, hazards, and dangers to public health and safety that are
reasonably foreseeable consequences of the special event. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2
(part), 2018)



Section 12.48.110   Interference with a special event.



   No individual shall join or participate in a special event, nor in any
manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct without the consent of
the applicant or its designee. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.120   Appeal.



   Any decision involving an application for a special event authorization
may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice for an appeal
with the city clerk within ten business days of such action. The city manager
or designee shall hear such appeal and issue a determination within five
business days. If such an appeal is taken from revocation of an
authorization, the revocation shall not be effective until after a decision
upholding the revocation has been made by the city manager or designee. The
decision of the city manager or designee on an appeal shall be final subject
only to a judicial challenge. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.130   Deposits for certain special events.



   A.   Generally.



      1.   The committee may require the applicant to pay a deposit
reasonably calculated to reimburse the city for its reasonable and necessary
costs in providing services for a special event.



      2.   If the applicant disputes the amount of a deposit, he or
she may appeal to the city manager or his/her designee within five business
days after receipt of the deposit determination.



   B.   Cleanup deposits.



      1.   The applicant for a special event involving the sale of
food or beverages, erection of structures, horses or other large animals,
water aid stations, or the use of public streets, sidewalks, or any public
right of way shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior to the
authorization of a special event. The cleanup deposit shall be in the amount
established in the master fee resolution.



      2.   The cleanup deposit shall be returned to the applicant
after the special event if the area used for the special event has been
cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event, or,
if no authorization has been made on an application, to the applicant after
the planned date of the event as identified in the application has passed.



      3.   If the property used for the event has not been properly
cleaned or restored, the applicant shall be billed for the actual cost
incurred by the city for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup deposit, or
a portion thereof, shall be applied toward payment of the bill. Should there
be any unexpended balance on deposit after completion of the work, this
balance shall be refunded to the applicant. Should the amount of the bill
exceed the cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due and payable to
the city upon the applicant's receipt of the bill.



   C.   Waiver of deposits for expressive events.



      1.   The committee shall waive the requirements for a deposit
if the applicant presents a verified statement, certifying under penalty of
perjury, explaining in sufficient detail for the committee to determine that:



         a.   First Amendment expression is the sole or primary
purpose of the special event; and



         b.   Payment of the deposit would be so burdensome that
in the absence of a waiver the applicant would be precluded from exercising
its First Amendment rights. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.140   Duties of applicant.



   A.   Each applicant shall comply with all terms and conditions of
its special event authorization.



   B.   Each applicant shall ensure that the person leading a parade,
or other event along a route, or the person in charge of any other event,
shall carry the special event authorization documentation on his or her
person for the duration of the event.



   C.   Each applicant shall ensure the area used for the authorized
special event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as existed prior
to the event, immediately following the completion of the event. (Ord.
2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Section 12.48.150   Severability.



   If any provision of this Chapter 12.48 or its application to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter or the
application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected. (Ord. 2018-05 § 2 (part), 2018)



Chapter 12.52
CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY



Sections:



12.52.010   Definitions.



12.52.020   Obstruction of movement in public ways.



12.52.030   Lying down on public sidewalks in designated city zones.



12.52.040   Sitting down on sidewalks in designated city zones.



12.52.050   Exemptions.



12.52.060   Penalty.



12.52.070   Severability.



12.52.010   Definitions.



   The definitions set forth in this section apply to this chapter and to
any other sections where these definitions are incorporated by reference,
either expressly or by implication.



   Public Place. "Public place" includes any of the following:



   1.   Any area inside a city or school district building;



   2.   Any enclosed area outdoors which is owned or occupied by the
city and used for public purposes, or which is owned or occupied by a public
school district;



   3.   Any unenclosed area outdoors, whether such area is publicly or
privately owned or occupied, to which the general public has access and to
which, by right or by express or implied invitation, the general public may
resort for business, pleasure or other lawful purpose: this category
includes, but is not limited to, publicly owned open areas such as streets,
sidewalks, parks, and open areas that may be either public or privately
owned, such as entrance ways, alcoves, yards and parking lots;



   4.   Any privately owned walkway, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
which is open to the general public and which, among its principal purposes,
serves to allow pedestrians to pass through or over the premises, without
regard to the pedestrian's destination;



   5.   Outdoor parking lots, whether publicly or privately owned,
which are adjacent to streets, sidewalks or other public places open to the
general public.



   Public Way. "Public way" means any public place or portion of a public
place which serves primarily for the movement of pedestrian, vehicular, or
bicycle traffic from one area to another; "public way" includes, but is not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, bicycle paths, covered or enclosed walkways
for pedestrians.



   Enclosed Area. "Enclosed area" means an area which is substantially
surrounded by a fence, ditch, wall or other barrier so as to limit access to
a relatively few points around the area.



   City Building. "City building" means any building which is owned or
occupied by the city or any of its agencies and which is used for public
purposes.



   School District Building. "School district building" means any building
which is owned or occupied by a public school district and which is used for
public purposes. (Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.020   Obstruction of movement in public ways.



   A.   No person shall occupy any portion of a public way or public
place so as to obstruct or interfere with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic thereon, whether such person does so alone or together with one or
more persons, or with equipment or personal property of any nature, and
whether such person does so by standing, sitting, lying or in any other
manner.



   B.   No person shall occupy a roadway median for any purpose,
whether by standing, sitting, lying or in any other manner, and no person
shall walk in a roadway median except as necessary to pass through at a
designated crossing location.  This section shall not apply to those persons
occupying a median while conducting activities related to maintenance,
surveying, construction, landscape maintenance, landscape improvements,
responding to an emergency, or unless otherwise permitted by law.  (Ord.
2009-08 § 2 (part), 2009: Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.030   Lying down on public sidewalks in designated city zones.



   No person shall lie down upon a public sidewalk or sidewalk curb
located in or adjacent to any P-C, P-C-C, P-C-N, P-C-CM, P-C-SO, P-C-DT,
P-C-R, P-C-S, P-PA, P-OC and P-OG zones. (Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.040   Sitting down on sidewalks in designated city zones.



   In the C-C community commercial, C-N neighborhood commercial, CBD
central business districts, no person shall sit upon the following enumerated
portions of a public sidewalk:



   A.   Within ten feet of any entranceway into or exit from a building;



   B.   Within ten feet of any building window;



   C.   Within four feet of any drinking fountain or public telephone;



   D.   Within fifty (50) feet of any cash disbursal machine, outdoor
vending machine, outdoor money-changing machine, or any other outdoor machine
or device which disburses or accepts coins or paper currency, except parking
meters and newspaper vending machines. (Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.050   Exemptions.



   Exemptions to Sections 12.52.020, 12.52.030 and 12.52.040 shall not
apply in the following cases and to the following persons:



   A.   Persons standing or sitting on the curb or portion of any
sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any parade, festival,
performance or similar event permitted under the provisions of this code;



   B.   Any conduct which is in conformity with the terms of any permit
granted pursuant to this code;



   C.   Any conduct in public places that are privately owned where
such conduct is in conformity with permission granted by the owner of such
premises or by the person entitled to the possession of such premises;



   D.   Persons sitting or lying down due to a medical emergency;



   E.   Persons who, as the result of a disability, utilize a
wheelchair or similar device to move about; and



   F.   Persons who place chairs or stools on public sidewalks in
conjunction with outdoor dining or permitted vending and or noncommercial
uses permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.060   Penalty.



   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or thirty (30) days in
the county jail. (Ord. 9803 § 1, 1998: Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



12.52.070   Severability.



   It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are
distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs,
clauses and/or phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of
the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses or phrases of this chapter.
(Ord. 9721 § 1 (part), 1997)



Chapter 12.56
CITY PARKS AS DRUG FREE ZONES



Sections:



12.56.010   Purpose.



12.56.020   Definitions.



12.56.030   Violations for possession or sale.



12.56.040   Penalty.



12.56.050   Exemptions.



12.56.060   Severability.



12.56.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the possession or sale of
illegal drugs in the city parks by designating the parks "drug free zones"
and implementing California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5
(hereinafter 11380.5). (Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.56.020   Definitions.



   "Drug free zone" as used in this chapter means all parks/recreation
areas, including adjacent public parking lots and sidewalks, used by the
public within boundaries of the city limits of the city, and which are owned,
operated and/or maintained by the city.



   "Illegal drugs" as used in this chapter means heroin, cocaine, cocaine
base, methamphetamine, or phencyclidine (PCP). (Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.56.030   Violations for possession or sale.



   Any person possessing and/or selling illegal drugs in a city drug free
zone shall be guilty of violating this chapter and, upon conviction thereof,
shall receive a penalty in addition to that received for the illegal
possession and/or sale unless that person receives an exemption from such
additional penalty. (Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.56.040   Penalty.



   Any violation of this chapter shall impose an additional one-year
prison sentence to the punishment for the conviction of possession or sale of
illegal drugs. (Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.56.050   Exemptions.



   A person may be exempt from this chapter only if one of the following
is applicable:



   A.   If the allegation pursuant to 11380.5 is not included in the
accusatory pleading and admitted by the defendant or found to be true by the
trier of fact;



   B.   If any other additional punishment is imposed pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code Sections 11353.1, 11353.5, 11353.6, 11353.7
or 11380.1; or



   C.   The court strikes the additional punishment because it has
determined there are circumstances in mitigation of the additional punishment
and states on the records its reason for striking the additional punishment.
(Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.56.060   Severability.



   It is the intention of the city council that the subsections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are distinct and
severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses, and/or
phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or
enforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs,
clauses or phrases of this chapter. (Ord. 9905 § 1 (part), 1999)



Chapter 12.60
SKATE PARKS



Sections:



12.60.010   Skate park designated.



12.60.020   Required riding equipment in skate parks.



12.60.030   In-line skating permitted.



12.60.040   Skateboarding and in-line skating a hazardous recreational
activity.



12.60.050   Posting skate park.



12.60.010   Skate park designated.



   The city designates and maintains as a skate park facility (hereinafter
"skate park") that area located at the northwest corner of the city
recreation park located at 345 North Jacob Street for the purpose of riding
skateboards and in-line skates. (Ord. 9919 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.60.020   Required riding equipment in skate parks.



   It is unlawful for a person to ride or use a skateboard, rollerskates
or in-line skates (as such terms are defined in Visalia Municipal Code
Section 10.44.010) in the skate park unless a person is wearing a helmet,
elbow pads and knee pads and where the skate park has a sign posted that
provides that anyone riding a skateboard or in-line skates in the skate park
must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads or be subject to citation. (Ord.
9919 § 1 (part), 1999)



12.60.030   In-line skating permitted.



   In-line skating shall be permitted in the city's skate park. (Ord. 9919
§ 1 (part), 1999)



12.60.040   Skateboarding and in-line skating a hazardous recreational
activity.



   Skateboarding and in-line skating at the city's skate park represents a
hazardous recreational activity for participants and the city will not be
liable for injuries incurred by persons participating in the hazardous
recreational activity in the city's skate park facility. (Ord. 9919 § 1
(part), 1999)



12.60.050   Posting skate park.



   The community services department shall cause a sign or signs to be
posted at the skate park providing reasonable notice of the requirements of
Section 12.60.020 and stating that any person failing to comply will be
guilty of an infraction and subject to citation. (Ord. 9919 § 1 (part), 1999)



Chapter 12.61
DOWNTOWN NEWSRACK DISTRICT



   12.61.010   Establishment of the Downtown Newsrack District.



   12.61.020   Findings.



   12.61.030   Declaration of purpose.



   12.61.040   Definitions.



   12.61.050   Prohibition.



   12.61.060   Newsrack permit required.



   12.61.070   Newsrack permit application; fee.



   12.61.080   Permit denial; appeal.



   12.61.090   Regulations and guidelines.



   12.61.100   Permissible newsracks and related size, model, color,
and space allocation standards.



   12.61.110   Newsrack placement.



   12.61.120   No abandonment; maintenance required.



   12.61.130   Newsrack identification.



   12.61.140   Display of harmful matter.



   12.61.150   Encroachment permit required.



   12.61.160   Abatement of violation of newsrack code.



   12.61.170   Costs.



   12.61.180   Insurance/indemnification.



   12.61.190   Violations.



   12.61.200   Severability.



12.61.010    Establishment of the Downtown Newsrack District.



   This section creates the Downtown Newsrack District (hereinafter
referred to as "district").  The district shall encompass the area
designated as the Downtown Retail Design District, as described in Title 17,
Chapter 17.58 of the Visalia Municipal Code, on the effective date of this
provision, and shall apply to the placement, maintenance and removal of
newsracks within the district. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.020   Findings.



   A.   The city council finds that there is a substantial governmental
interest in ensuring that persons may reasonably use the public's streets,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, and other public property without interference with
such use.



   B.   The city council further finds that the proliferation of news
and advertising publications intended for public distribution and the
corresponding increase in the number of individual newsrack dispensers placed
upon the public rights-of-way has resulted in the following:



   1.   Obstruction of traffic views;



   2.   Damage to light standards, poles, trees, bus shelters, benches,
and sidewalks from improper placement;



   3.   Detracting from the appearance of the public streets and
grounds;



   4.   Blocking access to public facilities;



   5.   Blocking access to properties adjoining public rights-of-way.



   C.   It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate
against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation,
distribution, or dissemination of any newspapers. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.030   Declaration of purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish the following:



   A.   Provide for increased pedestrian and vehicular safety and
convenience;



   B.   Ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with the free
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress
from, any residence, place of business or public facility, or any legally
parked or stopped vehicles;



   C.   Provide reasonable access for the safe and efficient use and
maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes, police or fire call boxes, sidewalk elevators, delivery areas,
loading zones, transit shelters, curb ramps, parking meters, and locations
used for public transportation services;



   D.   Reduce visual blight, clutter and litter problems associated
with poorly maintained, improperly located or abandoned newsracks;



   E.   Protect the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the
city;



   F.   Advance the economic interests of the city's businesses and
residents, including the interests of those involved in the publication or
distribution of newspapers and news periodicals through newsracks; and



   G.   Prevent newsracks from unduly interfering with city sidewalk
and street cleaners as well as other public services.



   H.   Promote the public safety, health and general welfare of
persons in the city in their use of public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2004-14
(part), 2004)



12.61.040   Definitions.



   The following words, phrases and terms as used in this article shall
have the following meanings:



   "Abandon Newsrack".  A newsrack is considered abandoned when it
remains empty, contains outdated issues, or is improperly maintained for more
than ten (10) business days.



   "Business Days" means Monday through Friday, excluding nationally
recognized holidays.



   "Days" means calendar days.



   "Director" means the community development director or his or her
designee.



   "Impound or Impounding" means either seizing, removing and storing at a
designated storage facility or by placing a written notice on the newsrack
that the newsrack is being seized and held in place.



   "Modular Newsrack" means a multi-unit newsrack and associated
components including pedestal, tray and rack.



   "Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the
display, sale or distribution of publications.



   "Public Right-of-Way" means land, which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
dedication, usage orprocess of law is used or reserved for use as a public
roadway in the city and also includes but is not limited to sidewalk.



   "Responsible Party" means any natural person, the parent or legal
guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, trusts, estate,
receiver, cooperative, partnership, corporation, association, business, joint
venture, limited liability company, or any government agency that is not
statutorily exempt.



   "Sidewalk" means the area of the public right of way which is
designated or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.



   "Single-Unit Newsrack Configuration" means a free standing single
newsrack unit of the style and type typically used by newspaper publishers
instead of or as an alternative to multi-unit configurations. (Ord. 2004-14
(part), 2004)



12.61.050   Prohibition.



   A.   No person shall place, install, use or maintain any newsrack on
public property within the district, within the public right-of-way of any
street within the district, or within any public easement adjacent to any
street within the district except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. 



   B.   All newsracks shall comply with federal, state and other local
laws and regulations. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.060   Newsrack permit required.



   A.   A person or persons responsible for installation, use, and/or
maintenance of a newsrack within the district shall apply for and secure a
permit from the director.  No permit shall be issued except in conformance
with this chapter.



   B.   Any responsible party who owns or has placed any newsrack which
is existing at the time this ordinance is adopted, shall have one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date of adoption to apply for and secure a permit
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.  Additionally, as one of the
conditions of any permit that is issued pursuant to this section, the
responsible party will have sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of a
permit to convert or replace existing racks to bring them into compliance
with the standards established in this chapter. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.070   Newsrack permit application; fee.



   A.   Application.



   1.   The newsrack permit application shall state:



   a.   The names and addresses of the responsible party for
installation, use and maintenance of the newsrack;



   b.   The name of the publication;



   c.   The interval of publication (i.e., weekly, daily, etc.);



   d.   A specific description of the proposed location for
installation. 



   2.   The application shall be approved and a permit issued within
ten (10) business days of receipt of the application if the proposal meets
the standards set forth in this chapter.



   B.   Fee.  Each application for a newsrack permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the city
council.  In exchange for its contribution to the beautification of downtown
Visalia, PBID shall be exempt from the permit fee for placement of multi-unit
newsracks.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.080   Permit denial; appeal.



   A.   If an application is disapproved, in whole or in part, the
director shall promptly notify the applicant by First Class U.S. Mail,
explaining fully the reasons for denial of the permit.  The applicant shall
have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date such notice was mailed by
director to request a hearing regarding the denial.  Such request for
hearing shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and shall be filed
with the director.



   B.   The request for hearing must specifically state the reasons it
is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director in
denying the permit application.  The request for hearing shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to facilitate review. 
Upon receipt of therequest for hearing, the director shall place the appeal
on the next city council agenda.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.090    Regulations and guidelines.



   Director is authorized to promulgate regulations which further the
purpose and intent of this chapter.  Such regulations shall be adopted in
accord with city's policy permitting adoption, amendment or repeal of
regulations and shall thereafter be enforceable as though set forth herein. 
Additionally, guidelines for the implementation of this ordinance may be
adopted and amended by resolution of the city council.  (Ord. 2004-14
(part), 2004)



12.61.100   Permissible newsracks and related size, model, color, and
space allocation standards.



   A.   Permissible Newsracks:  Newsracks shall be of a single unit or
modular configuration and shall comply with the standards contained in this
section.



   1.   Modular Configurations.



   a.   The downtown property business and improvement district
("PBID") intends to initially install five (5) multi-unit modular newsracks
in the district following adoption of this chapter.  PBID has agreed to make
these available at no rental cost to single unit users, subject to minimal
guidelines pertaining to maintenance fees and use, and intends to install
additional modular newsracks within the district as funding is available upon
information from the director that a request has been made to place a fourth
single unit in a location where three (3) single units already exist.  The
placement of modular racks owned by PBID is not intended to prohibit the
placement of single racks which are independently owned and operated so long
as they comply with the terms and conditions contained in this newsrack
ordinance.



   b.   When three (3) single unit newsracks are placed in a particular
location and a permit is requested to place a fourth unit in the same
location, the director may, in his or her discretion, issue a temporary
permit not to exceed sixty (60) days.  During that sixty (60) day period,
the director shall contact the executive director of the downtown property
business and improvement district (PBID) to request a modular unit be
installed so that the four single units may be converted to a modular unit. 
If the PBID is unable to install and convert to a modular within the sixty
(60) day temporary period, the director may extend the temporary period for
up to sixty (60) days or relocate the permittee to an acceptable location
within the vicinity of the three single units until such time as a modular
unit is installed by PBID.



   2.   Single-unit configuration. Single-unit newsracks are permitted
in configurations of no more than three (3) single units in one location
subject to the conditions herein. 



   B.   Size/height/configuration requirements:  The following
requirements shall apply to the size, height, configuration and arrangement
of newsracks:



   1.   Height/size:  Newsracks shall not exceed fifty-four (54)
inches in height above adjoining ground, measured from the ground to the top
of the surface of the newsracks, including the pedestal. The newsrack may not
be more than two (2) feet deep and not more than thirty (30) inches wide. The
pedestal shall be perpendicular to the box portion of the newsrack.



   2.   Arrangement/configuration:  Modular news-racks may have up to
two (2) horizontal rows and not more than six (6) compartments per row.



   C.   Accepted newsrack models. 



   1.   Modular-style newsracks of the following types are suggested:



   a.   K-49 -16;



   b.   K – 100;



   c.   KJ50 – KJ55f;



   d.   M -30 –M - 33; or



   e.   A similar, equivalent style as may be approved by the director.



   2.   Individual newsracks must be of the same type allowed for
modular installations or a similar, equivalent style as may be approved by
the director.



   D.   Preferred newsrack color.  Forest green is the preferred color
of the modular style and single style newsracks.  Any other color must be
approved by the director.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.110   Newsrack placement.



   A.   No newsrack shall be installed, used or maintained in any
location upon public property, within any right-of-way, or within public
easements adjacent to streets within the district where such installation,
use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or interferes
with or obstructs the line of sight of pedestrians and drivers, or interferes
with public utility, public transportation, or other government use, or
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian, bicycle, or
vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from  any residence, place of
business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of traffic
signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or light standards and telephone poles.



   B.   A temporary single-unit shall not be chained, bolted or
otherwise attached to any tree, shrub, or other plant nor attached to any
property not owned by the newsrack owner without the consent of the property
owner nor situated upon any landscaped area within the district, and provided
further that the single-unit is of a design which conforms to the standards
promulgated by the director.



   C.   The following standards for placement of newsracks shall apply:



   1.   It is unlawful to place or permit any newsrack to stand in any
place so that any part of the newsrack obstructs the access widths and
clearances for accessible routes established by the Department of Justice,
Office of the Attorney General, 28 Code of Federal Regulations, Appendix A to
part 36, in particular:



   a.   At least sixty (60) inches of clearance width on all public
sidewalks; clearance may be reduced to thirty-six (36) inches, providing a
passing space for wheel chairs is located a reasonable distance away, this
distance not to exceed two hundred (200) feet.



   b.   At least sixty (60) inches of clearance width for landings from
the edge of disabled access ramp.



   2.   It is unlawful to place or maintain any newsrack so that any
part of the newsrack is closer than eighteen (18) inches from any portion of
the right-of-way that is traveled by vehicles or bicycles or used for the
parking of vehicles.



   3.   Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the
wall of a building. The back of newsracks placed near the curb shall be
placed no less than (28) inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from
the edge of the curb. The back of newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a
building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six (6)
inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on a sidewalk
or parkway opposite another newsrack or similar vending device, unless a
clear distance of no less than eighty-four (84) inches is provided between
newsracks or devices.



   4.   No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in
whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or when such site or location is used for public transportation purposes or
other government use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or
impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including handicapped
access, the ingress or egress of any residence or place of business, or other
objects permitted at or near said location.



   5.   It is unlawful to place or maintain any newsrack so that any
part of the newsrack is within sixty (60) inches of traffic signal, traffic
controller, fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency
facility.



   6.   It is unlawful to place or maintain any newsrack so that any
part of the newsrack is within sixty (60) inches of red curbing or curbing
marked for a bus stop zone.



   7.   It is unlawful to place or maintain any newsrack so that any
part of the newsrack is withinsixty (60) inches along a parallel axis from
any portion of the blue curbing of a disabled parking zone.



   8.   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:



   a.   Within fifteen (15) feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk;



   b.   Within ten (10) feet of any driveway;



   c.   Unless the newsrack is less than thirty-six (36) inches in
height in which case the setback shall be sixty (60) inches.



   9.   It is unlawful to attach any newsrack in the public
right-of-way by any means whatsoever to any city planter, light pole, sign,
traffic signal, meter pole, or other item.



   10.   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained in
such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any
commercial window display.



   11.   Where modular newsrack systems have been installed in approved
locations, placement of single newsracks within one hundred (100) feet of
such modular newsracks is prohibited.  Modular newsracks may be placed next
to each other, providing that all public safety and public access
requirements of this chapter are met and that a clearance of sixty (60)
inches is provided between them.



   12.   Multi-unit configurations shall be permanently affixed to the
ground in a manner approved by the director.  Newsracks may not be affixed
to the ground without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the
community development department of city. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.120   No Abandonment; maintenance required; cure.



   A.   No Abandonment.  Newsracks shall not be abandoned. 



   B.   Maintenance Required.  Each newsrack within the district shall
be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times.
Newsracks that have been damaged shall be timely replaced or repaired.  For
example, without limitations, each newsrack shall be free of chipped, faded,
peeling or cracked paint, dirt and grease, rust and corrosion, and shall have
no broken structural parts or cracked plastic or glass parts.  Failure to
cause the repair, replacement and/or maintenance of newsracks may result in
the abatement thereof pursuant to Section 12.61.160.



   C.   Cure. Any removal notice issued on the basis of abandonment
shall be withdrawn on a showing that the newsrack is not abandoned but is
empty or contains outdated issues as a result of a labor strike or a
temporary or extraordinary interruption or disruption of publication by the
newspaper sold or dispensed from that newsrack.  Additionally, any removal
notice issued on the basis of failure to maintain shall be withdrawn upon a
showing that the maintenance issue has been cured to the satisfaction of the
director or his or her designee. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.130   Newsrack identification.



   A.   Every responsible party maintaining a newsrack in the district
under the terms of this chapter shall have his or her name, address and
telephone number affixed to it in a place where such information will be
readily visible, in letters that will fit in an area no less than two (2)
inches in height and three (3) inches in width and not to exceed three (3)
inches in height and five (5) inches in width.



   B.   Newsracks may contain identification graphics on the door side
of the newsrack only.  This display shall contain only the name of the
publication in letters one and one-half (1½) inches in size or less placed
upon a standard placard not to exceed eleven (11) inches in height and
sixteen (16) inches in width.  The placard shall promote only the
publication dispensed from the newsrack compartment.  Any empty compartments
within a newsrack shall have a black, eleven (11) by sixteen (16) inch
blinder card in the window portion of the compartment and shall contain no
other graphics or advertising. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.140   Display of harmful matter.



   Section 313.1 of the California Penal Code shall govern the display,
offer for sale, or selling of harmful matter as such is defined in California
Penal Code section 313(a), to minors in vending machines, in a manner
unattended by an adult at the time of sale, or located in an upon public
places. (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.150   Encroachment permit required.



   Prior to affixing any newsrack to the ground in the public right of way
an encroachment permit must be obtained from city in accord with Visalia
Municipal Code Chapter 12.12.  The insurance requirement, however, shall be
reduced to comply with the insurance required by Section 12.61.180 of this
chapter.  In exchange for its contribution to the beautification of downtown
Visalia, PBID shall be exempt from encroachment permit fees for placement of
multi-unit newsracks.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.160   Abatement of violation of newsrack code.



   A.   Removal sanctioned.  The director may cause a newsrack or a
modular newsrack installed or maintained in the district in violation of this
chapter to be removed and impounded if it is impractical to remedy the
violation otherwise.  An impounded newsrack shall be retained by the city
and may be recovered by the responsible party within thirty (30) days from
the date of impoundment upon payment of the costs incurred by the city for
maintenance, repairs, notification, seizure, removal, and storage.



   B.   Notification Prior to Removal.  Before any newsrack or modular
newsrack within the district is impounded, the person responsible for its
installation and maintenance shall be notified and given five (5) calendar
days to either remedy the violation, or request a hearing before the director
to contest the impoundment pursuant to subsection (C) of this section. 
Notice shall be deemed given when in writing and mailed by First Class U.S.
Mail to the address stated on the newsrack permit application or upon the
newsrack, and an additional notice tag shall be affixed to the newsrack on
the date of notice.  The latter notice shall be sufficient when no
identification is shown on the newsrack and no permit has been issued. 



   C.   Hearing Upon Request.  A person notified pursuant to
subsection (B) of this section of the city's intent to remove a newsrack may
request a hearing before the director by making a written request within five
(5) calendar days of notification to the director.



   D.   When Notification Not Required.  Not withstanding subsections
(B) and (C) of this section, prior notice of seizure is not required where
the newsrack or modular newsrack poses an immediate danger to pedestrians or
vehicles, provided notice of the seizure and an opportunity to contest is
given to the person responsible for the impounded newsrack within five (5)
calendar days after the seizure.



   E.   Removal of abandoned newsracks.  The director may cause the
removal, impoundment, and disposal of an abandoned newsrack as defined in
Section 12.61.040 if it is not claimed by the responsible party within thirty
(30) calendar days of seizure.



   F.   Revocation of Permit.  A permit for placement of a newsrack or
a modular newsrack within the district may be revoked by the director for
failure to adequately secure, identify, maintain, refurbish, paint, remove a
newsrack or modular newsrack as required by this chapter if any provision of
this chapter is violated.  Notice of revocation and an opportunity to
contest the determination shall be provided pursuant to subsections (B), (C)
and (D) of this section.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.170   Costs.



   The costs of installation, maintenance, replacement, removal, and
relocation of newsracks shall be at the sole expense of the permitee or
responsible party.  Upon removal of any newsrack,the permitee or responsible
party shall, at his or her sole expense, cause the public right-of-way to be
repaired to a condition in conformity to the surrounding area.  Upon failure
of the permitee or responsible party to make such repairs, the work may be
done by the city and charged to the permitee or responsible party.  (Ord.
2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.180   Insurance/indemnification.



   A.   Insurance. Any person installing or maintaining a newsrack in
the right-of-way of the district shall furnish to the director a certificate
of insurance showing that such person has then in force a policy or policies
of public liability insurance and property damage insurance, naming the city
and its officers and employees as additional insureds and in an amount not
less than one-hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) minimum liability combined
single limit (bodily injury and property damage) per person and per
occurrence.



   B.   Indemnification. Every person operating or maintaining a
newsrack upon or within the public property, right-of-way or public easements
within the district, shall agree prior to the granting of a permit, to
indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any
loss, liability, damage, or costs sustained by any person or property,
arising from the installation, operation or use of such newsrack.  (Ord.
2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.190   Violations.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, unless reduced to an infraction in the discretion of
the city attorney or his or her designee, and punishable in accord with
Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 1.12.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



12.61.200   Severability.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not impair any of the
remaining provisions.  (Ord. 2004-14 (part), 2004)



Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES



Chapters:



13.04   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT



13.08   SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM



13.12   WATER METERS



13.16   WATER WELLS



13.20   WATER CONSERVATION



13.24   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS



Chapter 13.04
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT



Sections:



13.04.010   Description.



13.04.020   Administration.



13.04.030   Duties of city manager.



13.04.040   Airport use.



13.04.050   Authority.



13.04.060   Rules and regulations.



13.04.070   Definition.



13.04.010   Description.



   The landed areas and appurtenances hereinafter described, title to
which is now vested in the city, are declared to be and to constitute,
integrally, a public park, airport and aviation field, and shall be known as
the "Visalia Municipal Airport." Said areas are situated within the county of
Tulare, state of California, and are bounded and described as follows:



   That portion of Section 32 and 33 of Township 18 South, Range 24 East
and also a portion of Sections 4 and 5 of Township 19 South, Range 24 East,
M.D.B.&M. in the City of Visalia, County of Tulare, State of California
described as follows:



   Beginning at a point on the East line of said Section 32, 169.12 feet
South of Northeast corner of said section, said point being on the South
right-of-way line of State Highway 198 (Date 1978); thence along said South
right-of-way line of said State Highway 198 and the East right-of-way line of
State Highway 99 (Date 1978), S 89 37'37" W, 370.02 feet; thence
Southwesterly along the arc of a curve concave to the Southeast having a
radius of 2927.00 feet said radial bearing S 0 22'23" E, to the center of
said curve through a central angle of 3 56' 59", a distance 201.77 feet;
thence continuing Southwesterly along the arc of a curve concave to the
Southeast having a radius of 1727.00 feet, said radial bearing S 4 19'22" E,
to the center of said curve, through a central angle of 13 09'07", a distance
of 396.42 feet; thence S 66 05'54" W, 319.55 feet; thence S 6 06'19"W, 497.32
feet; thence Southwesterly along the arc of a curve concave to the Northwest
having a radius of 365.00 feet, said radial bearing N 89 26'00"W, to the
center of said curve, through a central angle of 32 50'58", a distance of
209.27 feet; thence N 56 35'02"W, 80.00 feet; thence Northeasterly along the
arc of a curve concave to the Northwest having a radius of 285.00 feet, said
radial bearing N 56 35'02"W, to the center of said curve, through a central
angle of 32 50'58", a distance of 209.27 feet; thence N 56 35'02"W, 80.00
feet; thence Northeasterly along the arc of a curve concave to the Northwest
having a radius of 285.00 feet, said radial bearing N 56 35'02"W, to the
center of said curve, through a central angle of 32 50'58", a distance of
163.40 feet; thence N 4 25'05"W, 494.87 feet; thence N 71 56'31"W, 559.14
feet; thence Northwesterly along the arc of a curve concave to the Southwest
having a radius of 1927.00 feet, said radial bearing S 16 08'49"W, to the
center of said curve, through a central angle of 11 14'15", a distance of
377.94 feet; thence N 85 05'26" W, 385.70 feet; thence N 89 57'34"W, 958.96
feet; thence S 87 39'49"W, 380.87 feet; thence S 83 53'43"W,  544.64 feet;
thence S 67 23'57"W, 138.78 feet; thence Southeasterly along the arc of a
curve concave to the Southeast having a radius 558.00 feet, said radial
bearing S 22 36'03"E, to the center of said curve, through a central angle of
104 29'18", a distance of 1017.61 feet; thence S 37 05'21" E, 504.77 feet;
thence S 34 13'37" E, 200.25 feet; thence S 37 05'21"E, 500.00 feet; thence S
39 22'47"E, 800.64 feet; thence S 34 38'18"E, 1110.87 feet; thence S 30
57'55"E, 320.28 feet; thence Southeasterly along the arc of a curve concave
to the Southwest having a radius of 5124.00 feet, said radial bearing S 59
02'05"W, to the center of said curve, through a central angle of 1 33'15", a
distance of 138.99 feet; thence departing from said East right-of-way line of
said State Highway 99, S 89 58'00"E, 68.78 feet to the East right-of-way line
of the frontage road running along the East side of said State Highway 99
(50'wide); thence along the East right-of-way of said frontage road,
Southwesterly along the arc of a curve concave to the Northwest having a
radius of 5,184.00 feet, said radial bearing S 60 57'45"W, to the center of
said curve, through a central angle of 15 02'36" a distance of 1361.09 feet;
thence S 13 59'39"E, along said East right-of-way of said frontage road to
the intersection with the South line of the North 651.50 feet of said Section
5; thence Easterly along the South line of said Section 5; thence Easterly
along the South line of said North 651.50 feet of said Section 5 to a point
on a line 750.00 feet Southwesterly and parallel with the prolongation of the
center line of the Visalia Municipal Airport Main runway; thence
Southeasterly 1018.30 feet, along said line being parallel with said runway,
to a point on the East line of the West half of the West half of the
Northwest quarter of said Section 4; thence Southerly along said East line
1284.95 feet to a point on the South line of said Northwest quarter of said
Section 4, said point being the Southeast corner of the West half, of the
West half of the West half of the Northwest quarter, of said Section 4;
thence Easterly along the South line of said Northwest Quarter of said
Section 4, to the Southeast corner of the West half of the East half of said
Northwest quarter of said Section 4; thence Northerly to the Northeast corner
of said West half of the East half of said Northwest quarter of said Section
4; thence Westerly to the Northwest corner of the East half, of said
Northwest quarter, of said Section 4; thence Northerly along East line of the
West half of the Southwest quarter of said Section 33 to a point 330.00 feet
South of the Northeast corner of said West half of said Southwest quarter of
said Section 33; thence Westerly parallel with the East line of the West half
of said Southwest quarter of said Section 33, 330.00 feet; thence Easterly
415.42 feet to a point 20.00 feet West of the Northeast corner of said West
half of said Southwest quarter of said Section 33, said point being on the
West right-of-way line of Road 86 (40' wide); thence Northerly along said
right-of-way of  said Road 86 to the intersection with said South
right-of-way of said State Highway 198; thence Westerly along said South
right-of-way of said State Highway 198 to the point of beginning.



   Excepting therefrom Parcel No. 1 of Parcel Map No. 1098 as recorded in
Book 11 of Parcel Maps, Page 99, Tulare County Records, also excepting
Airport Drive as shown on said Parcel Map No. 1098.



(Prior code § 2400)



13.04.020   Administration.



   The municipal powers and jurisdiction and the powers and administrative
functions of the several departments of government of the city are extended
and made applicable to Visalia Municipal Airport and every part thereof. All
laws and ordinances of the city; all resolutions, orders, rules and
regulations of the council of said city, and all orders, rules and
regulations of any and all officers, boards and commissions of said city so
far as the same shall be adaptable, shall be applicable to Visalia Municipal
Airport. (Prior code § 2401)



13.04.030   Duties of city manager.



   The city manager shall have charge of and shall be chargeable with the
general administration of the Visalia Municipal Airport. (Prior code § 2402)



13.04.040   Airport use.



   The Visalia Municipal Airport is and shall be conducted and managed as
a terminal facility of the city for the accommodation of aircraft and for the
promotion of aviation and air commerce. (Prior code § 2403)



13.04.050   Authority.



   No person shall use the airport as the base or terminal for the
carrying on of commercial aviation, or the carrying of passengers, freight,
or express or for student flying, communications, or transportation, or other
commercial purpose, without first securing the permission of the city manager
and paying the fees and charges prescribed for such privileges, or for the
use of the airport or its facilities, or for services rendered.



   A.   No person shall use the airport property for any commercial
enterprise or solicit business for any commercial enterprise on the airport
property without having first obtained any required licenses, permits or
contracts from the city.



   B.   No person shall use the airport property as a site for a car
rental business, or for the solicitation of car rental business unless that
person has entered into a contract with the city allowing such use.  (Prior
code § 2404)



13.04.060   Rules and regulations.



   In addition to the foregoing, council of the city shall by resolution
adopt from time to time such field rules or administrative regulations as may
be required to safeguard and regulate the use of the Visalia Municipal
Airport to protect the public interest therein. It is unlawful for any person
in or about the said airport to violate any such field rules or
administrative regulations, and any persons so violating such rules or
regulations or any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 1.12.010. (Prior code § 2412)



13.04.070   Definition.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Person" means and includes any person, firm, corporation or
association, plural and singular. (Prior code § 2413)



Chapter 13.08
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM



Sections:



Article 1. General Provisions



13.08.010   Purpose and policy.



13.08.020   Rules and regulations.



13.08.030   Short title.



Article 2. Definitions



13.08.040   Definitions.



Article 3. Use of Public Sewers Required



13.08.050   Disposal of wastes.



13.08.060   Treatment of wastes required.



13.08.070   Unlawful disposal.



13.08.080   Occupancy prohibited.



13.08.090   Private sewerage disposal systems--Continuation of use.



13.08.100   Private sewerage disposal systems--Restrictions and
exceptions, continuation of use.



Article 4. Private Sewerage Disposal Construction



13.08.110   Prohibition of new systems or connections.



13.08.120   Sewer not available.



13.08.125   City's option to extend sewer.



13.08.130   Permit required.



13.08.140   Inspection required.



13.08.150   Design requirements.



13.08.160   Cost of maintenance by owner.



13.08.170   Additional requirements.



Article 5. Sewer Extensions, Financing and Costs Repayment



13.08.180   Private financing.



13.08.190   Public financing.



13.08.200   Existing sewer cost repayment.



13.08.205   Payment for sewer connections prior to July 1, 2010.



Article 6. Side Sewers and Connections



13.08.210   Permit required.



13.08.220   Installation and/or connection of lateral sewers by city.



13.08.230   Design considerations.



13.08.240   Separate sewers.



13.08.250   Sewer too low.



13.08.260   Connection to public sewer.



13.08.270   Safety precautions.



13.08.280   Completion of work.



13.08.290   Maintenance of side sewers.



Article 7. Public Sewer Construction



13.08.300   Permit required.



13.08.310   Plans, profiles and specifications required.



13.08.320   Subdivision.



13.08.330   Easements or rights-of-way.



13.08.340   Persons authorized to perform work.



13.08.350   Grade stakes.



13.08.360   Compliance with local regulations.



13.08.370   Protection of excavation.



13.08.380   Design and construction standards.



13.08.390   Bond--Public sewer construction.



13.08.400   All work to be inspected.



13.08.410   Notification.



13.08.420   Correct notices.



13.08.430   All costs paid by owner.



13.08.440   Contract with outside industrial and commercial users.



13.08.450   Street excavation permit.



13.08.460   Liability.



13.08.470   Time limit on permits.



Article 8. Regulation of Wastewater Discharges



13.08.480   Prohibitions on discharges.



13.08.490   Prohibitions on storm drainage and ground water.



13.08.500   Prohibition on unpolluted water.



13.08.510   Limitations on radioactive wastes.



13.08.520   Limitations on the use of garbage grinders.



13.08.530   Limitations on point of discharge.



13.08.540   Holding tank waste and septic tank waste.



13.08.550   Limitations on wastewater strength.



13.08.560   Limitations on infectious waste.



13.08.570   Traps required.



13.08.580   Construction of traps.



13.08.590   Maintenance of traps.



13.08.600   Pretreatment of wastes.



13.08.610   Maintenance of pretreatment facilities.



13.08.620   Monitoring facilities.



13.08.630   Inspection and sampling.



13.08.640   Notification of violation.



13.08.650   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.



13.08.655   Dental amalgam wastes.



13.08.660   Special agreements--Private facilities.



13.08.670   Special agreement--Public facilities.



13.08.680   Federal requirements limitations.



13.08.690   Regional water quality control board requirement limitations.



13.08.700   Other governmental agency jurisdictions.



Article 9. Permits and Fees



13.08.710   Permit required.



13.08.720   Application for permit.



13.08.730   Compliance with permit.



13.08.740   Agreement.



13.08.750   Basic connection charge.



13.08.755   Timing of fee payment.



13.08.760   Treatment connection charge.



13.08.770   Timing of fee payment.



13.08.780   Special connection charges.



13.08.790   Additional connection charges.



13.08.800   Classes of permits.



13.08.810   Permits and inspection charges.



13.08.815   Analytical requirements.



13.08.816   Sample collection.



13.08.820   Recordkeeping requirements.



Article 9A. Reporting Requirements



13.08.824   Baseline monitoring reports.



13.08.825   Compliance schedule progress reports.



13.08.826   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.



13.08.827   Periodic compliance reports.



Article 10. Sewer Service Charges



13.08.830   Purpose and basis.



13.08.840   Setting of rates.



13.08.850   Discharge classification.



13.08.860   Flow measurement.



13.08.870   Collection.



13.08.880   Late charges.



13.08.890   Application.



Article 11. Administration and Enforcement



13.08.900   Violation unlawful.



13.08.910   Inspection and sampling.



13.08.920   Notice and correction.



13.08.925   Consent orders.



13.08.930   Compliance orders.



13.08.935   Public nuisance.



13.08.940   Disconnection.



13.08.950   Public nuisance--Abatement.



13.08.960   Means of enforcement only.



13.08.970   Accidental discharge/slug control plan.



13.08.980   Issuance of cease and desist orders.



13.08.990   Show cause hearing.



13.08.995   Submission of time schedule.



13.08.1000   Appeals.



13.08.1010   City council appeal.



13.08.1020   Injunction.



13.08.1030   Liability.



13.08.1035   Administrative fines.



13.08.1040   Civil penalties.



13.08.1050   Criminal penalties for certain violations.



13.08.1060   Penalties for significant noncompliance.



13.08.1070   Falsifying of information.



13.08.1075   Emergency suspensions.



13.08.1080   Termination of service.



Article 12. Special Regulations



13.08.1090   Protection from damage.



13.08.1100   Confidential information.



13.08.1110   Special agreements.



Article 1. General Provisions



13.08.010   Purpose and policy.



   These wastewater discharge regulations set uniform requirements for
discharges of domestic and industrial waste and drainage water into the city
sewerage system to enable the city to comply with the administrative
provisions of the Clean Water Grant Regulations, water quality requirements
set by the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the applicable effluent
limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment
effluent standards, and any other discharge criteria which are required or
authorized by state and federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit
by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into those
systems. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4100)



13.08.020   Rules and regulations.



   The following rules and regulations concerning sewer construction,
disposal of sewage and drainage of buildings, and connection to and use of
the sewerage system of the city are adopted, and all work in respect thereto
shall be performed as herein required and not otherwise. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4101)



13.08.030   Short title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Wastewater Ordinance of the City of
Visalia." (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4103)



Article 2. Definitions



13.08.040   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Acceptable private sewerage disposal system" means adequate
earth-covered underground septic tanks, cesspools, leach lines and wells,
and/or combinations thereof; not including privies, privy vaults, open
cesspools, or similar devices.



   "Act" or "the act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.



   "Applicant" means the person making application for a permit for a
sewer or plumbing installation, who shall be the owner of premises to be
served by the sewer or plumbing installation  for which a permit or waiver
is requested, or his authorized agent.



   "Authorized representative" means:



   1.   If the discharger is a corporation, an authorized
representative shall mean:



   a.   President of the corporation in charge of a principal business
function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation;



   b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operational facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million
dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;



   2.   If the discharger is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an
authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor,
respectively;



   3.   If the discharger is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the governmental facility, or his/her designee;



   4.   The individuals described in this section may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the
authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization has been submitted to the city.



   "Available sewer" means a community sewer within two hundred (200) feet
of the property line of any premises.



   "Beneficial uses" means uses of the waters of the state that may be
protected against quality degradation including, but not necessarily limited
to, domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power
generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, and the preservation and
enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and
other uses, both tangible or intangible as specified by federal and state law.



   "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees C, expressed in milligrams per
liter.



   "Building" means a structure used for any purpose which contains a
fixture, plumbing system or sanitary facility of any type.



   "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side
sewer.



   "Categorical pretreatment standards" means National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard(s). Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of
the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial discharger.



   "Cesspool" means an excavation in the ground which receives the
discharge of a drainage system, or part thereof, so designed and constructed
as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein, but
permitting the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides.



   "Chlorine demand" means the amount of chlorine required to produce a
free chlorine residual of 0.1 mg/l after a contact time of fifteen (15)
minutes as measured by the Iodometric Method on a sample at a temperature of
twenty (20) degrees C in accordance with the procedures in standard methods.



   "City" means the city of Visalia, California.



   "City council" means the city council of the city.



   "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city or the engineer's
authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   "City manager" means the city manager of the city or the manager's
authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   "Clean Water Grant Program Regulations" means the latest regulations of
the California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Chapter 3, Subchapter 7, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.



   "Commercial discharger" means any discharger not specifically defined
as a residential, industrial, or institutional discharger.



   "Commercial garbage grinder" means a mechanical unit for pulverizing
solid wastes produced by commercial dischargers.



   "Community sewer" means a sewer owned and operated by the city or other
public agency tributary to a treatment facility operated by the city.



   "Compatible pollutant" means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, settleable solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus other
pollutants that the city's treatment facilities are designed to accept and/or
remove. Compatible pollutants are noncompatible when discharged in quantities
that have an adverse effect on the city's system or NPDES permit compliance.



   "Connection" means the physical attachment of a building, premises,
fixture, plumbing system, trap, pretreatment facility, or any other facility
discharging wastewater to a community sewer.



   "Connection fee" means a one time charge for new connections to the
collection system. The fee is normally paid at the time of issuance of a
building permit.



   "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the
state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health
through poisoning or through the spread of disease.  Contamination shall
include any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater,
whether or not waters of the state are affected.



   "Contractor" means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or
association duly licensed by the state of California to perform the type of
work to be done under a permit.



   "County" means the county of Tulare, California.



   "Developed lot" means a parcel of ground of record, of less than five
acres, created by subdivision or lot split, and occupied by a residential,
commercial, institutional or industrial structure.



   "Director" means the director(s) of the department(s) of the city or
such other person as may be designated by the director to perform the
services or make the determinations permitted or required in this chapter to
be made by the director.



   “Discharger” means any person who discharges or causes the
discharge of wastewater to a community sewer system or directly to the POTW.
Discharger shall mean the same as user.



   "Dissolved solids" means the solid matter in solution in wastewater, as
determined by evaporation of a sample from which all suspended matter has
been removed by filtration, in accordance with the procedures in standard
methods.



   "Domestic sewage" means the waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary
living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal,
without special treatment, into the community sewer.



   "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion of a building arranged,
intended or designed to be occupied by not more than one family and having
facilities for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitary purposes.



   "Effluent" means wastewater or other liquid, partially or completely
treated, or in its natural state, or any portion thereof flowing out of a
reservoir, basin, treatment plant or industrial treatment plant.



   "Fixture" means lavatory, tub, shower, water closet, garbage disposal
or other facility connected by a drain to the sewer.



   "Fixture unit" means the flow producing effluent of different fixtures
on the collection system as defined by the most recent edition adopted by the
city of the Uniform Plumbing Code, published by the International Association
of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, a nonprofit organization.



   "Garbage" means putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable
refuse or any part thereof resulting from the preparation, storage, handling,
processing or consumption of food.



   "Grease" means any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent and as determined by
the appropriate methods and procedures approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency, and identified in 40 CFR Part 136. Grease includes fats
and oils.



   "Grease interceptor" means a pretreatment device designed and installed
to separate fats, oils and grease from wastewater.



   “Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such as
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks or other such tanks
intended to temporarily contain septage wastes.



   "Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined in this section.



   "Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the
city's wastewater collection or treatment systems from any nondomestic source
regulated under the provisions of the Act, Section 307, as amended, or as
otherwise identified by the city.



   “Industrial user” means a source of indirect discharge. 



   "Industrial waste" means the waterborne waste and wastewater from any
producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature,
including institutional and commercial operations, where water is used for
laundering, vehicle cleaning, or the removal of significant quantities of
wastes of nonhuman origin, as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   "Industrial waste inspector" means the representative of the city
specifically authorized as industrial waste inspector.



   "Institutional discharger" means any public or nonprofit school,
church, hospital, lodge, club, fire department, library, memorial building or
other public or nonprofit activity which discharges only sanitary sewage to
city's system.



   “Interference” means the inhibition or disruption of the sewer
system, treatment process or operations of the wastewater treatment plant
which contributes to the violation of city's NPDES permit caused by a
discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharge or discharges from
other sources. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
by the city in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, or more stringent state
criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal
or use employed by the city.



   "Mass emission rate" means the weight of material discharged to the
sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the
mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or
combination of constituents.



   "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of surface or groundwater.



   "New source" means:



   1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation  from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



   a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



   b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or



   c.   The production or wastewater generating process of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, will be considered.



   2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of subsections (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this definition, but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.



   3.   Construction of a new source is determined to have commenced if
the owner or operator has:



   a.   Begun, or caused to being as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:



   i.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or



   ii.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or



   b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase, or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this definition.



   "Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health or is offensive
to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to
interfere with a person's comfort or enjoyment of life or property, or which
affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any
considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or
damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.



   "Outside sewer" means a sanitary sewer, beyond the limits of the city,
not subject to control or jurisdiction of the city.



   “POTW (Publicly Operated Treatment Works)” means the city sewage
treatment facilities, known also as the sewage treatment plant, the water
conservation plant, or the wastewater treatment plant.



   “Pass through” means the discharge of pollutants through the city's
treatment system into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit,
including an increase in magnitude or duration of the violation.



   "Peak flow rate" means the annually determined highest flow rate of
sewage or industrial waste discharged to a public sewer over a period of at
least fifteen (15) minutes at any time during the preceding twelve (12) month
period.



   "Permit" means any written authorization to install or construct sewers
or to discharge to the city sewerage system required pursuant to this or any
other regulation of the city.



   "Person" means any individual, firm, company, partnership, association,
organization, the United States of America, the state of California, a
political subdivision, governmental agency or other public or municipal
corporation.



   "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion activity
in moles per liter of solution as determined by standard methods and
procedures approved by the Environmental Protection Agency, and identified in
40 CFR Part 136.



   "Plumbing fixtures" means receptacles that receive liquid, water, or
wastewater and discharge them into a drainage system.



   "Plumbing system" means the distributing pipes for the water supply;
the fixtures and fixture traps; the soil, waste and vent pipes; the building
drain and building sewer, and the stormwater drainage pipes; with their
devices, appurtenances, and connections within and adjacent to the building.



   "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the receiving waters
of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for
beneficial use or for facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution
may include, but not be limited to, contamination.



   "Premises" means any lot, place or parcel of land or any building,
structure, mobile home, or any part of a building, structure, or mobile home
on any lot, place or parcel of land.



   1.   "Residential premises" means all premises used exclusively for
residential purposes except for boarding houses, dormitories, motels, hotels,
hospitals, convalescent homes, or other premises used primarily as a
temporary place of residence, and discharging only sanitary sewage.



   2.   "Nonresidential premises" means all premises other than
residential premises.



   "Pretreatment facility" means any works or device for the treatment or
flow limitation of sewage or industrial waste, prior to discharge into a
public sewer.



   “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
imposed on an industrial user.



   "Pretreatment standard" means any prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and/or local limitations on wastewater
discharge characteristics.



   "Private sewer," "building sewer" or "house service sewer" means that
part of the building sewer beginning at the junction thereof with the
building plumbing or drainage system and terminating at the property line or
at the easement line.



   "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.



   "Public sewer" ("community sewer") means a sewer directly controlled by
the city.



   "Radioactive material" means material containing chemical elements that
spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays
or energy forms.



   "Receiving water quality requirements" means requirements for the
city's treatment plant effluent and/or the waters to which such effluent is
discharged, established by law or by state or federal regulatory agencies,
for the protection of receiving water quality.



   "Residential discharger" means any discharger whose premises are used
solely for residential purposes.



   "Sanitary sewage" means any and all waste substances, liquids or solids
associated with human habitation, excluding storm, surface and groundwaters,
and industrial wastes.



   "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries only sanitary or sanitary
and industrial wastewaters and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are
not intentionally admitted.



   "Septage receiving station" means a facility at the Visalia Water
Conservation Plant for receipt of septic and holding tank wastes.



   “Septage waste” means the liquid and semi- solid material removed
from septic tanks or other holding tanks used to temporarily contain domestic
sewage.



   “Septage waste hauler” means an entity permitted to transport
septage waste from various locations to the wastewater treatment facility.



   "Septic tank" means a watertight receptacle which receives the
discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, designed and constructed so
as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and
allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a
system of open joint piping or a seepage pit meeting the requirements of the
Uniform Plumbing Code.



   "Sewage" ("wastewater") means a combination of the water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be
present.



   "Sewerage system" means all facilities for collecting, pumping,
storing, treating and disposing of sewage.



   "Sewage treatment plant" means the city sewage treatment facilities
known also as the water conservation plant or the wastewater treatment plant.



   "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for holding and carrying sewage,
including manholes and all other appurtenance facilities which are necessary
or convenient to the holding or carrying of sewage.



   1.   "House sewer" (building sewer) means that portion of the side
sewer from the lateral sewer to its connection to the building drain.



   2.   "Interceptor sewer" means a public sewer in a public
right-of-way receiving the discharges from main or trunk sewers and conveying
said sewage to the sewage treatment plant.



   3.   "Lateral sewer" means that portion of the side sewer which is
within the public right-of-way.



   4.   "Main sewer" means a publicly owned sewer in a public
right-of-way to which side sewer connections from private properties are or
may be connected for the disposal of domestic or industrial waste.



   5.   "Side sewer" means the privately owned and maintained sewer
which connects the plumbing system of the building to the main sewer. The
side sewer begins at the point of connection to the main sewer, including the
wye, and terminates at the point of connection to the building drain two feet
outside the foundation line or building wall. Side sewer includes the lateral
sewer and the house sewer.



   6.   "Trunk sewer" means a public sewer in a public right-of-way
receiving the discharge from one or more main sewers and conveying said
sewage to another trunk sewer or to an interceptor sewer.



   "Sewer service charge" means a charge established to obtain equitable
payment from all dischargers for the cost of construction, operation and
maintenance of the sewerage facilities.



   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.



   “Significant industrial user” means any industrial user which:



   1.   May be subject to categorical pretreatment standards;



   2.   Discharges an average twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);



   3.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
treatment plant; or



   4.   Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
operation of the system or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.



   "Significant noncompliance" occurs when one or more of the following
criteria occur:



   1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which sixty-six  percent (66%) or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6)-month period exceed
(by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I);



   2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6)-month period equal or
exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) multiplied by
the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);



   3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public);



   4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph 40 CFR
403.8 (f)(I)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   5.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism
or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



   6.   Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due
date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90)-day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;



   7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;



   8.   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.



   "Slug" means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than three times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows.



   "Solid wastes" means the nonliquid carried wastes normally considered
to be suitable for disposal with refuse at sanitary landfill refuse disposal
sites.



   "Street" means a public highway, road, street, avenue, alley way,
public place, easement or right-of-way for vehicle or pedestrian use.



   "Storm drain" ("storm sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.



   "Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.



   "Trade secret" means any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool,
mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of
information which is not patented, which is known only to certain individuals
within a commercial concern who are using it to fabricate, produce or
compound an article of trade or a service having commercial value, and which
gives its user an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors
who do not know or use it.



   "Trap" means any facility designed, constructed and operated for the
purpose of removing and retaining dangerous, deleterious or prohibited
constituents from wastewater by differential gravity separation before
discharge to the public sewer.



   "Unpolluted water" means water to which no constituent has been added,
either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water
unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm
or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.



   "Unsanitary" means contrary to those principles which are known to
promote and safeguard health.



   “User” means any person who discharges or causes the discharge of
wastewater to a community sewer system or directly to the POTW. User shall
mean the same as discharger.



   "User classification" means a classification of users based on the 1987
edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by
the Federal Executive Office of Management and Budget.



   "Waste" means and includes sewage and any and all other waste
substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human
habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing,
manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such
waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes
of, disposal.



   "Wastewater constituents and characteristics" means the individual
chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including
volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define,
classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of
wastewater.



   "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



   "Water softener" means a unit using the ion exchange process and
requiring sodium chloride to regenerate the exchange bed designed to remove
hardness (magnesium and/or calcium ions) from a water supply.



   "Waters of the state" means any water, surface or underground,
including saline waters, within the boundaries of the state. (Ord. 2011-08 §
2, 2011: Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2003-20 (part), 2003; Ord.
2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000: prior code §§ 4104--4199)



Article 3. Use of Public Sewers Required



13.08.050   Disposal of wastes.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within
the city, or in an area under jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4200)



13.08.060   Treatment of wastes required.



   It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse any
sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4201)



13.08.070   Unlawful disposal.



   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4202)



13.08.080   Occupancy prohibited.



   No building, industrial facility or other structure shall be occupied
until the owner of the premises has complied with this chapter. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4203)



13.08.090   Private sewerage disposal systems--Continuation of use.



   Whether or not public sewers exist or are installed in public streets
or rights-of-way abutting annexed and developed properties, existing
acceptable private sewerage disposal systems may continue to be maintained
and used by the property owners for service of the dwellings and structures
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter only, except as hereinafter
restricted or excepted. Acceptable private sewerage disposal systems include
adequate earth-covered underground septic tanks, cesspools, leach lines and
wells, and/or combinations thereof.  Determination of the acceptability of a
private system shall be the responsibility of the city. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4204)



13.08.100   Private sewerage disposal systems--Restrictions and
exceptions, continuation of use.



   A.   Dwellings or structures connected to or utilizing privies,
privy vaults, open cesspools, or similar unacceptable private sewerage
disposal systems shall, immediately upon annexation to the city, be connected
to an available public sewerage system.



   B.   Whenever it is determined that an existing adequate private
sewerage disposal system is in need of major repairs to ensure continuation
of the proper operation of that system, the dwelling or structure served must
be connected to an available public sewerage system within sixty (60) days.
Major repairs does not include such items as septic tank pumping and usual
maintenance functions.



   C.   Whenever state or county health authorities, or the city,
declare an individual private disposal system, or the systems in the area, to
be a health hazard or to be creating a public nuisance, the use of such
system, or systems, shall be discontinued within the period of time specified
by the city and connection(s) to public sewer made forthwith.



   D.   Whenever an area, under the authority of the special assessment
acts of the state of California is assessed for sewer construction, all
benefitted property owners may be required by the city council to connect to
the public sewer system, where in the opinion of the council the conditions
described in subsection (c) of this section exist or are incipient.



   E.   Where main sewers are installed, for the public welfare and at
public expense, the city council may require abutting property owners to
connect thereto within a period of time specified by the council. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4205)



Article 4. Private Sewerage Disposal Construction



13.08.110   Prohibition of new systems or connections.



   No new private sewerage disposal systems shall be constructed within
the city, and no new dwellings or structures shall be connected to existing
private systems; except as hereinafter excepted. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Ord. 2003-20 (part), 2003; Prior code § 4206)



13.08.120   Sewer not available.



   Where a public sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewerage disposal system complying with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2003-20 (part), 2003;
Prior code § 4207)



13.08.125    City's option to extend sewer.



   Where there is no available public sewer, the city shall have the
option, at its sole discretion, to extend the public sewer to within two
hundred (200) feet of the property line and require connection thereto, as
set forth herein.  If the city waives its option to extend sewer system,
such waiver shall be in writing from the city manager to the applicant. 
Such waiver is required prior to applicant commencing installation of a
private sewage disposal system. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2003-20
(part), 2003



13.08.130   Permit required.



   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city. The written
application for such permit shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, and other information deemed necessary by the city as well as
the sewer extension waiver signed by city manager. A permit and inspection
fee shall be paid to the city at the time application is filed, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord.
2003-20 (part), 2003;  Prior code § 4208)



13.08.140   Inspection required.



   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall provide
twenty-four (24) hour notice to the city when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Ord. 2003-20 (part), 2003; Prior code § 4209)



13.08.150   Design requirements.



   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with recommendations of the department of public health
of the state of California and the health officer of Tulare County, as
determined by the city. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage
disposal system requiring subsurface soil absorption capacity where the
characteristics of the property do not indicate sufficient soil absorption
qualities. No septic tank, cesspool, anaerobic tank or chemical process shall
be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or any stream or watercourse.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4210)



13.08.160   Cost of maintenance by owner.



   The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4211)



13.08.170   Additional requirements.



   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any law, ordinance,
rule or regulation administered by the county health office or city building
inspector. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4212)



Article 5. Sewer Extensions, Financing and Costs Repayment



13.08.180   Private financing.



   The purpose of this article is to provide an expedient method of
financing sewer construction in cases where all benefitted property owners do
not wish to participate in such construction and shall not benefit therefrom
until connecting to such sewer construction. The method shall provide for
equal proportion of cost within a reasonable period of time among the parcels
to be benefitted. The following method is not intended to be exclusive.



   A.   Petition for Extension. Owners of real property desiring to
have the city sewer system extended in accordance with the provisions of this
article, shall make written application therefore to the city, stating the
location and limits of the requested public sewer extension, together with a
description of their property. The city shall evaluate the feasibility and
practicality of the proposed sewer extension and shall estimate the cost of
the project, including all costs normally charged by the city to persons
extending public sewers, and shall submit to the council a map showing the
area to be served and benefitted by said sewer extension. All such sewer
extensions shall be within the boundary lines of a public street or a public
easement. The sewer extension shall extend across the parcel boundaries being
served. The minimum cost to any property owner shall be not less than
required by Section 13.08.180(C). The city manager shall report to the city
council regarding the proposed sewer extension and if the council determines
said extension to be in the public interest, it may grant the request for
initiation of the sewer extension project.



   B.   Deposit of Funds for Construction and Costs.  Whenever the
application of property owners for public sewer extension has been granted by
the city council, the applicant shall deposit with the city, in cash, an
amount equal to the total cost estimate of the project. No work shall be
started upon the project until the specified deposit has been made.



   C.   Performance. The city shall prepare plans, specifications, and
proposal agreements for the construction of the proposed public sewer
extension and shall advertise for sealed proposals. Contracts shall be let to
the lowest responsible bidder by the city council. Upon completion and
acceptance of the work by the city, the city shall prepare a statement of the
final cost of the public extension. If it shall be found that the actual cost
upon completion of the project is less than the estimated cost, the excess of
the money paid to the city shall be refunded to the applicants in the same
proportion that it was paid to the city. When the actual cost exceeds the
estimated cost, the applicants upon notice and demand shall forthwith pay the
prorated deficiency in cash. No connection to the constructed sewer shall be
permitted by the city until such additional payment, if necessary, is made.



   D.   Cost of Distribution. The city shall prepare a statement of the
final cost of the public sewer, and a map showing the prorated costs to the
various parcels of property benefitted.



   E.   Connection Requirements. Whenever the sewer system of the city
has been extended in accordance with the provisions of this article, those
owners of property benefitted, or their successors in interest who have not
heretofore contributed their proportionate share of the cost of the public
sewer extension in the amount set up in the city's final cost sheet, shall
not be permitted to connect with the public sewer extension unless, and
until, they shall have paid to the city the amount in cash stated on the
city's final costs sheet, or the current year connection fee as required by
Section 13.08.750(C), whichever is greater. All such payments shall be in
addition to any other fees required by other city ordinances or regulations.



   F.   Private Sewers. Any property owner in the public sewer
extension district who has, prior to said sewer extension, constructed a
private sewer connection to the public sewer for his property at his own
expense, shall not be required to contribute to the cost of said public sewer
extension except where such property derives increased benefits therefrom as
determined by the city and as approved by the council. Such property owner
shall pay only the amount so approved before connecting his property to the
public sewer extension.



   G.   Refunds. Periodically upon demand, the city shall refund to the
persons originally paying for a sewer extension proportionate amounts paid to
the city by property owners who did not participate in the original cost and
who have been given permits to connect to the extended sewer and have paid
for said connection as provided for in this chapter.



   H.   Termination of Refunds. Any claim by a contributing property
owner for a refund which is available due to payment by benefitted property
owners, shall be made within a period of ten years of the filing of the final
cost statement. All money paid after the lapse of ten years shall be retained
by the city.



   I.   Oversizing Sewer Mains. The city may oversize any sewer main
from the minimum eight inch diameter if it is determined by the city that a
larger line would be needed to serve other developments.  If a larger line
is installed, the city shall pay only the additional oversizing cost. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4213)



13.08.190   Public financing.



   The purpose of this article is to provide an equitable method for the
assessing of costs and the financing of such costs for the provision of
sanitary sewer service to developed lots within the city and/or annexing to
the city. The following method is not intended to be exclusive.



   A.   Definitions and Restrictions.



   1.   A developed lot is defined for purposes of this article as a
parcel of ground of record less than five acres, a parcel created by
subdivision or lot split and any of the above occupied by a residential,
institutional, or commercial structure.



   2.   The provisions of this article shall apply when at least ninety
(90) percent of the area proposed for sewer service is composed of developed
lots which are using private sewage disposal systems.



   3.   No area shall be considered for sewer service under the
provisions of this article unless at least fifty (50) percent of the property
owners of the developed lots sign a sewer connection agreement with the city
in accordance with the procedures outlined hereinafter.



   4.   Developed lots larger than those in the surrounding
neighborhood or subdivision which are subject to further development under
existing zoning restrictions shall be assessed at charges higher than those
described hereinafter when, in the opinion of the city engineer, such higher
charges are required as a matter of equitable sewer cost assessment.



   B.   Financing of Sewer Extensions. Sewer extensions to be
constructed under the provisions of this article may be financed by the city.
The city must be reimbursed for this financed cost at such time as benefiting
property owners connect to the sewer, except that sewers may be financed for
a period not to exceed five years from the date of connection under the
financing provisions of the short form of the 1911 Act, Chapter 27,
(commencing with Section 5870 through 5895.54) of the Streets and Highways
Code, state of California. The limits imposed with respect to such 1911 Act
financing are a minimum annual payment to the city of fifty dollars ($50.00)
plus interest with the repayment of the total amount due, with interest, to
be completed in not more than five years. All monies received as a result of
this chapter shall be paid to the Sanitation Fund of the city.



   C.   Public Financing. The city council shall establish annually by
resolution the sewer connection fee which is to represent the total cost of
public sewer facilities to the benefitted property owners under this article,
which fee shall include and take the place of all other charges and fees
other than the monthly sewer service charge specified in this chapter. Such
resolution shall be adopted by the council in each calendar year. The
resolution currently in effect shall prevail until such time as the
resolution for the new year is adopted.



   D.   The connection fee shall be based on a recommendation by the
city engineer considering the costs of sewer extensions for the preceding
twelve-month period. The connection fee shall include the cost of sewer
laterals to the property line, manholes, main line costs, plumbing permit,
and the trunkline capacity charge and treatment plant capacity charge
outlined in Section 13.08.750 and shall be a uniform cost per lot; except,
that additional fees may be stipulated for additional dwelling units on such
lots. The above provisions shall be dependent upon budgeted or specified
allocations by the city council of funds sufficient to carry out the purposes
of this subsection. The city council, by this chapter in no way undertakes to
guarantee the provision of sewer service to any area within or annexing to
the city except when, in the council's opinion, the city is able to finance
such facilities, and when it is the council's judgment that there is priority
need for such facilities with respect to other municipal service.



   E.   Sewer Connection Agreements. The property owner signing the
sewer connection agreement consents to:



   1.   Pay any and all applicable sewer connection fees as set forth
in Article 9, Sections 13.08.710 through 13.08.820;



   2.   Connect to the sewer line and pay the normal sewer service
charge as set forth in Article 10, Sections 13.08.830 through 13.08.890.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4214)



13.08.200   Existing sewer cost repayment.



   The purpose of this article is to assure repayment to the city by
directly benefitted property owners for connections to trunk sewers abutting
properties not otherwise adequately served by the public sewer system, where
such trunk sewers have been built at public expense and where the property
owners directly connecting thereto receive benefits in excess of those
accruing to the general area served by the trunk sewer; and further to
require payment to the city for connection to main sewers where the owners
and/or developers of connected and directly benefitted property have not paid
for their proportionate share of the cost of construction of the main sewer.



   A.   Application. This article shall not apply to connections to
existing sewers within the boundaries of the incorporated area of the city,
as said boundaries existed on April 12, 1948, as outlined in the map thereof
on file in the office of the city engineer.



   B.   Payment. Prior to issuance of a sewer connection permit for
properties desiring to connect directly to the aforementioned trunk sewers,
or main sewers, the persons desiring to connect thereto shall pay to the city
a cost determined annually by council resolution under Section 13.08.750. It
is the intent of this article to provide that property owners directly
benefitted by the construction of trunk or main sewers at a location where
they may connect directly thereto without extension of the public sewer,
shall pay to the city the costs which they would normally have incurred were
they to have constructed, or to have participated in the construction of,
sewer facilities to serve their property.  Single-family residences within
the city limits of the city which are permitted to connect to an existing
sanitary sewer line may have their charges set on the tax roll if they so
elect. The procedure of the short form of the 1911 Act assessment as set
forth in the Street and Highways Code, Chapter 27 shall be followed. The
limits imposed are a minimum annual payment to the city of fifty dollars
($50.00), with the repayment of all charges, with interest, to be completed
in not more than five years.



   C.   Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall apply to
connection to existing main or trunk sewer lines with the following
exceptions:



   1.   Those sewers constructed under the provisions of either the
short or long form of the 1911 Act of the state of California Streets and
Highways Code where assessments are or have been made on the basis of
benefits;



   2.   Sewer connections of the existing single family dwellings in
those areas which are deemed by the council to be unable to finance public
sewer improvements and described as such by council resolution, said
boundaries being as outlined on maps thereof on file in the city engineer's
office;



   3.   Sewers constructed under the provisions of Sections 13.08.180
or 13.08.190 or similar provisions of prior city ordinances;



   4.   Sewers constructed under council annexation agreements;



   5.   Sewers constructed pursuant to approved development agreements.



   D.   Disposition of Funds. All monies received as a result of this
section shall be deposited into the sanitation fund of the city. No monies
received as a result of this chapter shall be repayable to any developer or
property owner who has constructed main sewers for the benefit of his
property. Such repayments shall be made only when the developer or property
owner has fully complied with the provisions of Section 13.08.180. Further,
no developer or property owners shall have the right to sell, lease, assign,
or otherwise purport to convey sewer connection rights to any main sewer for
other than directly benefitted properties owned by said developer at the time
of design approval by the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4215)



13.08.205   Payment for sewer connections prior to July 1, 2010.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.08.190 B. and Section
13.08.200 B., payment for connection of single family residences inside the
city limits made to sanitary sewer lines after January 1, 2004 and prior to
July 1, 2010, may be placed on the county tax roll pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 27 of the Streets and Highways Code, with the repayment of all
charges, with interest, to be completed in not more than ten (10) years.



(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2003-15 (part), 2003)



Article 6. Side Sewers and Connections



13.08.210   Permit required.



   No person shall cause or permit a premises to be initially connected to
the sewer system nor shall any person increase the number of dwelling units
on residential premises connected to the sewer system, change the use of
residential premises connected to the sewer system to a nonresidential use,
increase the area of nonresidential premises devoted to a nonresidential use,
or change the use of nonresidential premises to a residential use without a
connection permit issued by the director as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000: prior
code § 4216)



13.08.220   Installation and/or connection of lateral sewers by city.



   A.   Except as otherwise directed by the city, the city shall
install all lateral sewers, making connections therefrom to main and trunk
sewers, and charging the property owner for the costs thereof.  This
installation shall terminate at the property line (street right-of-way line);
line and grade to said termination shall be determined by the city engineer,
as shall procedures for requesting such installations.



   B.   Where determined by the city engineer to be in the best
interest of the city and/or the property owner, and in all new subdivision
installations, the property owner shall be requested to have the lateral
sewer installed by a licensed contractor in lieu of city installation. In
such instances, the city shall be responsible for cutting wyes into existing
sewers.



   C.   In either case, city installation or property owner
installation, all costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of a lateral sewer shall be borne by the owner, except where
otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior
code § 4217)



13.08.230   Design considerations.



   Minimum size and slope in the side sewer shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4218)



13.08.240   Separate sewers.



   Every building must be separately connected to a public sewer. No two
adjacent lots abutting the same area shall be permitted to join in the use of
the same side sewer. However, one or more buildings located on premises
belonging to the same owner may be served with the same side sewer during the
period of said ownership. Upon the subsequent subdivision and/or sale of a
portion of said lot, the portion not directly connected with such public
sewer shall be separately connected with a public sewer, and it is unlawful
for the owner thereof to continue to use or maintain such indirect
connection. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4219)



13.08.250   Sewer too low.



   In any building in which any portion of the building drain or building
sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage drained
by such building drain or sewer shall be lifted by artificial means, approved
by the city engineer, and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of
the owner. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4220)



13.08.260   Connection to public sewer.



   The applicant for a side sewer permit shall notify the city when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer or
lateral sewer. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4221)



13.08.270   Safety precautions.



   All excavations for a side sewer installation being installed by the
owner's contractor shall be maintained in a safe and workmanlike manner, and
adequately guarded with barricades and/or lights so as to protect the public
from hazard, in full accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4222)



13.08.280   Completion of work.



   Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the course
of a contractor's work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4223)



13.08.290   Maintenance of side sewers.



   Side sewers, including lateral sewers and wyes, shall be maintained by
the owner of the property served in good order and condition, at his or her
sole cost and expense. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4224)



Article 7. Public Sewer Construction



13.08.300   Permit required.



   No person shall construct, extend or connect to any public sewer
without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees
and connection charges and furnishing bonds and/or cash deposits as required
herein. The provisions of this section requiring permits shall not be
construed to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under
contracts awarded and entered into with the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4225)



13.08.310   Plans, profiles and specifications required.



   A.   The application for a permit for public sewer construction
shall be accompanied by complete plans, profiles and specifications,
complying with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city,
prepared by a registered civil engineer, showing all details of the proposed
work.



   B.   The application, together with the plans, profiles and
specifications shall be examined by the city engineer who shall within twenty
(20) working days approve them as filed or require them to be modified as
deemed necessary for proper installation. When the city engineer is satisfied
that the proposed work is proper and that the plans, profiles and
specifications are sufficient and correct, he shall order the issuance of a
permit predicated upon the payment of all connection charges, fees and
deposits and furnishing required bonds. The permit shall prescribe such terms
and conditions as necessary in the public interest. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4226)



13.08.320   Subdivision.



   The requirements of Sections 13.08.300 and 13.08.310 shall be fully
complied with before any final subdivision map shall be approved by the city
council. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for
public use of all streets, easements or rights of way in which public sewer
lines are to be constructed. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4227)



13.08.330   Easements or rights-of-way.



   In the event that an easement is required for an extension of the
public sewer, the applicant shall procure and have accepted by the city
council a proper easement or grant of right-of-way sufficient in law to allow
the laying and maintenance of such extension. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4228)



13.08.340   Persons authorized to perform work.



   Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to perform the
work of public sewer construction within the city. All terms and conditions
of the permit issued by the city to the applicant shall be binding on the
contractor. The requirements of this section shall apply to side sewers
installed concurrently with public sewer construction. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4229)



13.08.350   Grade stakes.



   Grade and line stakes shall be set by a registered civil engineer prior
to the start of work on any public sewer construction. The contractor shall
be responsible for accurately transferring grades to sewer inverts. The
engineer shall provide copies of cut sheets to the contractor and to the
city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4230)



13.08.360   Compliance with local regulations.



   Any person constructing a sewer within a street or public right-of-way
or easement shall comply with all state, county or city laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening,
barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving
thereof, and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required by other
departments having jurisdiction prior to the issuance of a permit by the
city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4231)



13.08.370   Protection of excavation.



   A.   The applicant shall maintain such barriers, lights and signals
as are necessary to give warning to the public at all times that a sewer is
under construction and of each dangerous condition to be encountered as a
result thereof. Applicant shall also likewise protect the public in the use
of the sidewalk against any such conditions in connection with the
construction of the sewer. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be reinstalled in a manner
satisfactory to the city or any other public agency having jurisdiction
thereover.



   B.   If the city engineer determines that the construction site is
not adequately signed and the contractor evades the engineer's warning or it
is after working hours, the engineer shall have the recourse to obtain the
necessary signing devices from any source available and all costs related
thereto shall be borne by the contractor. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4232)



13.08.380   Design and construction standards.



   Minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers within the
city or subject to the jurisdiction of the city shall be the "Sanitary and
Storm Sewer Specifications" of the city. The city engineer may permit
modifications of those specifications or may require higher standards where
unusual conditions are encountered. "As-built" drawings showing the actual
location of all sewers, structures, wyes, and laterals shall be filed with
the city before final acceptance of the work. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4233)



13.08.390   Bond--Public sewer construction.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit for public sewer construction the
applicant shall furnish to the city a faithful performance bond or cash
deposit in the amount of the total estimated cost of the work. Said bond
shall be in the minimum amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and shall
be secured by a surety or sureties satisfactory to the city. The cash deposit
or faithful performance bond shall be conditioned upon the performance of the
terms and conditions of the permit and shall guarantee the correction of
faulty workmanship and the replacement of defective materials for a period of
one year after the date of acceptance of the work. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4234)



13.08.400   All work to be inspected.



   All sewer construction work, building sewers, plumbing and drainage
systems shall be inspected by an inspector acting for the city to insure
compliance with all requirements of the city. No sewer shall be covered at
any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No sewer
shall be connected either directly or indirectly to the city's public sewer
system until the work covered by appropriate permit has been completed,
inspected and approved. All sewers shall be cleaned of all debris accumulated
from construction operations. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4235)



13.08.410   Notification.



   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by permit
to notify the office of the city that said work is ready for inspection. Such
notification shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the
work is to be inspected and if notice is made verbally, it shall be followed
by written notice. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make
sure that the work is ready for inspection by the city before giving the
above notification. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4236)



13.08.420   Correct notices.



   When any work has been inspected and the work is unsatisfactory, a
written notice to that effect shall be given instructing the permittee, or
the agent of such permittee, within ten days, to comply to such order or
notice for work authorized by the permit in accordance with the ordinances,
rules and regulations of the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code
§ 4237)



13.08.430   All costs paid by owner.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued shall be borne by
the permittee. The permittee shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4238)



13.08.440   Contract with outside industrial and commercial users.



   A.   Use by an industry or commercial establishment located outside
the city limits ("outside user") shall not be granted if it shall impair the
usage of the sewer system or any part thereof by property within the city.



   B.   Enlargements, extensions or modifications of the city sewer
system for use by outside industries or commercial establishments, shall be
solely at the cost of such user and the city shall, upon completion, be
granted title to and hold full control of such extension, enlargements or
modifications.



   C.   Failure or refusal of any outside user to comply with any
condition of this article or of any contract granted hereunder, shall be
sufficient grounds for cutting off its connection with the sewer system after
five days written notice thereof by the city.



   D.   Determination by the city that the use of the city sewer system
by an outside user is resulting in impairment of the use by property within
the city, shall give the city the conclusive right to terminate any contract
user's further use of said city sewer system or any part thereof.



   E.   Any existing contracts with outside users for city sewer system
usage shall not be modified by the provisions of this chapter until such time
as such contracts have terminated.



   F.   Maximum protection to the city shall be provided in the
drafting of any contract and such protection shall include enforcement of the
pretreatment provisions of the city's NPDES permit and provision for
annexation to the city of the property occupied by users at such time as
annexation is, in the opinion of the city, feasible, with sufficient penalty
fees in said contract to guarantee compliance with this stipulation.



   G.   All contracts with outside users shall be approved by the city
council.



   H.   Permission shall not be granted to connect any lot or parcel of
land outside the city to any public sewer in or under the jurisdiction of the
city unless a permit thereof is obtained. The applicant shall first enter
into a contract in writing whereby he shall bind himself, his heirs,
successors and assigns to abide by all ordinances, rules and regulations in
regard to the manner in which such sewer shall be used, the manner of
connecting therewith, and the plumbing and drainage in connection therewith
and also shall agree to pay all fees required for securing the permit and a
monthly fee in the amount set by the city for the privilege of using such
sewer.  The granting of permission for connection to the city sewer system
by an outside user shall be optional with the city council. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4239)



13.08.450   Street excavation permit.



   A separate permit must be secured from the city or the county or any
other person having jurisdiction thereover by permittees or contractors
intending to excavate in a public street for the purpose of installing sewers
or making sewer connections.



   A.   No person shall enter, obstruct, uncover or tamper with any
portion of the public sewer, or connect to it, or dispose anything into any
sewer and/or sewer manhole without the written permission of the city
engineer.



   B.   No person or party shall remove or demolish any building or
structures with plumbing fixtures connected directly or indirectly to the
public sewer without first notifying the city engineer of such intention. All
openings in or leading to the public sewer line or lines caused by such work
shall be sealed watertight and inspected by the city engineer before being
backfilled.



   C.   No person shall fill or backfill over, or cause to cover, or
obstruct access to, any sewer manhole.



   D.   No person shall erect any improvements, structures, or
buildings over public sewers without the written permission of the city
engineer. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4240)



13.08.460   Liability.



   A.   The city and its officers, agents and employees shall not be
answerable for any liability or injury or death to any person or damage to
any property arising during or growing out of the performance of any work by
any permittee. The permittee shall be answerable for, and shall save the city
and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability imposed by
law upon the city or its officers, agents or employees, including all costs,
expenses, fees and interest incurred in defending same or in seeking to
enforce this provision. The permittee shall be solely liable for any defects
in the performance of permittee's work or any failure which may develop
therein.



   B.   Every person, firm, company, corporation, or organization
applying for a permit shall file with the engineering department a policy,
true copy thereof, or certificate of insurance, accompanied by an endorsement
signed by the underwriter or an authorized representative, as evidence that
the applicant has obtained and maintains and shall require all of its
subcontractors to maintain the following insurance requirements:



   1.   Comprehensive general liability coverage with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage. Such
insurance shall: (a) name city, its appointed and elected officials,
officers, employees and agents as additionally insureds; and (b) be primary
with respect to any insurance or self-insurance programs maintained by the
city; and (c) contain standard cross liability provisions;



   2.   Commercial automobile liability insurance with a combined
single limit of no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per
occurrence. Applicants whose transportation operations are governed by the
public utilities commission shall possess limits as required by the
commission;



   3.   Worker's compensation coverage with statutory limits, and
employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident.



   C.   Greater amounts may be required as determined by the city from
time to time by resolution.  Permittee must pay premiums thereon and
permittee shall not commence work until all insurance required has been
obtained and such insurance has been approved by the city. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4241)



13.08.470   Time limit on permits.



   If work under a permit is  not commenced within six months from the
date of issuance or if after partial completion the work shall be
discontinued for a period of six months, or if the connection or work
authorized by such permit is not completed within one year from date of
issuance of permit, the permit shall thereupon become void and no further
work shall be done until a new permit shall have been secured. A new fee
shall be paid upon the issuance of said new permit. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4242)



Article 8. Regulation of Wastewater Discharges



13.08.480   Prohibitions on discharges.



   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State,
or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   No person shall discharge to a public sewer wastes which, in the
opinion of the director, cause, or are capable of causing either alone or by
interaction with other substances:



   A.   A fire or explosive hazard;



   B.   Obstruction of flow in a sewer system or injury of the system
or damage to the wastewater collection, treatment or disposal facilities;



   C.   Danger to life or safety of personnel;



   D.   A nuisance, or prevention of the effective maintenance or
operation of the sewer system, through having a strong, unpleasant odor;



   E.   Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or
malodorous gas-producing substances;



   F.   No person or industrial user shall discharge to the city’s
facilities any substance which has or contains:



   1.    An end-of-pipe discharge temperature in excess of one hundred
fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five and one-half (65.5) degrees C), or
a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant,
but in no case heat which will cause the influent at the headworks of the
treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40)
degrees C);



   2.   More than two hundred (200) mg/l of total oil or grease;



   3.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other inflammable
or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   4.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;



   5.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



   6.   Any ashes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, wood, or any other solid, or viscous substance capable of
causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage system;



   7.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.0 or having any other corrosive characteristic capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage system;



   8.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances
in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



   9.   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating
a public nuisance;



   10.   No discharge to the sewer shall be permitted that when blended
with the remaining city flow shall cause an excess of the following
constituent levels in the discharge from the sewage treatment plant.



   a.   Chlorides: one hundred fifty (150) mg/l,



   b.   Dissolved solids: six hundred (600) mg/l,



   c.   Sodium ratio: seventy (70) percent,



   d.   pH, outside limits: 6.5-8.5 ph units;



   11.   Which exerts an excessive chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
demand to such a degree that the total wastewater received at the sewage
treatment plant exceeds treatable limits, as established by the city, for
such wastewater;



   12.   Which shall produce discoloration of the sewage treatment
plant effluent;



   13.   With a volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined in Section 13.08.040;



   14.   Any substance which may cause the treatment plant's effluent
or any other product of the treatment plant such as residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to city's
facilities cause the plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act;
any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used;



   15.   Any substance which may cause the treatment plant to violate
its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards;



   16.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the
city's wastewater collection and/or treatment systems, including, but not
limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one
hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21.



   G.   A detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters
of the state or a condition unacceptable to any public agency having
regulatory jurisdiction over the city; discoloration or any other condition
in the quality of the city's treatment works effluent in such a manner that
receiving water quality requirements established by city's NPDES permit
cannot be met;



   H.   Conditions at or near the city's treatment works which violates
any statute or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency or
state or federal regulatory body;



   I.   Quantities or rates of flow which overload the city's
collection or treatment facilities or cause excessive city collection or
treatment costs. (Ord. 2011-08 § 3, 2011: Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4245)



13.08.490   Prohibitions on storm drainage and ground water.



   Storm water, ground water, rain water, water well development water,
monitoring well discharge, swimming pool filter backwash, street drainage,
subsurface drainage, irrigation drainage, or yard drainage shall not be
discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer. The
city shall require cessation of such discharge if found to be existing.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4246)



13.08.500   Prohibition on unpolluted water.



   Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process
water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers, or surface
drainage from streets, curb and gutter or parking lots, shall not be
discharged through direct or indirect connection to a public sanitary sewer.
All installations of air-conditioning systems require the issuance of a
permit therefore by the city and the payment of customary building and/or
plumbing permit fees to the city prior to commencement of installation. All
evaporative coolers shall be furnished with a circulating pump or be drained
to yard areas, seepage wells or leaching devices, or storm drains. All new
installations of industrial, commercial or residential air conditioning units
shall have cooling water discharge recirculated  or shall be of such type as
not to require cooling water discharge.  In no case shall discharge be
permitted to be connected to the sanitary sewer system; except, that
condensation only from cooling towers may be discharged to the sanitary sewer
system by permit only. In no case shall water from evaporative coolers or air
conditioning units be allowed to discharge onto public streets, alleys or
sidewalks or to in any manner create a public nuisance. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4247)



13.08.510   Limitations on radioactive wastes.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any radioactive
waste into a community sewer. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4248)



13.08.520   Limitations on the use of garbage grinders.



   A.   Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a
community sewer except:



   1.   Wastes generated in preparation of food normally consumed on
the premises;



   2.   Where the user has obtained a permit for that specific use from
the city, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to
enable the city to equitably determine the user charges based on the waste
constituents and characteristics.



   B.   Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all
particles shall be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in
the community sewer, with no particles greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension. Garbage grinders shall not be used for
grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials, or garden refuse. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
one-half horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4249)



13.08.530   Limitations on point of discharge.



   No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or
other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved side sewer,
unless upon written application by the discharger and payment of the
applicable charges and fees, the city issues a permit for such direct
discharges. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4250)



13.08.540   Holding tank waste and septic tank waste.



   A discharger proposing to discharge holding tank waste and septic tank
waste into the septage receiving station must secure a permit. No discharge
shall be allowed to any location except the septage receiving station. If a
permit is granted for discharge of such waste, the discharger shall pay the
applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as
required by the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4251)



13.08.550   Limitations on wastewater strength.



   A.   No person or industrial discharger shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable
limitations:



 



Pollutant
 
Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit (mg/l)


Arsenic
 
0.05


Cadmium
 
0.02


Chromium
 
3.44


Copper
 
1.97


Cyanide
 
0.16


Lead
 
0.30


Mercury
 
0.02


Nickel
 
2.86


Silver
 
0.76


Zinc
 
0.64




 



   B.   No person or industrial user shall discharge wastes with an
electrical conductivity in excess of the flow weighted average EC of the
source water plus five hundred (500) umhos/cm or a total of one thousand
(1,000) umhos/cm, whichever is lower, except as provided for below. 



   C.   To promote and encourage water conservation efforts, the
maximum allowable electrical conductivity may be adjusted as determined by
the following formulas and definitions



   1.    Definitions



   "EC regulatory" shall mean flow weighted average EC of the source water
plus five hundred (500) umhos/cm or a total of one thousand (1,000) umhos/cm,
whichever is lower.  Flow weighted average EC for source water shall be
based on the local public or private water supplier's annual water quality
report.



   "EC industry" shall mean derived flow weighted monthly average EC
permit limit for an industrial user.  The maximum EC industry value due to
water conservation efforts is one thousand (1,000) umhos/cm.



   "EC small industry" shall mean derived flow weighted monthly average EC
permit limit for an industrial user discharging less than five thousand
(5,000) gallons per day.



   "Flow industry" shall mean measured or estimated wastewater flow volume
for an industrial user.



   "Flow conserved" shall mean documented and verified process wastewater
flow volume reduction due to water conservation efforts.



   "Flow small industry" shall mean measured or estimated wastewater flow
volume for an industrial user that is less than five thousand (5,000) gallons
per day.



   2.   Formulas.



EC Industry  =  [EC Regulatory x (Flow Industry + Flow Conserved)]



           __                       
___________________________



                        (Flow Industry)



   For industries with measured or estimated wastewater flow that is less
than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, the following formula is utilized.



EC Small Industry =  [EC Regulatory x (0.005 MGD + Flow Conserved)]



             _                       
__________________________



                      (Flow Small Industry)



   3.   Those industries that have EC limits higher than those listed
above resulting from a previous action are grandfathered with their existing
limit.  For grandfathered EC limits, no credit for water conservation
measures may be taken to obtain a higher EC limit.



   D.   Notwithstanding the limitations that are set forth in
subsection (A) of this section:



   1.   The city may impose more restrictive standards or requirements
on discharges if it is deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this
ordinance, specific prohibitions or the terms of the city's NPDES permit;



   2.   The city may authorize discharges containing higher
concentrations of specific pollutants on a site- specific basis, provided
that the concentrations of such discharges shall not cause pass through or
interference. Upon approval by the city, site-specific limitations shall be
established through the terms specified in the discharger's industrial
discharge permit. The city may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in
place of, concentration based limitations. However, no special agreement
shall be allowed to contravene federal, state or local pretreatment standards.



   E.   No person or industrial user shall ever increase the use of
process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on
industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2011-08 § 4, 2011: Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4252)



13.08.560   Limitations on infectious waste.



   A.   Infectious wastes which have been rendered noninfectious prior
to grinding as specified in Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Section
66840(i) from hospitals, clinics, and mortuaries may be disposed of to the
sanitary sewer system subject to the following limitations and requirements:



   1.   Pathologic specimens may not be disposed of to the sanitary
sewer system;



   2.   The material shall be ground by an approved grinder having the
capabilities of meeting or exceeding the following fineness: at least forty
(40) percent shall pass a No. 8 sieve; at least sixty-five (65) percent shall
pass a No. 3 sieve, and one hundred (100) percent shall pass a 3/8-inch
screen opening;



   3.   Ground organic kitchen waste from hospital food preparation and
disposal facilities excluding all paper and plastic items may be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system;



   4.   Disposable hypodermic needles, syringes, and associated
articles following their use in hospitals, out-patient clinics, medical and
dental offices, etc., may not be discharged to the sanitary sewer system;



   5.   The materials must not violate any other requirements of these
rules and regulations.



   B.   The following shall not be discharged to the sanitary sewer by
any means:



   1.   Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are
isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease;



   2.   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;



   3.   Wastes excluded by other provisions of this title except as
specifically permitted in this section.



   C.   All hospitals within the limits of the city desiring to dispose
of a ground "infectious waste" by discharge into facilities of the city shall
first have a valid nonsignificant discharge permit. All applicants for such
permits shall fill out completely the application form, pay the appropriate
fee, receive a copy of the city regulations governing discharge of ground
hospital wastes, and shall agree in writing to abide by the regulations. The
nonsignificant discharge permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed
four years from date of issuance.



   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the health officer of Tulare County to define wastes as being
infectious. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4253)



13.08.570   Traps required.



   Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the City, they are necessary for the protection of the sewerage system from
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not
be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. Such traps
shall be required, for example, on discharges from all service stations,
automotive repair garages, car washes, restaurants, eating establishments and
food preparation establishments, and such other commercial or industrial
establishments as the city may designate. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4254)



13.08.580   Construction of traps.



   All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and
shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  Restaurant traps shall be gas-tight, of a type approved for
restaurant use by the division of building safety. Traps for all other
facilities, including service stations and garages, shall be in accordance
with the adopted plan of the city for such traps or shall be the approved
equal thereof as determined by the director. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4255)



13.08.590   Maintenance of traps.



   When installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by
the owner, at owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all
times. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4256)



13.08.600   Pretreatment of wastes.



   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a)
a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred fifty (350)
milligrams per liter; (b) containing more than three hundred fifty (350)
milligrams per liter of suspended solids; (c) having the characteristics
described in Section 13.08.550 (C) or constituent levels in excess of those
enumerated in Section 13.08.550 (A); or (d) having an average daily flow
greater than .05 MGD, or one percent of the average daily sewage flow of the
city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. When necessary
in the opinion of the city the discharger shall provide, at his/her expense,
such  pretreatment as may be necessary to: (a) reduce the BOD discharge to
three hundred fifty (350) mg/l and suspended solids to three hundred fifty
(350) mg/l; (b) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided in Section 13.08.550; or (c) control the
quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed 
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city and
no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is
obtained in writing. Material which shall readily settle, such as sand,
glass, metal filings and diatamaceous earth, for example, or floatable
material which is readily removable shall be removed from wastewater prior to
discharge to the public sanitary sewer system. The review and approval of
such plans and/or proposed operation procedures shall in no way relieve the
discharger from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the city and in accordance with federal and
state standards, under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes
in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported in
writing to and be approved by the city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior
code § 4257)



13.08.610   Maintenance of pretreatment facilities.



   When preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at owner's expense. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4258)



13.08.620   Monitoring facilities.



   The city may require the discharger to construct, at discharger's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems and may also
require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and
operated at the dischargers expense. The monitoring facility shall be
situated on the discharger's premises. If the monitoring facility is inside
the discharger's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for
city personnel, such as a gate secured with a city lock.  There shall be
ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and
compositing of samples for analysis. The manhole, sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the discharger, regardless of whether located on
private or public property. Whether constructed on public or private
property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with city requirements, construction standards and specifications.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4259)



13.08.630   Inspection and sampling.



   The city shall inspect the facilities of any discharger to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the city or its representatives ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of
their duties.  The city, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
discharger's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
discharger has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the discharger
shall make necessary arrangements so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, state and EPA will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4260)



13.08.640   Notification of violation.



   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the city within twenty-four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of such analysis to the city
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial
user is not required to resample if the city performs monitoring at the
facility at least once each month for the parameter in violation. (Ord.
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4261)



13.08.650   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.



   A.   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the city, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director and the state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any
discharge into the city's wastewater collection and treatment system of a
substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of the constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during
the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later
than ten days after the discharge commences. Notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. This notification requirement does not apply to pollutants reported
under the requirements of discharge permits issued by the city.



   B.   In case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) identifying additional
characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substances as a
hazardous waste, the industrial discharger shall notify the city, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director and the state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of such regulations.



   C.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4262)



13.08.655   Dental amalgam wastes.



   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, any
mercury or amalgam waste into the sewer system. 



   B.   All dental practices discharging to the sewer system shall
comply with the most recent Best Management Practices for Dental Amalgam
Waste as published by the American Dental Association. (Ord. 2011-08 § 5,
2011)



13.08.660   Special agreements--Private facilities.



   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
discharger whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be proposed by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
industrial discharger and subject to such terms and conditions as might be
required by the city. However, no special agreement shall be allowed to
contravene federal, state or local pretreatment standards. (Ord.  2006-02
(part),  2006: Prior code § 4263)



13.08.670   Special agreement--Public facilities.



   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any other public
corporation or entity, whereby the city undertakes to provide for the
construction, acceptance, maintenance or operation of facilities for the
collection, pumping or other means of transmission of sewage from the public
agencies, pursuant to any appropriate legal authorization. However, no
special agreement shall be allowed to contravene federal, state or local
pretreatment standards. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4264)



13.08.680   Federal requirements limitations.



   Users in industrial categories subject to the categorical pretreatment
standards development by the EPA under the Act are required to comply with
pretreatment standards promulgated pursuant to Section 307. The city may
issue standards more stringent than the federal standards if the director
determines that the limitations in the federal standards are not sufficient
to: (1) protect the operation of the city's treatment facilities, or (2)
comply with water quality standards or effluent limitations specified in the
city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit.
(Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000:
prior code § 4265)



13.08.690   Regional water quality control board requirement limitations.



   Source control of industrial discharges shall be accomplished by use of
a permit and monitoring system as described herein. Discharge of industrial
waste from any person within the city onto land or to any natural outlet may
be permitted only if the discharge complies with all requirements of the
regional water quality control board and of all other local, state and
federal laws and regulations. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code §
4266)



13.08.700   Other governmental agency jurisdictions.



   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer, by
the regional water quality control board, fish and game, or by other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord.  2006-02 (part), 
2006: Prior code § 4267)



Article 9. Permits and Fees



13.08.710   Permit required.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance or
perform any work on any plumbing or drainage system under the jurisdiction of
the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4270)



13.08.720   Application for permit.



   Any person, legally entitled to apply for and receive a permit, shall
make such application on forms provided by the city for that purpose.
Applicant shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to
be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in
connection therewith. The city may require plans, specifications or drawings
and such other information deemed necessary. If the city determines that the
plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the
applicant are in compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
city, the permit applied for shall be issued upon payment of the required
fees as hereinafter fixed and/or as adopted by council resolution in
implementation or modification hereof. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior
code § 4271)



13.08.730   Compliance with permit.



   After approval of the application, evidenced by the issuance of a
permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer, the grade,
materials or other details from those described in the permit or as shown on
the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued, except with
written permission from an authorized representative of the city. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4272)



13.08.740   Agreement.



   The applicant's signature on an application for any permit, as set
forth in Section 13.08.720, shall constitute an agreement to comply with all
of the provisions, terms and requirements of this and other applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, and with the plans and
specifications filed with the application, if any, together with such
corrections or modifications as may be made or permitted by the city, if any.
Such agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only
upon a written request for the alteration from the applicant, approved by the
city. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4273)



13.08.750   Basic connection charge.



   The city requires property developers, subdividers and individuals
making connection to the city sanitary sewer system to pay a fee per
connection.



   A.   Developers and subdividers shall pay to the city an amount, as
set by resolution of the city council, for connection to the sanitary sewer
system. Payment shall be made at such time as actual development is approved
by the city.



   B.   At the time of connection to the city sewer system, residential
property shall be assessed at an amount, as set by resolution of the city
council, per lot for connection to the city sewer system, where such
residential properties were not previously assessed on an acreage basis.



   C.   Properties, other than those for which connection has been
requested by or required of a developer or individual, shall only be assessed
at such time as connection is made to the city sewer system.  Public bodies
or such organizations as the city council may determine as nonprofit, and not
land developers for profit, shall not be assessed until such time as
connection is made to the city sewer system.



   D.   The city reserves to itself the right to assess additional fees
for commercial or industrial properties where such additional fees are, in
the opinion of the council, warranted by increased flows.



   E.   Fees established by the council are based upon the average
costs of trunk sewers and oversize sewers paid for by the city in typical
areas subject to service by the city. Review of the existing fees may be
initiated by the council from time to time as necessary to meet increasing
costs or changed conditions of providing trunk sewer or oversize service to
areas being considered by the city for sanitary sewer service. Any revision
of the fee schedule shall be approved by resolution adopted by the council.



   F.   The council is in no way committed to annexation of any
particular area by virtue of the offer of the aforementioned fees by persons
owning or developing areas proposed to be annexed to the city. The questions
of annexation or of provision of a trunk sewer or oversize sewer to any area
shall, in each instance, be resolved by the city council for the benefit of
the city.



   G.   The above shall in no way abrogate any of the provisions of any
other ordinance governing sewer service charges or fees currently in effect
or hereafter adopted. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4274)



13.08.755   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 13.08.750, the city
council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 13.08.750.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section, the city council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this chapter will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this chapter will not
materially affect the ability of the city to deliver its five year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section, the city council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid;
provided, that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first;



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies;



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit. If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the feepayer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designee and the city attorney;



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred, on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee
by the point in time specified in such resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay such deferred fees by the
point in time specified in such resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which such party has a financial
interest.



   D.   Companies classified within the following Standard Industrial
Codes shall be able to pay their development impact fees over five years
without interest or administrative fee. The first installment of twenty (20)
percent shall be due upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in five
equal annual installments thereafter and shall be collected on the property
tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property tax roll shall
not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000--2099   Food processing



   2200--3999   Certain other manufacturers



   4200--4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500--4599   Air transportation



   4700--5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



   E.   Private companies located within the city limits with a
permitted wastewater discharge capacity in excess of five hundred thousand
(500,000) gallons per day may pay their sewer impact fees over ten (10)
years. The first installment of ten (10) percent shall be due prior to
occupancy, and the balance shall be paid in nine (9) equal annual
installments thereafter. No interest shall accrue during the first five (5)
years. Any balance remaining after the fifth year shall accrue interest at
the rate of the city sewer connection services interest rate annually set by
city council. All payments due after the initial payment shall be collected
on the property tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property
tax roll shall not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.
(Ord. 2012-13 § 2, 2013: Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 9818 § 2, 1998)



13.08.760   Treatment connection charge.



   A separate charge is established to recover capital costs for future
use in the treatment facility from those for whom the capacity has been
provided.  Each new discharger who connects to the public sewer shall, prior
to issuance of a permit, pay to the city a sum of money to be determined
yearly by the city council, which sum shall represent repayment by that
discharger for future capacity provided for dischargers use. The payment of
this fee shall in no way affect that discharger's monthly sewer service
charges or any other charges and fees established by this chapter. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4275)



13.08.770   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 13.08.760, the city
council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 13.08.760.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section the city council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this article will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this article will not
materially effect the ability of the city to deliver is five year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section, the city council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid;
provided, that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first;



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies;



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit. If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the fee payer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designee and the city attorney;



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred, on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee
by the point in time specified in such resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay such deferred fees by the
point in time specified in such resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which such party has a financial
interest.



   D.   Companies classified within the following Standard Industrial
Codes shall be able to pay their development impact fees over five years
without interest or administrative fee. The first installment of twenty (20)
percent shall be due upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in five
equal annual installments thereafter and shall be collected on the property
tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property tax roll shall
not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000--2099   Food processing



   2200--3999   Certain other manufacturers



   4200-4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500-4599   Air transportation



   4700-5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



   E.   Private companies located within the city limits with a
permitted wastewater discharge capacity in excess of five hundred thousand
(500,000) gallons per day may pay their sewer impact fees over ten (10)
years. The first installment of ten (10) percent shall be due prior to
occupancy, and the balance shall be paid in nine (9) equal annual
installments thereafter. No interest shall accrue during the first five (5)
years. Any balance remaining after the fifth year shall accrue interest at
the rate of the city sewer connection services interest rate annually set by
city council. All payments due after the initial payment shall be collected
on the property tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property
tax roll shall not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.
(Ord. 2012-13 § 2, 2013:  Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Ord. 9818 § 3,
1998)



13.08.780   Special connection charges.



   Whenever sewers serving a property have been previously constructed
under the provisions of Article 5 of this chapter, cost recovery payments in
accord with the procedures outlined in that article 5 shall be recovered
prior to sewer connection permit issuance. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006:
Prior code § 4276)



13.08.790   Additional connection charges.



   In addition to any other charges established herein, the city may
establish additional connection charges for any sewer connection when, in the
opinion of the city council, the circumstances of such connection necessitate
the payment of charges over and above those established herein. (Ord. 
2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior code § 4277)



13.08.800   Classes of permits.



   Permit classes are as follows:



   A.   Building sewer permit;



   B.   Public sewer construction permit;



   C.   Private sewage disposal system permit;



   D.   Industrial discharge permit;



   E.   Nonsignificant discharge permit;



   F.   Special use sewer permit. (Ord.  2006-02 (part),  2006: Prior
code § 4278)



13.08.810   Permits and inspection charges.



   Permit and inspection charges and requirements shall be established by
resolution of the city council as follows:



   A.   Building Sewer Permit. A lump sum fee as required by Section
15.04.010, shall be paid to the city for inspecting the system from the end
of the building drain to a public sewer or private sewage-disposal system.



   B.   Public Sewer Construction Permit. A fee as required by Section
16.36.170 shall be paid to the city for inspecting the installation of sewer
mains that shall become a public sewer.



   C.   Private Sewage Disposal System Permit. A fee as set by
resolution of the city council for evaluating design adequacy and inspection
of installation shall be paid to the city for the issuance of a permit for
the construction of a new private sewage disposal system under the terms of
Article 4 of this chapter. Should the installation be of excessive magnitude
or complexity, the city may impose such additional charges as required to
provide sufficient funds to cover all costs incurred by the city.



   D.   Industrial Discharge Permit. The permit fees shall be based on
time, materials and analyses required to process the permit and shall be paid
to the city for each industrial discharge permit.



   1.   Prior to consideration of any industrial discharge permit, each
industrial user shall furnish the following information on forms to be
provided by the city:



   a.   Name and address of applicant;



   b.   Volume of wastewater to be discharged;



   c.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned in Section 13.08.550;



   d.   Average and thirty (30) minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;



   e.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details showing all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;



   f.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises including all types of materials which are or could be
discharged;



   g.   Any other information deemed by the city to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application.



   2.   The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.  After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the city may issue an industrial discharge permit subject to the
terms and conditions provided herein.



   3.   Industrial discharge permits shall contain the following:



   a.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



   b.   The average and maximum allowable wastewater constituents and
characteristics;



   c.   Limits on rate and time of discharge, or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization;



   d.   Requirements for installation of inspection, metering, and
sampling facilities;



   e.   Pretreatment requirements;



   f.   Specifications for monitoring programs which shall include
sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule.
Sampling and pollutant analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures established under Section 304 (h) of the Act, detailed in 40 CFR
136;



   g.   i.    Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports, including but not limited to baseline monitoring reports,
compliance schedule progress reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports, and
periodic reports on continued compliance (see Sections 13.08.824 to 13.08.827
of this ordinance) as may be required from industrial users to assess
compliance with federal, state and local limitations and standards with
permit conditions, and, where applicable, with compliance schedule milestones
or deadlines. In addition, all users shall submit to the city notices of
potential problem discharges including slug loading;



   ii.   Reports submitted to the city by industrial users must be
signed and certified by an authorized representative of the discharger. The
name of such individual(s) shall be presented to the city for approval prior
to issuance of any permit. A change in the authorized representative without
prior notification to and approval by the city may result in rescission of
the discharge permit. All baseline monitoring reports and other reports
related to compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines must
contain a certification by a qualified professional, indicating whether or
not pretreatment standards are being consistently met, and if any additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is required to meet the
applicable standards. The reports required pursuant to this Section are
subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001 relating to fraud and false
statements and the provisions of Section 309(c)(2) of the Act governing false
statements, representations or certifications in reports required under the
Act.



   h.   Requirements for specific language in the certification by an
authorized representative.  Said certification shall state,



I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.



   i.   Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access
thereto;



   j.   Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate
limits when incompatible pollutants, as defined by Section 13.08.040, are
proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge;



   k.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



   4.   Industrial discharge permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed two years.  It shall be the responsibility of
permittee to initiate renewal within ninety (90) days prior to permit
expiration. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.



   5.   Industrial discharge permits are issued to a specific
discharger for a specific operation. If operational changes cause any new,
increased or changed discharge, the city may rescind, condition or modify the
discharger's industrial discharge permit. An industrial discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
discharger, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the
prior approval of the city. Provided, that the city approves of such
reassignment, transfer or sale of the permit, the permitted discharger shall
provide a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator of the
facility prior to completing the transaction.



   6.   Any discharger who violates the following conditions of the
permit or of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is
subject to having his permit revoked, after due notice and hearing by the
city council.



   a.   Failure of a discharger to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;



   b.   Failure of the discharger to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



   c.   Refusal of reasonable access to the discharger's premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring;



   d.   Violation of conditions of the permit.



   E.   Nonsignificant Discharge Permit. The permit fees shall be based
on time, material and analyses required to process the permit and shall be
paid to the city for each nonsignificant discharge permit. Nonsignificant
discharge permits shall be issued to certain small industries and some
commercial users whose individual discharges do not significantly impact the
treatment system, degrade receiving water quality, or contaminate sludge.
Industries that have the potential to discharge a nondomestic or process
wastestream, but at the present time discharge only sanitary waste, are also
included in this group. this group also includes septage waste haulers.



   1.   Information similar to that required for an industrial
discharge permit shall be required for a nonsignificant discharge permit, and
shall be furnished on forms to be provided by the city;



   2.   Nonsignificant discharge permits may contain the same
information as industrial discharge permits;



   3.   Nonsignificant discharge permits shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed four years;



   4.   Nonsignificant discharge permits are issued to a specific
discharger for a specific operation, and shall not be reassigned, transferred
or sold without the prior approval of the city;



   5.   Violators of the conditions of the nonsignificant discharge
permit shall be subject to the same penalties as violators of the conditions
of the industrial discharge permit.



   F.   Special Use Sewer Permit. Special use permits shall be required
under the following circumstances:



   1.   Storm or drainage water discharge (Section 13.08.490);



   2.   Discharge of unpolluted waters (Section 13.08.500);



   3.   Direct discharge to sewer (Section 13.08.530);



   4.   Monitoring well discharge (Section 13.08.490).



   Under any of the above circumstances, or any other special condition
that may be determined by the city to warrant a permit, the applicant shall,
prior to confirmation of such permit, pay a fee in an amount to be determined
on an individual case basis by the city.



   G.   Reinspection Fee. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each
inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is
called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. (Ord.
2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4279)



13.08.815   Analytical requirements.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part),  2006)



13.08.816   Sample collection.



   A.   Except as indicated in Section B, below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques.
In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city may authorize
the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where
the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.



   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.820   Recordkeeping requirements.



   Industrial users shall maintain records of all information resulting
from monitoring activities.  Records shall be kept for a time period
consistent with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(h) but in no case for a
period of less than three years. Such records shall be made available for
inspection and upon demand by the city, state and/or EPA. This period of
retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial discharger or the
operation of the city's pretreatment program or when requested by the state
or the Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior
code § 4280)



Article 9A. Reporting Requirements



13.08.824   Baseline monitoring reports.



   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph B., below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the information
listed in paragraph B., below. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A
new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.



   B.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



   1.   Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.



   2.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.



   3.   Description of Operations.  A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



   4.   Flow Measurement.  Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



   5.   Measurement of Pollutants.



   a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.



   b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city, of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section 13.08.815 of this ordinance.



   c.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in Section 13.08.816 of this ordinance.



   6.   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.



   7.   Compliance Schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section
13.08.825 of this ordinance.



   8.   Signature and Certification.  All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Sections 13.08.810D.3.gii and
13.08.810D.3.h of this ordinance.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.825   Compliance schedule progress reports.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by Section 13.08.824(B)(7) of this ordinance:



   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months nor
shall the total time period exceed the allotted time specified in the consent
order or compliance order;



   C.   The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later
than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   D.   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the city.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.826   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.



   Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in Section
13.08.824(B)(4-6) of this ordinance. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Sections 13.08.810D.3.gii and 13.08.810D.3.h of this ordinance.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.827   Periodic compliance reports.



   A.   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the city but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 13.08.810D.3.h of this ordinance.



   B.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   C.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the
procedures prescribed in Section 13.08.816 of this ordinance, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



Article 10. Sewer Service Charges



13.08.830   Purpose and basis.



   Sewer service charges as set forth in this chapter are established to
assure that each recipient of waste treatment services within the city sewer
service area shall pay its proportionate share of the costs of all waste
treatment service provided by the city. The system of charges to be
established must, in accordance with the requirements of the federal act and
the state Clean Water Grant Program, provide for the following items:



   A.   Sufficient financing for an adequate operation and maintenance
program; including competent operating personnel.



   B.   Funds to be reserved for necessary future replacements,
improvements, and expansions of the facilities. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4285)



13.08.840   Setting of rates.



   Specific dollar amounts for sewer service charges for each user
classification shall be established by resolution of the city council on a
yearly basis following the federally required annual revision of the city's
revenue program, with any required adjustments to be effective as set by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code §
4286)



13.08.850   Discharge classification.



   The following basis shall be utilized for the establishment of sewer
service charges:



   A.   Residential (single-family, multiple dwellings, and mobile home
parks). Each residential unit shall pay a flat rate per month for each
dwelling unit.



   B.   Commercial and institutional (excluding such commercial
establishments as are determined by the director to produce wastewaters with
a higher BOD or suspended solids content than Visalia domestic wastewater or
to possess other characteristics requiring additional treatment costs). 
Each licensed business, institutional, and commercial establishment
(including businesses and professional offices, motels, schools and
hospitals) shall pay in accordance with the rate schedule as set by
resolution of the city council.



   C.   Industrial (including high-strength or additional treatment
requirement commercial dischargers as described in subsection (B) of this
section).



   1.   All significant industrial and commercial sources shall be
charged on the basis of set amounts for each million gallons of wastewater
flow, each pound of BOD, and each pound of suspended solids discharged by
individual users per month, in accordance with a rate schedule set by
resolution of the city council. Measurement of BOD and suspended solids shall
be performed by  the city or by a laboratory approved by the city; the
frequency and number of tests for each characteristic to be determined by the
director. All such testing shall be at the expense of the expense of the
discharger;



   2.   All industrial sources determined by the director not to be
significant dischargers shall be charged a flat rate per month based on the
quantity and strength of their wastewater as determined by the director, in
general accordance with the rate schedule for subsection (C)(1) of this
section set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4287)



13.08.860   Flow measurement.



   Flow measurements for rate purposes shall be based upon one hundred
(100) percent of daily metered water consumption if all water used is
supplied by a public utility company. Otherwise, the amount of sewer usage
shall be determined by the director in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. If, in the opinion of the director or the opinion of the discharger,
it is necessary to install metering devices in order to accurately determine
the sewer usage, such metering devices shall be installed, when directed by
the city, at the discharger's cost, and the specifications therefor shall be
approved by the city.  Flow measurements shall be made at regular intervals
or continuously recorded as determined necessary by the city and billings
shall be adjusted appropriately. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code §
4288)



13.08.870   Collection.



   A.   Billing for sewer service for those dischargers governed by
Section 13.08.850(A) and 13.08.850(B), and payment thereof shall be  to and
by the person in whose name water service is rendered to the property, or the
owner of the property on written application. In the case of a residence or
commercial establishment using well water, the owner of the property is
responsible for sewer service charges. The date charges begin to accrue for
sewer service is the earliest of the date water billing is started or the
date customer requests service. In the case of a residence or commercial
establishment using well water, the date charges begin to accrue for sewer
service is the date of occupancy, title change, or annexation. The date
charges for service end is the later of the date the water service and/or
sewer service is terminated, or the date customer requests to end services.



   B.   The sewer service charges for dischargers governed by Section
13.08.850(C) shall be paid every month on the basis of measured flow, BOD and
suspended solids for the previous month, as billed by the city to the
discharger.



   C.   All service charges shall be retained by the city irrespective
of any intra-billing termination date of sewer service, to defer service and
administrative costs. Upon written application by the property owner of
tenant-occupied property, billing and payment may be to and by such property
owner where the refuse service charge is similarly billed and paid. (Ord.
2014-01 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 2011-08 § 6, 2011: Ord. 2006-02 (part),
2006: Ord. 2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000: prior code § 4289)



13.08.880   Late charges.



   A.   In the event that dischargers described in Sections
13.08.850(A) and 13.08.850(B) shall fail to pay any billing within fifteen
(15) days from the bill date, a late charge as set by resolution of the city
council for each such billing month may be added to the bill, and the city
may have no authority to accept any payment thereafter without collecting the
late charge. This charge shall be collected to defray the cost of billing and
bookkeeping involved in late payments.



   B.   For each industrial sewer service charge, as defined in Section
13.08.850(C), remaining unpaid more than fifteen (15) days from the bill date
there may be added and collected therewith a late charge as set by resolution
of the city council and any such unpaid charge, together with the late charge
shall bear interest at the rate as set by resolution of the city council
until paid.



   C.   In the event that the discharger shall fail to pay any charge
herein provided by the 15th of the third month following presentation of the
bill for such charge to the discharger, the city may, in addition to any
other remedies it may have, after due notice in writing, discontinue
furnishing sewer service and not resume the same until all delinquent charges
hereunder, together with any costs necessitated by the discontinuance and
resumption of sewer service, have been fully paid. Any such notice of
disconnection or discontinuance of service shall include the name, address,
and telephone number of the city division authorized to discuss, and correct
where appropriate, any outstanding charges.



   D.   In addition or in the alternative, and at the option of the
city, the city may file a civil action for the collection of any amounts due
and unpaid. This remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to the remedy of
means of enforcing payment of the sum required to be paid by this chapter
stated in subsection (A), (B), (C), (E), (F), (G) or (H) of this section.



   E.   As an alternate means of collection of amounts due and unpaid
at owner-occupied property:



   1.   Once a year the city council may cause to be prepared a report
of delinquent fees including late charges. The council shall fix a time, date
and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto;



   2.   The council shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to
the landowners listed on the report not less than ten days prior to the date
of the hearing;



   3.   At the hearing the council shall hear any objections or
protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees including
late charges.  The council may make such revisions or corrections to the
report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be
confirmed;



   4.   The delinquent fees set forth in the report as confirmed shall
constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land and are
a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees. A certified
copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the county auditor for the
amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land
as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien is created, and
attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder of the county
in which the property is situated, of a certified copy of the resolution of
confirmation.  The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the
same manner as ordinary county ad valorem property taxes are collected and
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of county ad valorem property taxes shall be
applicable to such assessment, except that if any real property to which such
lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser
for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been
created and attached thereon, prior to the date on which the first
installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the lien which would
otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to such real property
and the delinquent fees, as confirmed, relating to such property shall be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection and recorded in the name of
the prior property owner following city policies and procedures.



   5.   The city may, in its discretion, issue separate bills for such
special assessment taxes and separate receipts for collection on account of
such assessment.



   F.   At the time the fees become delinquent, until such time as they
are fully paid, the delinquent account balance, including late charges, shall
constitute an unrecorded lien against the property, and, as such, may be
identified during a title search. For commercial businesses, delinquent
account balances, including late charges, may be considered an unrecorded
lien against the business name and/or owner of the business.



   G.   In addition to, or in lieu of other collection processes, the
city may authorize a third party to discontinue water service as a means of
collecting delinquent balances.



   H.   In addition to, or in lieu of other collection processes,
delinquent balances may be processed through a collection bureau. (Ord.
2014-01 § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 2011-08 § 7, 2011: Ord. 2006-02 (part),
2006: Ord. 2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000: prior code § 4290)



13.08.890   Application.



   In the event there are any inequities that arise because of the nature
of certain business, commercial accommodations or units under this article,
the director shall have the authority to establish any variances in applying
this article to alleviate such inequities. Any requirements for pretreatment
to bring materials discharged to a sewer to a condition where they may be
handled by the sewage system of the city, shall not be cause for a reduction
of the rates and charges outlined herein. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior
code § 4291)



Article 11. Administration and Enforcement



13.08.900   Violation unlawful.



   A.   Following the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter, to connect
to, construct, install or provide, maintain, use or alter any other means of
sewage disposal from any building in said city except by connection to a
public sewer in the manner as provided in this chapter, or by installation,
provision, usage or maintenance of approved private disposal facilities in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may fine such user in at least the amount of one thousand dollars
($1000.00) per day. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   C.   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any violation of
the provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this
chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon recommendation of the
prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an
infraction pursuant to Section 19(c) of the California Penal Code.



   D.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this article shall
be punished by: (1) A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this article within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of this article
within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a
new and separate offense.



   E.   Any person convicted of any infraction of this article shall be
punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this article within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this article within one year. Each day a violation continues shall be
regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior
code § 4295)



13.08.910   Inspection and sampling.



   The city may inspect the facilities of any discharger to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Owners and/or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow city representatives ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection
or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have
the right to set up on the discharger's property such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a discharger has
security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the discharger shall make
necessary arrangements with security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the city shall be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
The purposes of such inspection may include, but are not limited to:



   A.   Determination of the size, depth and location of any sewer or
storm drain connection;



   B.   Determination of the outlet of any sewer or storm drain
connection by depositing testing materials in any plumbing fixture attached
thereto and flushing the same, if necessary;



   C.   Determination by measurements and samples of the quantity and
nature of sewage or wastewater being discharged into any sewer, storm drain
or water course;



   D.   Inspection testings and sampling of the discharge of any device
used to prevent the discharge into any sewer, storm drain, or water course of
illegal waste or illegal quantities of waste, such as floor drains, traps or
other clarifiers, also, of those devices used to grind, shred, pulverize, or
otherwise treat garbage or industrial waste before discharging same into a
sewer or storm drain;



   E.   Determination of the location of roof, swimming pool and
surface drains, and whether they are connected to a street gutter, storm
drain or sewer;



   F.   Determination of the nature and quantity of flow in any open
water course or storm drain;



   G.   Inspection and copying of records of monitoring activities and
results. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4296)



13.08.920   Notice and correction.



   A.   Any person found to be violating, with respect to violations
other than sewer service charge delinquencies, any provision of this or any
other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall be served by the city
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.



   B.   All persons shall be held responsible for any and all damages
resulting from the acts of agents or employees. Upon being notified by the
city of any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of
said work or facilities shall correct the same, within the stipulated time
limit, at such person or persons' expense. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior
code § 4297)



13.08.925   Consent orders.



   The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance.  Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document.  Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 13.08.930
and 13.08.980 of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.930   Compliance orders.



   When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that
the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not
come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order shall not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for
any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.935   Public nuisance.



   Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any
industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter, other
than those provisions involving sewer service charge delinquencies, is
declared to be a public nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be
brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial
facility during the period of such violation. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4298)



13.08.940   Disconnection.



   As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the city shall have the power to disconnect a discharger from the sewer mains
of the city five days after written notice, by certified mail, thereof. Upon
disconnection, the city shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and
reconnection to the system, and the discharger shall deposit the cost, as
estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such discharger
connection is reconnected to the system. The city shall refund any part of
the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and
reconnection. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4299)



13.08.950   Public nuisance--Abatement.



   During the period of any disconnection, habitation of such premises by
human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the city may cause
proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of said premises
by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such event, and
as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the city a reasonable
attorney's fee and cost of suit arising in said action. (Ord. 2006-02 (part),
2006: Prior code § 4300)



13.08.960   Means of enforcement only.



   The city declares that Sections 13.08.880 through 13.08.950 are
established only as a means of enforcement of the terms and conditions of
this chapter and not as a penalty. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code §
4301)



13.08.970   Accidental discharge/slug control plan.



   A.   The city may require any industrial user to develop and
implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two
years, the city shall evaluate each significant industrial discharger and
determine whether or not such a plan will be required. Any industrial user
required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:



   1.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;



   2.   Description of stored chemicals;



   3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental
or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge of
substances prohibited by the city;



   4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.



   B.   Notification of Discharge. Significant industrial and
commercial dischargers shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally
discharging wastes in violation of this chapter, to enable countermeasures to
be taken by the city to minimize damage to the community sewer, treatment
facility, treatment processes and the receiving waters. This notification
shall be followed, within seven days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the
measures being taken to prevent future occurrence.  Such notification shall
not relieve dischargers of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the
sewer system, treatment plant, or treatment process, or for any fines imposed
on the city on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water
Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code.



   C.   Notices to Employees. In order that employees of significant
industrial dischargers be informed of city requirements, such dischargers
shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter, together with
such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the
city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution
control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the
discharger's bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an
accidental discharge or violation of this chapter.



   D.   Preventive Measures. Any direct or indirect connection or entry
point for accidental discharge of deleterious wastes to the discharger's
plumbing or drainage system should be eliminated. Where such action is
impractical or unreasonable, the discharger shall appropriately label such
entry points to warn against discharge of such wastes in violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4302)



13.08.980   Issuance of cease and desist orders.



   When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place, in
violation of prohibitions or limitations of this chapter, or the provisions
of an industrial discharge permit, the city may issue an order to cease and
desist and direct that those persons not complying with such prohibitions,
limitations, or provisions:



   A.   Comply forthwith;



   B.   Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the city;



   C.   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of
a threatened violation. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4303)



13.08.990   Show cause hearing.



   The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the city and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least seven days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be
served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.



(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.995   Submission of time schedule.



   When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking
place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this
chapter, or the provisions of an industrial discharge permit, the city may
require the discharger to submit for approval, with such modifications as it
deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the
discharger shall take in order to prevent or correct the violation. (Ord.
2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4304)



13.08.1000   Appeals.



   Any discharger, permit applicant, or permit holder affected by any
decision, action, or determination made by the director, interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder by
the city, may file with the city manager a written request for
reconsideration within ten days of such decision, action, or determination,
setting forth in detail the facts supporting the discharger's request for
reconsideration. The city manager has the discretion to refer any and all
appeals to a designated administrative hearing officer for determination.
(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Ord. 2000-18 §§ 1 (part), 2 (part), 2000: prior
code § 4305)



13.08.1010   City council appeal.



   Appeal decisions made by the city manager, or an administrative hearing
officer designated by the city manager,  may be appealed to the city
council. City council decisions shall be final. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4306)



13.08.1020   Injunction.



   Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of
this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of
contamination, pollution or nuisance, or whenever any person violates permit
conditions and/or applicable pretreatment standards, the city may petition
the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction
or both, as may be appropriate, in restraining the continuance of such
discharge. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4307)



13.08.1030   Liability.



   Any person, firm or corporation, or any partner, officer, agent or
employee thereof who deposits or permits to be deposited into the city's
sewer system or any facilities tributary thereto any wastes other than those
permissible under the terms of the ordinance and the terms of the valid
permit granted thereunder, shall be liable for any and all damage caused to
the city by virtue of such act, including compensation for damage to the
city's facilities and all costs of any legal fees, suits, or judgments
against the city which may be attributable to such wastes so discharged.
(Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4308)



13.08.1035   Administrative fines.



   A.   When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the city may fine such user. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation,
per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
The administrative penalty assessed per this section shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
the second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within
one year.  In the alternative, an alternative administrative penalty
requested by the Director of Public Works and approved by a resolution of the
Visalia City Council may be utilized pursuant to Section 1.13.050(D). 



   B.   Payment of any penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.



   C.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30)
calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten percent
(10%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.



   D.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a
request has merit, the city may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event
the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest
accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders,
to the fine.



   E.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   F.   Revocation of Permit. In the event a discharger shall fail to
make arrangements for corrective actions or to pay penalties, as required
herein, and shall not have appealed as provided within the time allowed, then
the director shall order such discharger's permit immediately suspended, and
take such action as necessary to ensure that the discharger complies with the
provisions of this section, including but not limited to physically blocking
the discharger's access to the sewer system. All such measures shall remain
in effect until the discharger has complied with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2011-08 § 8, 2011: Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006)



13.08.1040   Civil penalties.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.08.900:



   A.   The city may impose civil penalties upon any discharger who
violates any provision of this chapter. Civil penalties shall be in
accordance with Section 1.12.010. The purpose for issuing civil penalties
under this section is to penalize negligent or willful misconduct, discourage
future violations from occurring, encouraging corrective actions and
punishing repeat violators.



   B.   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city
in at least the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



   C.   The city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
city.



   D.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   E.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   F.   Notice of Violation. Upon the director's determination that a
chargeable violation has occurred, he shall issue to and serve upon, the
discharger a notice of violation(s). Such notice shall describe the time,
date, place and circumstances of each violation charged, the amount of
penalty imposed by the director for each violation, and corrective measures
which the discharger is required to undertake as a condition of continuation
of discharger's permit. The director shall have discretionary authority to
decline to issue notice of violation(s) in cases where violations are
insignificantly technical in nature and the public interest would not be
served by formal charges. The director shall keep a record of all such
discretionary determinations.



   G.   Discharger Payment or Appeal. Discharger shall pay the penalty
and take corrective action described in the notice of violation, or shall
make arrangements to pay and take corrective actions.  Payment shall be
made, or a plan for payment and corrective action shall be made and completed
not later than thirty (30) days after service upon the discharge of the
notice of violation. Discharger may, in the alternative, within thirty (30)
days of service of the notice of violation, file a notice of appeal with the
city manager, which notice of appeal shall stay all further action on the
notice of violation, and accumulation of interest upon penalties therein,
pending final decision by the city manager on the appeal; provided, however,
that nothing herein shall be taken to limit the authority of the director to
take such action or to make such directives as are reasonable in the
circumstances to stop or prevent an ongoing or threatened violation.



   H.   Revocation of Permit. In the event a discharger shall fail to
make arrangements for corrective actions or to pay penalties, as required
herein, and shall not have appealed as provided within the time allowed, then
the director shall order such discharger's permit immediately suspended, and
take such action as necessary to ensure that the discharger complies with the
provisions of this section, including but not limited to physically blocking
the discharger's access to the sewer system. All such measures shall remain
in effect until the discharger has complied with the provisions of this
section.



   I.   City Manager's Authority. Upon an appeal brought to the city
manager by a notice of appeal by a discharger charged with the violation, the
city manager shall set the matter for hearing. Alternatively, the city
manager may refer such appeals to a designated administrative hearing
officer. The city manager, or the administrative hearing officer shall
determine whether the violation has occurred, and whether the civil penalty
imposed by the director was reasonable in all the circumstances. The city
manager, or the administrative hearing officer designated by the city
manager, shall have the authority and set proceedings to affirm or dismiss
the allegations, to condition the penalties imposed or the corrective action,
or to reduce or increase the fines imposed by the director. Failure of the
discharger to comply with the decision of the city manager or the
administrative hearing officer designated by the city manager, or make
arrangements for compliance satisfactory to the director within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the decision, shall result in termination of the
discharger's permit, and the director shall thereupon order physical
termination of service forthwith, which service shall not be resumed until
the order of the city manager or the administrative hearing officer
designated by the city manager, has been complied with.



   J.   Lien. The amount of civil penalties imposed under this section
which have remained delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days shall
constitute a lien against the real property of the discharger from which the
discharge originated resulting in the imposition of the civil penalty. The
lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the
county recorder and when recorded shall be in force and effect for ten years
from time of recording unless sooner released, and shall be renewable in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of
the Code of Civil Procedure.



   K.   Superior Court Action. The city may, at its option, elect to
petition the superior court to confirm any other establishing civil penalties
and enter judgment in conformity therewith in accordance with the provisions
of Sections 1285 to 1297.6, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord.
2006-02 (part), 2006: Ord. 9605 § 26 (part), 1996: Prior code §4309)



13.08.1050   Criminal penalties for certain violations.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.08.900:



   A.   A discharger who willfully or negligently violates any
provisions of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine in at least the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or subject
to penalties in accordance with Section 1.12.010. (Ord. 2006-2 (part), 2006:
Ord. 9605 § 26 (part), 1996: Prior code § 4310).



   B.   A discharger who willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and be subject to a
penalty in at least the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation, per day or be subject to penalties in accordance with Section
1.12.010 This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for
personal injury or property damage available under state law. (Ord. 2006-02
(part), 2006: Ord. 9605 § 26 (part) 1996: Prior code § 4310).



13.08.1060   Penalties for significant noncompliance.



   Notwithstanding civil or criminal penalties, any industrial user found
to be in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements
during the previous twelve (12) months shall be included in an annual public
notification in the largest daily newspaper published in the city. (Ord.
2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4311)



13.08.1070   Falsifying of information.



   Any person or persons who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation, record, report, plan or other document filed with the city or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or procedure required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4312)



13.08.1075   Emergency suspensions.



   The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal
notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare or persons. The
city may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.



   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, it's receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the
termination proceedings in Section 13.08.1080 of this ordinance are initiated
against the user.



   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city prior to the date of any
termination hearing under Section 13.08.1080 of this ordinance.



   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 2006-02 (part),
2006)



13.08.1080   Termination of service.



   The city may revoke any industrial discharge permit, or immediately
terminate, or cause to be immediately terminated, wastewater service to any
premises if a violation of any provision of this chapter causes or threatens
to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance as defined in
this chapter. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4313)



Article 12. Special Regulations



13.08.1090   Protection from damage.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city sewerage system. (Ord.
2006-02 (part), 2006: Prior code § 4316)



13.08.1100   Confidential information.



   All information and data regarding a discharger obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits or monitoring programs, and from
inspections, shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods which would be
detrimental to the discharger's competitive position. When requested by the
person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection
by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use
in making studies and shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall
not be recognized as confidential information. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4317)



13.08.1110   Special agreements.



   Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or
agencies regarding wastewater treatment and sewerage facilities may be
entered into when in the opinion of the city unusual or extraordinary
circumstances compel special terms and conditions. However, no special
agreements between the city and any user shall be allowed to contravene
federal, state or local pretreatment standards. (Ord. 2006-02 (part), 2006:
Prior code § 4318)



Chapter 13.12
WATER METERS



Sections:



13.12.010   Purpose.



13.12.020   Short title.



13.12.030   Authorization.



13.12.040   Application.



13.12.050   Water meters on new construction.



13.12.060   Water meters on existing connections.



13.12.070   Phased implementation.



13.12.080   Plans and reports required.



13.12.090   Enforcement.



13.12.100   Lifeline rate.



13.12.110   Application to P.U.C.



13.12.120   Severability.



13.12.010   Purpose.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to improve water
conservation in the city by assuring that as much water consumption is
metered as is cost effective. (Prior code § 9620)



13.12.020   Short title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Water Meter Ordinance of the City
of Visalia." (Prior code § 9621)



13.12.030   Authorization.



   The city manager, or his designee, upon the recommendation of the
director of the general services department, is authorized and directed to
implement the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 9622)



13.12.040   Application.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers,
and property within the limits of the city. (Prior code § 9623)



13.12.050   Water meters on new construction.



   Water meters shall be required for all new construction, including
single-family residences. For the purpose of this section, "new" shall be
defined as all construction which has not closed escrow on the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 9624)



13.12.060   Water meters on existing connections.



   Water meters shall be required on all existing service connections with
meter spacers and meter boxes, except those used exclusively for fire
protection service. (Prior code § 9625)



13.12.070   Phased implementation.



   Water meter installation on unmetered connections defined in Section
13.12.060 shall occur in phases, and shall be complete by July 1, 1994.
(Prior code § 9626)



13.12.080   Plans and reports required.



   All water purveyors within the limits of the city shall prepare phased
installation plans to meet the deadline in Section 13.12.070, and shall
submit these plans to the director of the general services department by
August 1, 1991. A report of the progress made toward implementing the plan
shall be made to the director of the general services department by July 1st
each year, until implementation is complete. (Prior code § 9627)



13.12.090   Enforcement.



   A.   A determination by the city council that a water purveyor has
failed to comply with Sections 13.12.060 and 13.12.070 will result in the
filing of a formal complaint with the California Public Utilities Commission,
requesting enforcement action.



   B.   Failure to install water meters on existing service connections
as specified in Sections 13.12.060 and 13.12.070 may result in the waste of
water, and is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated in an action brought on behalf of the people of the state of
California by the city attorney, in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior code § 9628)



13.12.100   Lifeline rate.



   All water purveyors who install meters shall offer such consumers who
qualify a lifeline rate, as and when approved by the California Public
Utilities Commission. (Prior code § 9630)



13.12.110   Application to P.U.C.



   All water purveyors within the city shall, within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter,
make appropriate application to the California Public Utilities Commission
for authorization to install meters pursuant to this chapter, and to charge
all customers with meters rates based upon usage as measured by such meters.
Upon approval of the P.U.C., each water purveyor shall charge such customers
rates based upon usage as measured by the meters. (Prior code § 9631)



13.12.120   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Prior
code § 9629)



Chapter 13.16
WATER WELLS



Sections:



13.16.010   Adoption of water well ordinance.



13.16.020   Legislative authority.



13.16.030   Purpose.



13.16.040   Application of chapter.



13.16.050   Administrative variance.



13.16.060   Retroactivity.



13.16.070   Definitions.



13.16.080   Permit--When required, conditions expiration.



13.16.090   Emergency work.



13.16.100   Permit not required.



13.16.110   Application for permit.



13.16.120   Application fee.



13.16.130   Denial of permit.



13.16.140   Appeal of denial or conditions.



13.16.150   Judicial review of decision.



13.16.160   Inspections.



13.16.170   Mandatory inspections on certain projects.



13.16.180   Inspection--Public domestic well--Misdemeanor.



13.16.190   Well developer's report.



13.16.200   Confidentiality of reports.



13.16.210   Failure to report.



13.16.220   Enforcement--Stop order--Misdemeanor.



13.16.230   Enforcement--Permit conditions--Misdemeanor.



13.16.240   Declaration of nuisance.



13.16.250   Nuisance--Notice--Contents.



13.16.260   Notice--Personal delivery--Mailing--Posting.



13.16.270   Hearing--Request--Setting--Notice.



13.16.280   Hearing--Conduct.



13.16.290   Hearing--Decision.



13.16.300   Abatement--Entering private property.



13.16.310   Accounting--Notice--Hearing.



13.16.320   Hearing on accounting.



13.16.330   Special assessment and lien.



13.16.340   Location of wells.



13.16.350   Casing.



13.16.360   Casing--Materials.



13.16.370   Casing--Thickness.



13.16.380   Casing perforations.



13.16.390   Casing perforations--Shallow wells.



13.16.400   Annular seal--Public domestic wells.



13.16.410   Annular seal--Individual domestic wells.



13.16.420   Annular seal--Other wells.



13.16.430   Sealing off strata.



13.16.440   Grouting material and installation.



13.16.450   Surface seal.



13.16.460   Surface seal on existing wells--Nuisance--Misdemeanor.



13.16.470   Sample spigot.



13.16.480   Anti-siphon devices.



13.16.490   Access and air vent pipe.



13.16.500   Disinfection of wells.



13.16.510   Pump installation.



13.16.520   Well development--Cleaning.



13.16.530   River wells.



13.16.540   Cathodic protection wells.



13.16.550   Injection, disposal and air conditioning wells.



13.16.560   Defective wells.



13.16.570   Out of service wells and dry wells (seepage pits).



13.16.580   Destruction.



13.16.590   Same--Sealing strata.



13.16.600   Same--Residential area.



13.16.610   Same--Fill material.



13.16.620   Violations.



13.16.010   Adoption of water well ordinance.



   A.   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the requirement of the
regional water quality board for each municipal entity to establish well
water regulations that will insure a high quality of water and regulate the
entry of substances into the underground waters.



   B.   The city council adopted by reference the Tulare County Well
Ordinance as the "Well Ordinance of the City of Visalia" excepting such
amendments that reference city ordinance numbering and city officials
responsible for administration of the chapter. (Prior code § 7760)



13.16.020   Legislative authority.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by Sections 13800
to 13806 of the water code of the state of California. However, subsequently
the regional water quality control board held a hearing on this chapter
pursuant to Section 13804 of the Water Code of the state of California. On
October 11, 1974, the county clerk received official notice of the decision
of said regional board that this chapter was not sufficiently restrictive to
protect the quality of the affected waters on several points, in accordance
with said Section 13804. This chapter, as amended, was subsequently reviewed
and approved by said regional board and went into effect on February 8, 1975.
(Prior code § 7761)



13.16.030   Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that water produced by
wells in the city will be of high quality and to protect and preserve the
quality of underground waters by regulating the entry of substances from the
surface into well shafts and regulating the interchange through well shafts
of water between underground strata. (Prior code § 7762)



13.16.040   Application of chapter.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all
individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, estates and
trusts.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter are also applicable to the
United States, the state of California, cities and all political subdivisions
of the state of California, and to all officers, employees and departments of
the United States, the state of California, cities and other political
subdivisions when they drill a well, or perform any of the other acts covered
by this chapter, within the incorporated city. (Prior code § 7762.5)



13.16.050   Administrative variance.



   The chief building official may permit construction, deepening,
reconstruction and destruction of wells without strict compliance with the
standards established by this chapter when he determines that strict
compliance would impose an unreasonable burden on the permittee and that the
variance would not endanger the health or safety of the water user or the
public generally. (Prior code § 7763)



13.16.060   Retroactivity.



   Except as specifically provided in Sections 13.16.450, 163.16.470 and
13.16.480, this chapter shall apply only to construction, reconstruction,
deepening or destruction of a well when such construction, reconstruction,
deepening or destruction is commenced after the effective date of this
chapter. (Prior code § 7764)



13.16.070   Definitions.



   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth
in the following sections shall apply throughout this chapter.



   "Agricultural well" means a well used exclusively to supply water for
irrigation, livestock operation or other agricultural purposes.



   "Air conditioning well" means a disposal well used exclusively to
return to the ground, in a closed system, well water which has been used as a
coolant in air conditioning processes.



   "Annular seal" means the impervious material placed in the annular
space to prevent the flow of water across or along the annular space.



   "Annular space" means the area between the bore and the well casing. If
a conductor casing is used, annular space includes the area between the bore
and the conductor casing and between the conductor casing and the well casing.



   "Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess of
fifty (50) feet deep constructed by any means for the purpose of installing
equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment
in contact with the ground.



   "Construction" means the fashioning of the shaft of a well and
includes, but is not limited to, excavation, installation of casing, placing
gravel, perforation of casing in place, installation of annular seals and
sealing off strata.



   "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters to a
degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or the
spread of disease.



   "Destruction of well" means:



   1.   The complete filling of the well shaft in such a manner as to
protect persons and animals from the danger of physical harm and prevent
surface waters, waste, debris, and contaminants from entering the well; and



   2.   The sealing of the well shaft and annular space in such a
manner as to prevent pollution of any water bearing stratum by the
introduction through the well shaft of water, or any other substance, the
presence of which would result in a significant deterioration in the quality
of water in the stratum.



   "Disposal well" means a well into which liquid or solid substances are
deposited.



   "Domestic water" means water which is so used that, if contaminated, it
would act as a vehicle for the exposure of humans to dangerous substances or
disease causing organisms, including, but not limited to, water used for
drinking, food preparation, dish washing, bathing and swimming.



   "Hardrock well" means a well in which the water bearing strata occur in
crystalline rock.  Crystalline rock as used in this definition refers to
rocks of both igneous and etamorphic origin including, but not limited to,
granite, diorite, gabbro, schist and gneiss.  Limestone and dolomite which
commonly develop solution openings are also included.



   "Health officer" means the building official of the city or his duly
authorized representative.



   "Individual domestic water well" means a well, the water from which is
used to supply the domestic needs of no more than one individual residence or
one duplex. However, if the property on which the well is constructed is two
and one-half acres or more in area, an individual domestic well means a well
the water from which is used to supply the domestic needs of not more than
four individual residences or duplexes occupied by the owner or lessee of the
land, his relatives or employees hired to perform services on the parcel.



   "Industrial well" means a well used exclusively to supply water for
industrial purposes.  If any water from such a well is used for domestic
purposes, the well shall be deemed to be a public domestic well.



   "Injection well" means a well used to introduce water into the
underground as a means of replenishing ground water basins.



   "Monitoring wells" means an artificial excavation construction for the
purpose of gathering information regarding the subterranean aquifer
conditions for an extended period of time.



   "Permittee" means the person who makes a permit application or a person
on whose behalf such an application is made.



   "Point driven wells" means a well constructed by driving into the
ground a pipe fitted with a well point.



   "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of water by waste to a
degree which unreasonably and adversely affects such water for beneficial
uses, or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. The term pollution
includes contamination.



   "Public domestic water well" means any well the water from which is
used to supply domestic water which is not an individual domestic water well
as defined in this section.



   "Reconstruction" means alteration, repair, restoration of a well shaft.



   "River well" means a dug well located in or near a watercourse which
draws water from that watercourse.



   "Test hole" means an artificial excavation constructed for the purpose
of gathering information regarding subterranean conditions preparatory to
commencement of a well construction project.



   "Water quality" means the chemical, physical, biological,
bacteriological, radiological and other properties and characteristics of
water affecting its use.



   "Well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for
the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water or any other
substance into, the underground or for the purpose of cathodic protection,
except that this definition shall not include:



   1.   Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the
jurisdiction of the department of conservation of the state of California,
except those wells converted to use as water wells;



   2.   Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavations during
construction or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.



   "Well contractor" means any person licensed pursuant to Chapter 9
(commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions
Code of the state of California to engage in well drilling.



   "Well development" means the use of one or more of a variety of
techniques, including, but not limited to, overpumping, surging, introduction
of chemicals and explosions, which are intended to, and usually have the
effect of, increasing the flow of water from underground sources into the
well shaft through perforations or through the bottom of the shaft by acting
upon fine particles impeding the flow of such water.



   "Well redevelopment" means the development of a previously existing
well. (Prior code §§ 7765-- 7765.28)



13.16.080   Permit--When required, conditions expiration.



   Except as otherwise provided in Sections 13.16.090 and 13.16.100 and
except as otherwise provided in well redevelopment of this chapter, it is
unlawful for any person to construct, deepen, reconstruct or destroy any
well, or cause any of those acts to be done, unless a permit has first been
issued to him or to the person on whose behalf the work is undertaken. Every
permit shall be deemed to be conditioned upon compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The health officer may prescribe additional
conditions if he determines that they are required to prevent contamination
or pollution of underground waters. Permit conditions are appealable pursuant
to Section 13.16.130. The permit shall expire on the one hundred eightieth
calendar day after date of issuance if the work has not been started and
reasonable progress toward completion has not been maintained, except that
the health officer may extend the expiration date of the permit if he
determines that the delay has been warranted. (Prior code § 7766)



13.16.090   Emergency work.



   Should persons or property be threatened by a sudden, unforeseen
impairment in the quantity or quality of water available, so that it becomes
necessary to obtain a new water supply or increase the existing supply and a
permit cannot be obtained because city offices are not open, a well may be
constructed, deepened or reconstructed without a permit. All work done under
such emergency conditions shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
In all such cases, the person who caused the work to be done shall, within
forty-eight (48) hours after such work is begun, excluding weekends and
holidays, file a statement with the health officer indicating the reason for
the emergency work. The health officer shall inspect the well and order the
person who caused the emergency work to be done to perform such other and
further work, if any, as shall be necessary to bring this well into
conformity with the requirements of this chapter. The terms of such an order
shall be deemed permit conditions within the meaning of Section 13.16.140.
(Prior code § 7767)



13.16.100   Permit not required.



   A.   No permit is required to install, replace, or repair a pump on
an existing well or to redevelop an existing well. However, whenever such
work requires that the sanitary seal be broken, the person doing the work
shall make a record of the project, retain it for at least one year and make
it available to the health officer on request.



   B.   No permit is required by this chapter for the construction of a
seepage pit or evaporation pond constructed pursuant to this chapter. The
foregoing provision shall not be construed to allow disposition of sewage,
contaminants, toxic materials or other substances in such a seepage pit in a
manner forbidden by Section 13.16.550.



   C.   Except as provided in Section 13.16.530, no permit is required
to construct, reconstruct, deepen or destroy a river well.



   D.   No permit shall be required to install a surface seal required
by Section 13.16.450 or a surface seal and annular seal required by Section
13.16.460. (Prior code § 7768)



13.16.110   Application for permit.



   A.   Application for a permit required by Section 13.16.080 shall be
made to the health officer. Such application shall be on forms furnished by
the health officer and shall provide all information pertaining to the
project required by the health officer. Every application shall be signed by
the owner or lessee of the land on which the well is, or will be, located, or
the owner of the easement which allows the con-struction of a well, or the
authorized agent of any such person.



   B.   The following information shall be furnished:



   1.   Owner's name and address;



   2.   Intended use of well, whether domestic, agricultural,
industrial, or other use;



   3.   Location of well by reference to street address, nearest
streets or cross roads or other significant features and, when requested by
the health officer, by reference to township, range and section;



   4.   Dimensioned plot plan indicating north direction, distances and
location of existing and proposed structures, sewers or sewage disposal
systems, other wells and any other potential source of contamination or
pollution on the property or adjacent property within one hundred fifty (150)
feet of the well or proposed well;



   5.   Well drilling contractor's name, address and contractor's
license number;



   6.   Nature of the work to be done, whether construction, deepening
or other work, and the method to be used, whether cable tool, rotary or other
method;



   7.   Estimated depth of well when completed;



   8.   Size, gauge and type of casing;



   9.   Significant features of well (e.g., conductor casing or gravel
pack).



   C.   In addition to the foregoing the health officer may require
such other and further information relevant to the project as he may deem
necessary to determine whether the public health and safety require the
denial of the permit or the imposition of further conditions.



   D.   A permit may be denied for failure to supply any information
required by or pursuant to this section which is known to, or by the exercise
of reasonable diligence can be acquired by, the applicant. (Prior code §
7769)



13.16.120   Application fee.



   Each application for a permit to construct, reconstruct, deepen, or
abandon a water well shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution
of the city council. There shall be no fee for permits issued to the
governmental entities and officers specified in Section 13.16.040(B). (Prior
code § 7770)



13.16.130   Denial of permit.



   A.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section and
in Section 13.16.110, no permit shall be denied unless it appears that the
project for which the permit is requested poses a substantial threat of
pollution to the underground waters.



   B.   No permit shall issue for the construction, deepening or
reconstruction of an individual domestic water well or a public domestic
water well in a location in which sources of pollution or contamination are
known to exist which may cause a well complying with the provisions of the
well standards of this chapter to become polluted or contaminated; provided,
however, that if no other source of potable water is available and if the
health officer determines that such water may be rendered potable by
appropriate treatment, a permit conditioned on the provision of facilities
for such treatment may be issued.



   C.   No permit shall issue for the construction of a point driven
public or private domestic water well; however, that where no water is
available at a depth of greater than fifty (50) feet a permit may be issued
for construction of a point driven well less than fifty (50) feet deep. Any
permit for the construction of a point driven public domestic water well
shall be conditioned upon provision of purification facilities adequate to
insure that water produced will be and will remain potable. (Prior code §
7771)



13.16.140   Appeal of denial or conditions.



   If the health officer denies an application for permit, or issues a
permit subject to conditions which the applicant believes to be unreasonable,
the applicant may appeal to the city council for the decision of the health
officer. The city council shall, within twenty (20) days after receipt of a
written appeal, hold a hearing to determine whether the permit shall be
issued to the applicant and, if a permit is to be issued, the terms and
conditions under which it shall be issued. Such a hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with Section 13.16.270 and may be continued from time to time
by the council. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within
seven days after the conclusion of the hearing and the decision shall be
final as to all matters determined. (Prior code § 7772)



13.16.150   Judicial review of decision.



   Judicial review of a decision of the city council made after a hearing
pursuant to this chapter, if the decision denies the permit, shall be made
pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedures of the state of
California. The method of judicial review, the time limits for judicial
review, and all of the other provisions of said Section 1094.6 shall govern
such judicial review. When giving written notice to the applicant that the
permit has been denied, the city council shall provide notice to the
applicant that the time within which judicial review must be sought is
governed by said Section 1094.6. (Prior code § 7773)



13.16.160   Inspections.



   Every project for which a permit is required by this chapter may be
inspected by the health officer at such times as he deems advisable. (Prior
code § 7774)



13.16.170   Mandatory inspections on certain projects.



   The building official may prescribe mandatory inspections of public
domestic water well projects, and of projects on which he deems it likely
that strata seals will be required pursuant to Section 13.16.430. The stage
at which each such inspection is required shall be set forth in the permit.
It is unlawful for any person to continue work on a project past the stage at
which an inspection has been prescribed pursuant to this section until such
inspection by the building official has been completed; except that, a
permittee, or one acting on his behalf, may make an appointment with the
building official, by telephone or otherwise, to have the inspection carried
out at or following a time agreed upon at which it is contemplated the
inspection stage will have been reached, but not less than twenty-four (24)
hours following the time the appointment is made, and, if the building
official does not appear to make the inspection within one hour following the
time specified, work on the project may lawfully proceed. (Prior code § 7775)



13.16.180   Inspection--Public domestic well--Misdemeanor.



   It is unlawful to use a public domestic water well constructed,
reconstructed or deepened after the effective date of this chapter until the
building official has inspected it and determined that the water produced
meets the standard prescribed by Section 13.16.520. An adverse determination
shall be subject to review pursuant to Section 13.16.140. (Prior code § 7776)



13.16.190   Well developer's report.



   Any person who installs pumping equipment and develops a well for
public domestic supply shall, within thirty (30) days after completion, file
a written report with the building official containing the following
information:



   A.   Depth of water after developing the well;



   B.   The yield in gallons per minute with number of feet of drawdown
after five or more continuous hours of pumping. The pumping time may be
reduced if the building official determines that a problem exists for the
disposal of water. (Prior code § 7778)



13.16.200   Confidentiality of reports.



   Information reported pursuant to Section 13.16.190 shall not be
divulged except on written request of the person reporting such information
or the permittee of the project. (Prior code § 7779)



13.16.210   Failure to report.



   It is unlawful for any person to fail to file the reports required by
Section 13.16.190. (Prior code § 7780)



13.16.220   Enforcement--Stop order--Misdemeanor.



   Whenever any well construction, destruction, pump installation or
repair work is being done contrary to the requirements of this chapter, the
permit or the notice of intent, the building official may order the work
stopped by posting a notice to stop at the well site. It shall be unlawful to
do further work after such notice has been posted. A stop order shall be
subject to review pursuant to Section 13.16.140. (Prior code § 7781)



13.16.230   Enforcement--Permit conditions--Misdemeanor.



   It is unlawful to perform any work for which a permit has been granted
pursuant to this chapter without complying with the conditions of such
permit. (Prior code § 7782)



13.16.240   Declaration of nuisance.



   Wells constructed, reconstructed, deepened or destroyed after the
effective date of this chapter which are not constructed, reconstructed,
deepened or destroyed in accordance with the terms of this chapter, including
permit conditions added by the building official pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter, and wells and test holes which are defective within
the meaning of Section 13.16.520 are declared public nuisances which may be
abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The owner may abate
the nuisance described hereinabove at any time prior to commencement of
actual abatement by, or at the direction of, the building official. (Prior
code § 7783)



13.16.250   Nuisance--Notice--Contents.



   Whenever the building official determines that a nuisance described in
Section 13.16.240 exists, he shall deliver to the owner of the land upon
which the nuisance has been determined by him to exist a written notice
informing the owner of the determination that such nuisance exists. The
notice shall state that unless the owner abates the nuisance within a time,
following completion of service of the notice, therein stated, determined by
the building official to be a reasonable time to accomplish such abatement,
but not less than two weeks, or within such time files a notice of appeal
with the clerk of the city council, the building official will abate the
nuisance. It shall also state that the cost of such abatement may be added to
the county assessment roll as a lien on the real property or placed on the
unsecured tax roll. (Prior code § 7784)



13.16.260   Notice--Personal delivery--Mailing--Posting.



   The notice required by Section 13.16.250 shall be served by delivering
it personally to the owner, or if he cannot, after diligent effort, be
personally served, by placing it in the mail, with postage paid for certified
mail, addressed to the owner as his address appears on the records of the
county assessor. If service cannot with diligent effort be accomplished by
personal delivery or by mail, notice may be given by posting a copy at the
well site or by posting copies not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart
along the subject property. Notice by posting shall be deemed complete one
week after posting. (Prior code § 7785)



13.16.270   Hearing--Request--Setting--Notice.



   The owner of property upon which the building official has determined
that a nuisance described in Section 13.16.240 exists may request a hearing
before the city council for review of such determination within the time
specified in Section 13.16.250 by filing a written request therefore with the
clerk of the city council. The request shall describe the property on which
the nuisance has been determined to exist by street name and number and give
the name of the owner and his address. The clerk shall set a date and time
for hearing and send a notice thereof by regular mail at least ten days
before such date to the owner at the address set forth on his request and
shall notify the building official of such hearing. (Prior code § 7786)



13.16.280   Hearing--Conduct.



   At the date and time set, a hearing shall be held by the city council.
The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be represented by
counsel.  The city council shall hear all pertinent evidence offered by all
interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable
to the hearing.  All persons giving evidence shall be sworn before
testifying. The owner may employ a shorthand reporter to report the hearing.
The council may continue said hearing from time to time. (Prior code § 7787)



13.16.290   Hearing--Decision.



   At the conclusion of the hearing if the city council determines that a
public nuisance exists, it shall thereupon order the nuisance abated no
sooner than thirty (30) days following the mailing by the clerk of the notice
of the council's decision. The council shall determine whether the nuisance
is to be abated by correction or destruction. (Prior code § 7788)



13.16.300   Abatement--Entering private property.



   If a nuisance is not corrected or a hearing sought within the time
specified pursuant to Section 13.16.250, or if, after hearing, a nuisance is
not abated pursuant to, and in the time required by, Section 13.16.290, the
building official shall cause the nuisance to be abated and for that purpose
he and others at his direction, may enter the property where the nuisance
exists. (Prior code § 7789)



13.16.310   Accounting--Notice--Hearing.



   The building official shall keep an account of the cost of abatement
and render a report in writing to the city council showing such cost. Upon
receipt of the account of the building official, the clerk of the city
council shall deposit a copy of the account in the mail addressed to the
owner and include therewith a notice informing the owner that, at a date and
time selected by the clerk, but not less than ten days after the date of
mailing of the notice, the council will review the account and that the owner
may appear at said time and be heard. (Prior code § 7790)



13.16.320   Hearing on accounting.



   At the time fixed, the city council shall meet to review the report of
the building official. The owner may appear at said time and be heard on the
questions whether the accounting is accurate and the amounts reported
reasonable. The report of the building official shall be admitted into
evidence.  The owner shall bear the burden of proving that the accounting is
not accurate and reasonable. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in Section 13.16.280. The city council shall make such
modifications in the accounting as it deems necessary and thereafter shall
confirm the report by resolutions. (Prior code § 7791)



13.16.330   Special assessment and lien.



   The city council may order that the cost of abating nuisances pursuant
to this chapter be placed upon the county tax roll by the county auditor as
special assessments against the land, or placed on the unsecured roll, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 25845 of the Government Code of the
state of California. (Prior code § 7792)



13.16.340   Location of wells.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided, no well hereafter constructed
shall be located closer than the indicated horizontal distances from the
following:



   Front property line         25 feet



   Other property line         5 feet



   Septic tank            50 feet



   Leach line or disposal field      100 feet



   Metallic sewer line         25 feet



   Non-metallic sewer line      50 feet



   Seepage pit            150 feet



   B.   No well hereafter constructed shall be located within
twenty-five (25) feet of an area in which animals or fowl, fed by means other
than grazing, are confined or restrained, except when a physical barrier
prevents drainage or percolation from the confinement into the well.



   C.   No domestic well hereafter constructed shall be located within
fifty (50) feet of another well, except that an individual domestic well
hereafter constructed may be located within fifty (50) feet of another
individual domestic well.



   D.   When the building official determines that an extraordinary
danger of pollution or contamination exists, the building official may
increase the setback requirements specified in this section.



   E.   The setback restrictions contained in this section are not
violated when the location of a septic tank, leach or disposal field, solid
sewer line, or seepage pit on property of another is not known to the
permittee and could not by the exercise of reasonable diligence have been
discovered.



   F.   Cathodic protection wells are not subject to the setback from
property line provisions of this section. (Prior code § 7793)



13.16.350   Casing.



   The well casing shall extend not less than one-half inch above the top
of the concrete base required by this chapter. At the time of completion of
the well, the top of the casing shall be sealed with a weatherproof plate or
cap, securely fastened in place. (Prior code § 7794)



13.16.360   Casing--Materials.



   Subsections (a) and (b) of Subsection 2 of Subsection A of Section 12
of Part II of Chapter II of state of California Department of Water Resources
Bulletin No. 74 are referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter with
the same effect as if fully set forth herein. Any casing manufactured in
accordance with the standards therein established may be used in the
construction or reconstruction of wells.  Casing made of high carbon steel
for which no specifications are established and casing made of material other
than steel may be used upon a showing by the permittee that such material
will withstand pressures reasonably to be anticipated. In no case may wood or
downspout be used for casing. No damaged, defective or factory reject casing
shall be used. All casing shall be watertight, except for perforations.
(Prior code § 7795)



13.16.370   Casing--Thickness.



   Where steel casing is used it shall be not less than the thickness set
forth in the following table:



 

Diameter
 
Gauge
 
Thickness in Inches


6 inch
 
12
 
0.1046


8 inch
 
12
 
0.1046


10 inch
 
12
 
0.1046


12 inch
 
12
 
0.1046


14 inch
 
10
 
0.1345


more than 14 inch
 
8
 
0.1644



 



(Prior code § 7796)



13.16.380   Casing perforations.



   The casing of domestic water wells shall not be perforated within fifty
(50) feet of the ground surface if the depth of the well is greater than
fifty (50) feet. When possible, the uppermost perforations shall be below an
impervious stratum in an aquifer of good quality water. If a domestic water
well with perforations fifty (50) feet or less from the ground surface is
deepened, the perforations fifty (50) feet or less in depth shall be sealed
off to prevent commingling of water from that level with deeper water. (Prior
code § 7797)



13.16.390   Casing perforations--Shallow wells.



   Where an individual domestic well has a depth of sixty-five (65) feet
or less, only the bottom one-fourth of the casing shall be perforated;
provided, that the building official, after submission to him of sufficient
evidence that the well will not be thereby polluted or contaminated, may
permit perforations above the bottom one-fourth of the casing. Wherever
possible, the perforations shall be kept below an impervious stratum. (Prior
code § 7798)



13.16.400   Annular seal--Public domestic wells.



   Public domestic wells shall have an annular seal.  On a public
domestic well the space between the wall of the bore and the well casing or
the conductor casing, if the conductor casing is left in place, shall be
grouted to a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet from the ground surface
except as follows:



   A.   In the event the space between the wall of the bore and the
conductor casing cannot be grouted to a depth of fifty (50) feet, the space
shall be grouted to the greatest depth possible and the space between the
well casing and the conductor casing shall be grouted to a depth of not less
than fifty (50) feet from the ground surface in such a manner that the grout
will be forced out into the space between the wall of the bore and the
conductor casing at the fifty (50) foot level. The grout shall form an
effective seal which will preclude the vertical movement of water along the
outside of the conductor casing between those aquifer lying above and below
the fifty (50) foot level from the ground surface. In such cases, a gravel
fill pipe may be installed through the annular seal on gravel packed walls.



   B.   Public domestic wells extending into hard rock shall be grouted
no less than one foot into the first hard rock encountered.



   C.   Public domestic wells less than sixty-five (65) feet deep shall
conform to requirements set by the building official at the time the permit
is issued. (Prior code § 7799)



13.16.410   Annular seal--Individual domestic wells.



   Individual domestic wells shall have an annular seal. On an individual
domestic well the space between the wall of the bore and the well casing or
the conductor casing, if the conductor casing is left in place, shall be
grouted to a depth of not less than fifty (50) feet on wells drilled by the
rotary method and not less than twenty (20) feet on wells constructed by
other methods. (Prior code § 7800)



13.16.420   Annular seal--Other wells.



   Agricultural and industrial wells located within one hundred (100) feet
of a domestic well or source of contamination and all air conditioning wells
shall meet the annular seal requirements set forth in Section 13.16.400.
(Prior code § 7801)



13.16.430   Sealing off strata.



   A.   Whenever a well penetrates one or more aquifers containing
water the quality of which is such that the quality of water produced by the
well, or the quality of water in other aquifers, will be significantly
reduced if the waters are allowed to intermingle, the aquifer containing the
low quality water shall be sealed so as to prevent such intermingling.
Whenever an aquifer is required to be sealed, a ten foot annular seal shall
be formed in the confining formations, except that where the well shaft ends
in the aquifer to be sealed, the seal need not be extended into the lower
confining formation so long as the bottom of the shaft is sealed. There shall
be no casing perforations in the aquifer to be sealed.



   B.   When drilling a well, if the driller drills through a layer of
clay which is twenty (20) feet or more in thickness, the casing shall not be
perforated both above and below the clay if both the following conditions
occur:



   1.   The difference in water quality above and below the clay is
more than five hundred (500)  micromhos as specified electrical conductance
or more than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter as total dissolved
solids; and



   2.   The well is located in an area which is designated by the
building official as a salinity problem area on a current map of the known
salinity problem areas in the city prepared by, and on file in the office of,
the building official. Said map shall be revised by the building official
from time to time to show the areas in the city where salinity problems are
known to exist after consultation with well drillers generally and other
interested groups and individuals. (Prior code § 7802)



13.16.440   Grouting material and installation.



   All annular seals shall be of neat cement grout, quick setting cement
or bentonite the composition of which shall conform to requirements of
Subsection 9 of Part II of Chapter II of state of California Department of
Water Resources Bulletin No. 74 which is referred to, adopted and made a part
of this chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein. The
building official may accept other materials when they have been demonstrated
to form acceptable seals which preclude the vertical movement of water along
the outside of the well casing.  All annular seals shall be poured in one
continuous process unless otherwise specified on the permit.  The annual
seal shall be a minimum of two inches thick at all depths, except the annular
seal for hardrock wells shall be a minimum of one inch thick at all depths.
In no event shall the thickness of an annular seal be less than three times
the diameter of the largest aggregate used in the sealing material. (Prior
code § 7803)



13.16.450   Surface seal.



   All water wells shall be provided with a watertight concrete base
poured in a single, continuous operation on thoroughly compacted earth.
Except for individual domestic wells, the base shall have a minimum total
thickness of fourteen (14) inches of which at least ten inches shall extend
above the ground level at the casing. The base of individual domestic wells
shall have a minimum total thickness of four inches. The base shall extend
horizontally in all directions at least one foot from the outside of the well
casing or the wall of the bore hold on gravel packed wells. The concrete base
shall be adequately sloped so as to drain water away from the well casing to
the edge of the base. The building official may approve a base of a different
design where the variation from this pattern of construction would serve a
practical purpose or is essential to the integrity or utility of the well and
will not lessen well protection. (Prior code § 7804)



13.16.460   Surface seal on existing wells--Nuisance--Misdemeanor.



   All public domestic water wells constructed prior to the effective date
of this chapter which do not have an effective surface seal shall be provided
with a concrete base which meets the requirements of Section 13.16.450 and
shall comply with the requirements of Sections 13.16.480 and 13.16.490. They
shall also have an annular seal two inches thick which extends down the
outside of the outermost casing not less than three feet from the ground
surface. A public domestic well which, within one year after the effective
date of this chapter, does not meet all the requirements of this section
shall be deemed a public nuisance within the meaning of Section 13.16.240. It
is unlawful to maintain such a nuisance. (Prior code § 7805)



13.16.470   Sample spigot.



   Public domestic wells shall be provided with a sample spigot on the
pump discharge line as close to the pump as practical. The sample spigot
shall be on the discharge side of the check valve when a check valve is
installed. The spout of the spigot shall not be threaded unless the pump has
a check valve. (Prior code § 7806)



13.16.480   Anti-siphon devices.



   A.   All wells constructed after the effective date of this chapter
shall have a check valve, air gap of which will prevent water from the
discharge line from flowing into the well.



   B.   Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
chapter, all existing public domestic wells shall have a device of the type
described in subsection (A) of this section and it is unlawful, and a public
nuisance, to maintain a well without such a device.



   C.   The devices of the type required to be installed under
subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall be placed as close to the pump
as practical.



   D.   It is unlawful to inject any herbicide, chemical or any other
pollutant into the discharge line of a well which is not equipped with a
device of the type described in subsection (A) of this section. (Prior code
§ 7807)



13.16.490   Access and air vent pipe.



   All wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means by
which disinfectants can be introduced into the well or the depth of the well
may be measured. The pipe, if provided, shall be extended to a height of not
less than three inches above the concrete base and shall be kept sealed and
shall be provided with a threaded cap. On public domestic wells, the pipe
shall also serve as an air relief vent, terminate downward, be covered with
sixteen (16) per inch or finer wire mesh screen and be protected against the
possibility of contamination by material entering the pipe. (Prior code §
7808)



13.16.500   Disinfection of wells.



   After the pump has been installed, all domestic wells shall be
disinfected with a solution containing at least fifty (50) parts per million
available chlorine, which shall remain in the well for a period of not less
than twenty-four (24) hours or by an equivalent method of disinfection
satisfactory to the building official, and such procedure shall be repeated
on all public domestic wells as necessary to produce water which will yield
negative results on two consecutive biological samples tested in the manner
prescribed in Section 13.16.530. The gravel used in domestic gravel packed
wells shall be disinfected by mixing one-half pound of tablets containing
seventy (70) percent available chlorine with each tone of gravel introduced
to the well. The chlorine tablets shall be evenly distributed throughout the
volume of gravel used. (Prior code § 7809)



13.16.510   Pump installation.



   After the effective date of this chapter, pumps and pump motors
installed or reinstalled directly over the casing of any well shall be
provided with a sanitary seal between the pump base and the concrete base or
between the well casing and the pump column pipe. Wells on which a
submersible pump or a pump offset from the casing is installed or reinstalled
shall have a steel plate fitted over the top of the casing with a watertight
seal between the plate and the casing and between the casing and any pipes or
conduits which enter the well through the steel plate. No pipe or conduit
shall enter the casing from the side except access, air vent, and pump
discharge pipes as required by this chapter. Holes in the base of the pump
which open into the well shall be sealed. (Prior code § 7810)



13.16.520   Well development--Cleaning.



   Before being placed in service, all wells developed or redeveloped
shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances. (Prior code § 7811)



13.16.530   River wells.



   The city council finds that, because an adequate supply of groundwater
exists, it is not practical or desirable to construct public domestic river
wells.  No permit shall be issued for construction of a domestic river well.
(Prior code § 7812)



13.16.540   Cathodic protection wells.



   Cathodic protection wells shall be constructed in conformance with the
cathodic well standards set forth in the state of California Department of
Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1 which is referred to, adopted and made a
part of this chapter, with the same effect as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior code § 7814)



13.16.550   Injection, disposal and air conditioning wells.



   Injection, disposal and air conditioning wells are subject to the
requirements of Sections 13.16.340 to 13.16.360 both inclusive, 13.16.410,
13.16.440, that portion of 13.16.450 applicable to individual domestic wells,
and that portion of 13.16.500 application to wells having submersible pumps.
In addition, disposal water injected into any water bearing formation through
a disposal, injection or air conditioning well shall not cause the
temperature of the adjacent ground water at any point greater than fifty (50)
feet in a horizontal direction from such well to increase more than eight
degrees Fahrenheit.  Disposal water which so heats the ground water is a
contaminant. It is unlawful to introduce into a disposal well greater than
forty (40) feet in depth or penetrating a water bearing formation, sewage,
contaminants, toxic materials or other substances which will alter the
existing ground water quality or cause the existing ground water in the
disposal area to be contaminated. A sampling tap shall be provided on all
disposal and injection wells in such a manner that water, representative of
the water entering the well, may be withdrawn. (Prior code § 7815)



13.16.560   Defective wells.



   It is the duty of every owner of land on which there exists a well or
test hole which impairs, or allows the impairment of, the quality of the
underground water or water bearing formations or constitutes a health or
safety hazard to correct the defective conditions or to destroy the well or
test hole.  Whenever a well or test hole is corrected pursuant to this
section, that correction shall be deemed a reconstruction and shall be
performed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. This section shall
not be construed to require a permit for installation of a surface seal and
annular seal pursuant to Section 13.16.460. (Prior code § 7816)



13.16.570   Out of service wells and dry wells (seepage pits).



   It is the duty of every owner of land on which there is a well or test
hole which is not being used to cap the well or test hole with a watertight
seal and keep the well site free of trash, weeds and debris. Whenever any
well or test hole is capped, notice shall be sent to the building official
stating the owner's name, the location of the well or test hole, the fact
that it has been taken out of service and the anticipated date of return to
service if that date is known. Any owner who willfully fails to perform the
duties imposed by this section or who introduces or knowingly allows sewage
or other pollutants to flow into an out of service well, test hole or dry
well shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 7817)



13.16.580   Destruction.



   Except as provided in Sections 13.16.590 and 13.16.600, well
destruction shall be accomplished by clearing the shaft of any obstructions,
if possible, and filling the shaft in the following manner:



   A.   The water well shafts shall be filled to within twenty (20)
feet of the surface with inorganic material. The top twenty (20) feet of the
shaft shall be filled with impervious material. If an annular space exists,
the casing shall be perforated twenty (20) feet from the surface and the
impervious material allowed to flow into and seal the annular space. (Prior
code § 7818)



13.16.590   Same--Sealing strata.



   Where a well penetrates one or more aquifers containing water the
quality of which is such that the quality  of water in other aquifers will
be significantly reduced if the waters are allowed to intermingle, in
addition to the impervious seal required by Section 13.16.580, the building
official shall require that the shaft be sealed at such depths and in such a
manner that no such intermingling of waters will occur through the shaft or
through the annular space. (Prior code § 7819)



13.16.600   Same--Residential area.



   Whenever a well to be destroyed is located on a parcel one-half acre or
less in area on which is located one or more dwellings, a hole shall be
excavated around the well casing to a depth of six feet below the ground
surface. The well casing shall be removed to within six inches of the bottom
of the hole. The well shaft must be filled in the manner provided in Sections
13.16.580 and 13.16.590; except, that the depth to which impervious fill is
required shall be measured from the bottom of the hole excavated pursuant to
this section rather than from the surface of the surrounding ground. Such
impervious fill shall be allowed to spill over into the excavation to form an
effective seal. After such impervious fill has set, the excavation shall be
filled with native soil. (Prior code § 7820)



13.16.610   Same--Fill material.



   Impervious materials used in well destruction must have a coefficient
of permeability of less than one hundred (100) feet per year. Suitable
materials include, but are not limited to, neat cement grout, concrete and
bentonite clays. Materials which maybe used as inorganic fill include, but
are not limited to, clay, sand, silt, native soils and any of the impervious
materials referred to above. No fill material shall contain matter which will
pollute the underground water. Used drilling mud shall not be used as a fill
material. (Prior code § 7821)



13.16.620   Violations.



   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections
13.16.530, 13.16.550 and 13.16.570 which are declared to be unlawful shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in Section
1.12.010.



   B.   Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 13.16.210
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars ($50.00).



   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
which are declared to be unlawful, other than Sections 13.16.210, 13.16.530,
13.16.550 and 13.16.570, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Prior
code § 7822)



Chapter 13.20
WATER CONSERVATION



Sections:



13.20.010   Purpose.



13.20.020   Short title.



13.20.030   Authorization.



13.20.040   Application.



13.20.050   Definitions.



13.20.060   Permanent water conservation requirements--Prohibition against
waste.



13.20.070   Water conservation stages.



13.20.080   Mandatory conservation phase implementation.



13.20.090   Enforcement.



13.20.100   Public nuisance--Definitions.



13.20.110   Enforcement officers.



13.20.120   Exceptions.



13.20.130   Severability.



13.20.010   Purpose.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prevent waste or
unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water in the city.  (Ord.
2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.020   Short title.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Water Conservation Ordinance of the
City of Visalia."  (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.030   Authorization.



   The city manager, or designee, is authorized and directed to implement
the applicable provisions of this chapter upon their determination that such
implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety.  (Ord.
2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.040   Application.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons,
customers, and property within the limits of the city.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water
where necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential
government services such as police, fire, and other similar emergency
services.  (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.050   Definitions.



   "Commercial nursery" means the use of land, buildings or structures for
the growing and/or storing of flowers, fruit trees, ornamental trees,
vegetable plants, shrubs, trees and similar vegetation for the purpose of
transplanting, for use as stock or grafting, and includes the retail sale or
wholesale distribution of such items directly from the premises/lot.



   "Drip irrigation system" means a non-spray, low-pressure, and low
volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a precipitation or
flow rate measured in gallons per hour (GPH), designed to slowly apply small
volumes of water at or near the root zone of plants or other landscaping and,
in no event, emits more than four (4) gallons of water per hour.



   "Irrigation system" means the components of a system meant to apply
water to an area for the purpose of irrigation, including, but not limited
to, piping, fittings, sprinkler heads or nozzles, drip tubing, valves, and
control wiring.



   "Large landscape area" means an area of vegetation at least three (3)
acres in size supporting a business necessity or public benefit use such as
parks, golf courses, schools, and cemeteries.



   "Measureable rainfall" means any amount of precipitation of more than
one-quarter (1/4) inch (0.25").



   "Ornamental landscape" means plants for the purpose of improving the
aesthetic appearance of property, including but not limited to, trees,
shrubs, bushes, flowers, ground cover, turf, lawns, and grass but, does not
include crops or other agricultural products or special landscape areas.



   "Person" means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or
private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of
water within the limits of the city of Visalia.



   "Plumbing fixture" means a receptacle or device that is connected to a
water supply system, including, but not limited to, pipes, toilets, urinals,
showerheads, faucets, washing machines, water heaters, tubs, and dishwashers.



   "Potable water" means water which conforms to the federal and state
standards for human consumption.



   "Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to
which it is applied and flows from the landscape onto other areas.



   "Sports field" means a public or private facility improved with
apparatus and/or striping supporting a public benefit use or business
necessity that provides turf areas as playing surface for regularly scheduled
(at least weekly) individual and team sports, and does not include a facility
on a residential property.



   "Turf" means a ground cover surface of grass that can be mowed.



   "Water feature" means a design element where open, artificially
supplied water performs an aesthetic or recreation function, including, but
not limited to, ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, and streams.



(Ord. 2016-08 § 2 (part), 2016)



13.20.060   Permanent water conservation requirements--Prohibition against
waste.



   The following water conservation requirements are effective at all
times and are permanent. Violations of this section shall be considered waste
and an unreasonable use of water. The prohibitions shall apply to all persons
year round unless modified by adoption of a more stringent water conservation
stage.



   A.   Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of ornamental
landscape, turf, or other vegetated area is prohibited between the hours of
8:00 am and 6:00 pm on any day, except by the use of a hand-held bucket or
similar container, a hand-held hose fitted with a positive shut-off nozzle or
device that causes it to cease dispensing water immediately when not in use,
or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or
repairing an irrigation system.



   B.   No Use of Unattended Hose Without Timer. Irrigation utilizing
an unattended hose sprinkler, soaker hose, or other irrigation system is
prohibited unless the hose is fitted with a hose faucet timer.



   C.   No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. The use of water which
causes water to flow or run off onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas,
sidewalk, driveway, street, parking lot, alley, gutter, ditch, or drain,
etc., is prohibited. Every water user is deemed to have his/her water
distribution lines and facilities under his/her control at all times and to
know the manner and extent of his/her water use and runoff.



   D.   No Watering During Rain. Irrigation of ornamental landscape or
other vegetated areas is prohibited during and within forty-eight (48) hours
of measureable rainfall.



   E.   Limits on Washing Down Paved Surfaces and Buildings. The
washing of building exteriors, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis
courts, patios, or other paved areas is prohibited except where the hose is
fitted with a positive shut-off nozzle or device that causes it to cease
dispensing water immediately when not in use.



   F.   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. The excessive
use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or malfunctions in the
water user's plumbing or distribution facilities for any period of time after
such escape of water should reasonably have been discovered and corrected is
prohibited. It shall be presumed that a period of forty-eight (48) hours
after discovery is a reasonable time within which to correct such leak or
break.



   G.   Recirculating Water Required for Water Features. Operating a
water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited.



   H.   Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types
of mobile equipment is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or
similar container or hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing
water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to commercial
car washing facilities.



   I.    Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking
establishments, including but not limited to restaurants, hotels, cafes,
cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or dinks are sold,
served, or offered for sale, are required to serve drinking water only upon
request.



   J.   Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to
Decline Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging
establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and
linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently
display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily
understood language.



   K.   No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of
single pass cooling systems is prohibited in new buildings.



   L.   No Installation of Non-recirculating Water Systems in
Commercial Carwash and Laundry Systems. Installation of non-recirculating
water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor carwash and new
commercial laundry systems.



   M.   Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray
Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are
prohibited from using non-water conserving dish-wash spray valves.



   N.   The draining of swimming pools more than once every three
years, except for structural repairs, chemical imbalance, or to comply with
public health standards determined by the county health officer or city code
enforcement officer, shall be prohibited. Any resident whose swimming pool is
drained by order of the city or county for failure to maintain it properly
will also be issued a notice of violation. The draining of pools for reasons
of health and safety hazards as determined by a city officer or department of
health is permitted. Pool drain permit applications due to structural repairs
or chemical imbalance shall include the results of a pool water test
conducted by an independent testing organization which shows a cyanuric acid
level above 100 parts per million, total dissolved solids over 2,500 parts
per million, or calcium over 450 parts per million, or a statement of repairs
from a licensed pool contractor stating the nature and duration of repairs to
be made and the date on which the pool will be drained.



   O.   New Pools and Spas Required to Have Covers. A cover must be
installed when constructing a new pool or spa or when a city building permit
is issued for repair or remodeling a pool or spa. 



(Ord. 2016-08 § 2 (part), 2016)



13.20.070   Water conservation stages.



   A.   Stage 1. Water Watch. Upon implementation by the city manager
and publication of notice, the following restrictions shall apply to all
persons in addition to the prohibited uses in Section 13.20.060.



      1.   Irrigation of ornamental landscapes is limited to three
(3) days per week in the months of March through November, and one (1) day
per week in December, January, and February, as follows:



         a.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an odd
number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday
in March through November, and only on Saturday in December, January and
February.



         b.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an
even number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Wednesday, Friday and
Sunday in March through November, and only on Sunday in December, January and
February.



         c.   The foregoing restrictions do not apply to:



            i.   Landscape irrigation zones that exclusively
use drip irrigation systems.



            ii.   Irrigation of ornamental landscapes with the
use of an attended hand-held bucket or similar container, or an attended
hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle or
device.



            iii.   Operation for very short periods of time
for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. A
city of Visalia sign or equivalent must be displayed notifying the public of
the repairs while the area remains wet.



      2.   Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not
limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts,
patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or
sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar
container, a hand-held hose fitted with a positive shut-off nozzle or device,
or a low-flow high-pressure washer.



   B.   Stage 2. Water Alert. Upon implementation by the city manager,
publication of notice, and ratification by resolution of the city council,
the following restrictions shall apply to all persons in addition to the
prohibited uses in section 13.20.060. Stage 2 shall terminate one (1) year
after implementation unless reauthorized by the city council by resolution.



      1.   Irrigation of ornamental landscapes is prohibited in the
months of December, January and February, and is limited two (2) days per
week in March through November, as follows:



         a.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an odd
number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Tuesday and Saturday in March
through November; no irrigation is allowed in December, January, or February.



         b.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an
even number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Wednesday and Sunday in
March through November; no irrigation is allowed in December, January, or
February.



         c.   The foregoing restrictions do not apply to:



            i.   Landscape irrigation zones that exclusively
use drip irrigation systems.



            ii.   Irrigation of non-turf ornamental landscapes
with the use of an attended hand-held bucket or similar container, or an
attended hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle
or device.



            iii.   Operation for very short periods of time
for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. A
city of Visalia sign or equivalent must be displayed notifying the public of
the repairs while the area remains wet.



            iv.   Sports fields and public and private golf
course greens and tees may deviate from the mandatory irrigation day and time
restrictions in order to maintain play areas and accommodated event schedules
by submitting to the city manager or designee an alternative watering
schedule that reduces overall water use by 20 percent from the average used
the year prior to Stage 2 (Stage 4 in prior ordinance) declaration.
Applicants must reapply for the exception annually and provide documentation
that the alternative watering schedule achieved the required water use
reduction. Documentation may consist of water utility bills, pump electric
utility bills, or other documentation that provides the required information.



            v.   Large landscape areas may deviate from the
mandatory irrigation day restrictions by submitting to the city manager or
designee an alternative watering schedule that reduces overall water use by
30 percent from the average used the year prior to the Stage 2 (Stage 4 in
prior ordinance) declaration. Applicants must reapply for the exception
annually and provide documentation that the alternative watering schedule
achieved the required water use reduction. Documentation may consist of water
utility bills, pump electric utility bills, or other documentation that
provides the required information.



            vi.   A plant establishment exception for new
permanent landscapes is allowed by permit. The plant establishment exception
allows for irrigation on non-watering days for a period of 21 days. Plant
establishment permits are issued for new or rehabilitated landscape projects
that have been approved by the community development department in accordance
with the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, unless and until
the city adopts a local water efficient landscape ordinance, in which case
the local ordinance shall apply. Otherwise, the plant establishment exception
does not apply to installation of turf or annual plants and no more than one
(1) plant establishment permit will be issued for an address per year.



      2.   Overseeding of lawns is prohibited. Exception is provided
for maintenance of sports fields and golf course greens and tees.



      3.   Filling or re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds is
prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided
that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed
within the water feature prior to implementation of Stage 2 or higher in this
chapter.



      4.   The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
courts, patios, or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, unless it is
necessary for the health and safety of the public, in which case a low-flow
high-pressure washer must be used.



      5.   Washing of buildings is prohibited unless preparing the
building for sale or for painting, in which case a low-flow high-pressure
washer must be used.



      6.   All outdoor mist cooling systems related to human comfort
are prohibited.



      7.   Use of temporary water slides is prohibited.



      8.   Stage 2 of this section will be enforced by the issuance
of one warning for violation before the issuance of a citation in accordance
with Section 13.20.090. Citations will be issued without a warning for
willful and egregious violations. Willful and egregious violations include
draining a pool without a permit or other violations as determined by the
city manager or designee.



   C.   Stage 3. Water Warning. Upon implementation by the city
manager, publication of notice, and ratification by resolution of the city
council, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons in addition to
the prohibited uses in Section 13.20.060. Stage 3 shall terminate one (1)
year after implementation unless reauthorized by the city council by
resolution.



      1.   Irrigation of ornamental landscapes is prohibited in the
months of December, January and February, and is limited to one (1) day per
week in March through November, as follows:



         a.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an odd
number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Saturday in March through
November; no irrigation is allowed in December, January, or February.



         b.   Locations bearing a street address ending in an
even number shall be permitted to irrigate only on Sunday in March through
November; no irrigation is allowed in December, January, or February.



         c.   The foregoing restrictions do not apply to:



            i.   Landscape irrigation zones that exclusively
use drip irrigation systems.



            ii.   Irrigation of non-turf ornamental landscapes
with the use of an attended hand-held bucket or similar container, or an
attended hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle
or device.



            iii.   Operation for very short periods of time
for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. A
city of Visalia sign or equivalent must be displayed notifying the public of
the repairs while the area remains wet.



            iv.   Sports fields and public and private golf
course greens and tees may deviate from the mandatory irrigation day and time
restrictions in order to maintain play areas and accommodated event schedules
by submitting to the city manager or designee an alternative watering
schedule that reduces overall water use by 50 percent from the average used
the year prior to Stage 2 declaration, or 30 percent from the average used
the year prior to the Stage 3 declaration. Applicants must reapply for the
exception annually and provide documentation that the alternative watering
schedule achieved the required water use reduction. Documentation may consist
of water utility bills, pump electric utility bills, or other documentation
that provides the required information.



            v.   Large landscape areas may deviate from the
mandatory irrigation day restrictions by submitting to the city manager or
designee an alternative watering schedule that reduces overall water use by
60 percent from the average used the year prior to Stage 2 declaration, or 60
percent from the average used the year prior to the Stage 3 declaration.
Applicants must reapply for the exception annually and provide documentation
that the alternative watering schedule achieved the required water use
reduction. Documentation may consist of water utility bills, pump electric
utility bills, or other documentation that provides the required information.



            vi.   A plant establishment exception for new
permanent landscapes is allowed by permit. The plant establishment exception
allows for irrigation on non-watering days for a period of 21 days. Plant
establishment permits are issued for new or rehabilitated landscape projects
that have been approved by the community development department in accordance
with the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, unless and until
the city adopts a local water efficient landscape ordinance, in which case
the local ordinance shall apply. Otherwise, the plant establishment exception
does not apply to installation of turf or annual plants and no more than one
(1) plant establishment permit will be issued for an address per year.



      2.   The washing of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,
trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types of mobile equipment is permitted
only on Saturday or Sunday. Exception. Washing may be done at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial carwash or fleet maintenance facility.
Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health,
safety and welfare of the public are contingent upon frequent vehicle
cleanings, such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and
perishables.



      3.   Overseeding of lawns is prohibited. Exception is provided
for maintenance of sports fields and golf course greens and tees.



      4.   Filling or re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds is
prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided
that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed
within the water feature prior to implementation of Stage 2 or higher in this
chapter.



      5.   The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas,
courts, patios, or other paved areas is absolutely prohibited, unless it is
necessary for the health and safety of the public, in which case a low-flow
high-pressure washer must be used.



      6.   Washing of buildings is prohibited unless preparing the
building for sale or for painting, in which case a low-flow high-pressure
washer must be used.



      7.   All outdoor mist cooling systems related to human comfort
are prohibited.



      8.   Use of temporary water slides is prohibited.



      9.   Use of portable water for street cleaning with trucks,
except for initial wash-down for construction purposes (if street sweeping is
not feasible).



      10.   Use of potable water for construction purposes, such as
consolidation of backfill, dust control, or other uses unless no other source
of water or method can be used.



      11.   Stage 3 of this section will be enforced by the issuance
of one warning for violation before the issuance of a citation in accordance
with Section 13.20.090. Citations will be issued without a warning for
willful and egregious violations. Willful and egregious violations include
draining a pool without a permit or other violations as determined by the
city manager or designee.



   D.   Stage 4. Water Emergency. Upon implementation by the city
manager, publication of notice, and ratification by resolution of the city
council, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons in addition to
the prohibited uses in Section 13.20.060. Stage 4 shall terminate one (1)
year after implantation implementation unless reauthorized by the city
council by resolution.



      1.   Watering or irrigating lawn, landscape, or other
vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction shall not
apply to the following categories of use:



         a.   Maintenance of non-turf vegetation, including trees
and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container or
a handheld hose equipped with a positive self-closing shut-off nozzle or
device.



         b.   Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for
fire protection.



         c.   Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion
control.



         d.   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be
rare or essential to the well-being of protected species.



         e.   Actively irrigated environmental mitigation
projects.



      2.   Overseeding of lawns is prohibited.



      3.   Filling or re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds is
prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life.



      4.   Washing of buildings is prohibited unless preparing the
building for sale or for painting, in which case a low-flow high-pressure
washer must be used.



      5.   All outdoor mist cooling systems related to human comfort
are prohibited.



      6.   Use of temporary water slides is prohibited.



      7.   Draining and refilling of swimming pools is prohibited
except that a pool may be drained by permit to comply with public health
standards as determined by the county health officer or city code enforcement
officer. Any resident whose swimming pool is drained by order of the city or
county for failure to maintain it property will also be issued a notice of
violation. The draining of pools for reasons of health and safety hazards as
determined by a city officer or department of health is permitted. Drained
pools may not be refilled.



      8.   Washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes,
and other vehicles is prohibited except at a commercial carwash or fleet
vehicle washing facility.



      9.   Use of potable water for construction purposes, such as
consolidation of backfill, dust control, or other uses is prohibited.



      10.   Stage 4 of this section will be enforced by the issuance
of a citation in accordance with Section 13.20.090 without a warning.



(Ord. 2016-08 § 2 (part), 2016)



13.20.080   Mandatory conservation phase implementation.



   The city manager or designee, with the assistance of any operator of a
water utility having customers within the city, shall monitor the projected
supply and demand for water within the city and shall recommend to the city
manager the extent of the conservation required through the implementation
and/or termination of particular conservation stages in order to assure the
water supply of the city. Thereafter, the city manager, as directed by
administrative policies, may order that the appropriate phase of water
conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the Applicable
provisions of this chapter. Said order shall be ratified by the city council
by resolution and made by public announcement and shall be published a
minimum of one time in a daily newspaper of general circulation.  (Ord.
2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.090   Enforcement.



   A.   It is one of the objectives of the city council of the city
that the citizens of Visalia be encouraged to voluntarily comply with the
provisions of the chapter. Therefore, in furtherance of said objective, the
enforcement of the chapter will permit the issuance of up to two warnings for
violations of Sections 13.20.060 or 13.20.070, by way of written notices of
violation to the violating water user, before the issuance of a citation for
said violations.



   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person violating any
provision of Sections 13.20.060 or 13.20.070 shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed six-hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00). Each day that a violation
continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. The fine for a
first violation may be waived by attending a city water conservation class.



(Ord. 2016-08 § 2 (part), 2016)



13.20.100   Public nuisance--Definitions.



   A.   In addition to any other remedies which may otherwise be
available to the city, the city council makes the following findings and
declarations.



   B.   The waste of water, as that term is defined herein, on public
or private property within the city, is found to contribute to and compound
drought conditions which may, from time to time, exist in the city, to the
detriment of one of our most precious and finite resources, to wit, water.
Such conditions cause injury to the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city. Therefore, the waste of water within the city, on
private or public property, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in an action
brought on behalf of the people of the State of California, by the city
attorney, in any court of competent jurisdiction.  (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.110   Enforcement officers.



   A.   All peace officers and persons authorized by law to issue
citations within the city shall, in conjunction with duties imposed by the
law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Pursuant to the provisions of section 836.5 of the Penal Code,
the following officers and employees of the city are designated as
enforcement officers and authorized to issue citations for enforcement of
this chapter:



      1.   Director of public works;



      2.   City engineer;



      3.   Building official;



      4.   Industrial waste inspector;



      5.   Public works inspector;



      6.   Building inspector;



      7.   Fire marshal



      8.   Fire prevention inspector;



      9.   Natural resource conservation technician;



      10.   Water conservation education coordinator;



      11.   Natural resource conservation manager or designee.



   C.   Employees of any operator of a water utility having customers
within the city, including California Water Service Company, are authorized
by this chapter to issue written notices of violations of section 13.20.060
or 13.20.070, but are not authorized by law to issue citations for said
violations.  (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.120   Exceptions.



   Consideration of written applications for exceptions regarding
regulations and restrictions on water use not otherwise set forth in previous
sections of this chapter shall be as follows:



   A.   Written application for exception may be granted by the city
manager or designee.



   B.   Exceptions may be granted if:



      1.   Compliance with this chapter would cause an unnecessary
and undue hardship to the applicant, including, but not limited to, adverse
economic impacts, such as loss of production or jobs;



      2.   Compliance with this chapter would cause a condition
affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant
or the public; or



      3.   Compliance with this chapter would prevent the use of
recycled or reclaimed water which use would conserve the city's potable water
supplies.  (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)



13.20.130   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  (Ord.
2015-07 § 2, 2015)



Chapter 13.24
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS



Sections:



13.24.010   Definitions.



13.24.020   Public hearings by council.



13.24.030   Report of director of public works.



13.24.040   Council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution.



13.24.050   Unlawful acts.



13.24.060   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.



13.24.070   Other exceptions.



13.24.080   Notice to property owners and utility companies.



13.24.090   Responsibility of utility companies.



13.24.100   Responsibility of property owners.



13.24.110   Responsibility of city.



13.24.120   Extension of time.



13.24.010   Definitions.



   Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this
section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to
them in the following definitions:



   "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of
California.



   "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporation,
partnerships and their agents and employees.



   "Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures" means
poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication
circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service.



   "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the
city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of Section 13.24.030.



   "Utility" means and includes all persons or entities supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of
electrical material or devices. (Prior code § 7850)



13.24.020   Public hearings by council.



   The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain
whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal
of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated
areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities
for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The
city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and
place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof.
Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time
to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and
conclusive. (Ord. 9605 § 27, 1996: prior code § 7851)



13.24.030   Report of director of public works.



   Prior to holding such public hearing, the director of public works
shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for such
hearing by the city council, containing, among other information, the extent
of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the city
and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of
the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of
overhead facilities. (Prior code § 7852)



13.24.040   Council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution.



   If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by
resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and
order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall
include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the
time within which such removal and underground installation. Such resolution
shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall
fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be
accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to
receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such
removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability
of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Prior code § 7853)



13.24.050   Unlawful acts.



   Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in Section 13.24.040, it is unlawful for any person or
utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the
district after the date when said overhead facilities may be required to
furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance
by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or
occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section
13.24.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities
after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. (Prior code § 7854)



13.24.060   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed sixty (60) days,
without authority of the director of public works in order to provide
emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission,
on such terms as the director of public works may deem appropriate, in cases
of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility,
to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires
and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 7855)



13.24.070   Other exceptions.



   This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040
shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the
following types of facilities:



   A.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;



   B.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;



   C.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing
any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited,
or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originated in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures are not prohibited;



   D.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used
for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;



   E.   Overhead wire attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building
without crossing any public street;



   F.   Antenna, associated equipment and supporting structures, used
by a utility for furnishing communication services;



   G.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets and concealed ducts;



   H.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used in providing power or communications to construction
projects. (Prior code § 7856)



13.24.080   Notice to property owners and utility companies.



   A.   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution
adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030, the city clerk shall notify all
affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district
created by said resolution of the adoption thereof.  Said city clerk shall
further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they
or any person occupying such property, desire to continue to receive
electric, communication, or similar associated service, they or such occupant
shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to
receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at
a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of
the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.



   B.   Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy
of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040 together with a copy
of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last
equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 7857)



13.24.090   Responsibility of utility companies.



   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by resolution adopted pursuant to Section
13.24.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the commission.
(Prior code § 7858)



13.24.100   Responsibility of property owners.



   A.   Every person owning, operating, occupying or renting a building
or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of
the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in
Section 13.24.090 and the termination facility on or within said building or
structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with
the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the
time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.24.040,
the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required
underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.



   B.   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may
be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on
either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States
mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in
possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be
addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be
addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last
equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery,
City of                         . If notice is given by mail,
such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it
has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If
notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the
director of public works shall, with forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing
thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches
by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.



   C.   The notice given by the director of public works to provide the
required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed
within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the director of public
works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the
cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and
become a lien upon such property.



   D.   1. If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the
said required underground facilities have not been provided, the director of
public works shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if
such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are
being furnished thereto, the director of public works shall in lieu of
providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order
the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.



   2.   Upon completion of the work by the director of public works, he
shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that
the required underground facilities have been provided and the costs thereof,
together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is
to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing
protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises,
which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.



   E.   The director of public works shall forthwith, upon the time for
hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing thereof to
the owner thereof, in the manner provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the
council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed
assessment.



   F.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the
council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any,
and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.



   G.   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its
confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made by the director of
public works, and the director of public works is directed to turn over to
the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on
which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector
shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes
levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said
assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes
are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear
interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Prior code § 7859)



13.24.110   Responsibility of city.



   City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.24.040. (Prior code § 7860)



13.24.120   Extension of time.



   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040 cannot be performed within the time
provided on account of shortage of materials, ware, restraint by public
authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, which such act
will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of
such limitation. (Prior code § 7861)



Title 14
RESERVED



Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION



Chapters:



15.04   California Administrative Code



15.06   California Referenced Standards Code



15.08   California Building Code



15.20   California Plumbing Code



15.24   California  Mechanical Code



15.28   California Electrical Code



15.36   California Historical Building Code



15.40   Miscellaneous Building Regulations



15.44   Housing Standards



15.48   Moving Buildings



15.52   Mobile Home Parks



15.56   Travel Trailer Parks



15.60   Floodplain Management Regulations



15.64   California Residential Code



15.68   California Green Building Standards Code



15.72   California Energy Code



15.76   California Existing Buildings Code



15.80   Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems



15.90   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations



Chapter 15.04
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



Sections:



15.04.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Administrative Code.



15.04.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Administrative Code.



   A.   That certain administrative code, in book form known and
designated as the 2016 California Administrative Code, California Code
Regulations Title 24 Part 1, Published by International Code Council, is
adopted as the technical Administrative Code of the city, to all intents and
purposes and to the same effect as if each and every section, paragraph,
subparagraph, word, phrase or clause contained therein were fully set forth
herein, except for those deletions, modifications, and amendments set forth
below. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.  (Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.06
CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE



Sections:



15.06.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code.



15.06.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code.



   A.   That certain referenced code, in book form known and designated
as the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, is adopted as the technical
Referenced Standards Code of the city, to all intents and purposes and to the
same effect as if each and every section, paragraph, subparagraph, word,
phrase or clause contained therein were fully set forth herein, except for
those deletions, modifications, and amendments set forth below. If any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.  (Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.08
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



Sections:



15.08.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Building Code.



15.08.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Building Code.



   A.   That certain building code, in book form known and designated
as the 2016 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, and
published by The International Code Council, is adopted as the Building Code
of the city, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each
and every section, paragraph, subparagraph, word, phrase or clause contained
therein were fully set forth herein, except for those deletions,
modifications, and amendments set forth below. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the chapter.



   B.   Appeals Board section 1.8.8 in the California Building Code
shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 1.8.8 – Change:  Appeals Board, is amended to read as
follows:



   Appeals.  When it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not
apply, or that the true intent and meaning of his code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision  of the Chief
Building Official to the Local Appeals Board within 20 days from the date of
the decision of the Chief Building Official. Subsection 1.8.8.1 , 1.8.8.2 and
1.8.8.3. shall be deleted and replaced as follows:



   “1.8.8.1 General. Every city, county or city and county shall
establish a local appeals board.  “The local appeals board shall consist
of persons appointed by the chief appointing authority.”  The local
appeals board shall be comprised of a least five voting members that shall
serve at the pleasure of the city, county or city and county.  Appointees
shall not be employees of the jurisdiction and shall be qualified and
specifically knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Codes and
applicable local ordinances.”



   1.8.8.2 Definitions. The following terms shall for the purpose of this
section have the meaning shown.



   Local Appeals Board.  The board or agency of a city, county or city
and county which is authorized by the governing body of the city, county or
city and county to hear appeals regarding the building requirements of the
city, county or city and county.  Further, the appeals board shall hear
appeals regarding the requirements of the city, county or city and county
relating to the use, maintenance and change of occupancy of buildings and
structures, including requirements governing alteration, additions, repair,
demolition and moving.  In any area in which there is no such board or
agency, “Local appeals board” means the governing body of the city,
county or city and county having jurisdiction over the area.



   1.8.8.3 Appeals.  Except as otherwise provided in law, any person,
firm or corporation adversely affected by a decision, order or determination
by a city, county or city and county relating to the application of building
standards published in the California Building Standards Code, or any other
applicable rule or regulation adopted by the Department of Housing and
Community Development, or any lawfully enacted ordinance by a city, county or
city and county, may appeal the issue for resolution to the local appeals
board.



   The local appeals board shall hear appeals relating to new building
construction and existing buildings.



   C.   Included specifically are 2016 California Building Code
Appendices B (Board of Appeals), C (Group U – Agricultural Buildings), F
(Rodentproofing), H (Signs), I (Patio Covers) and J (Grading).



   D.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Building Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two copies
filed in the office of Building Safety Division of the city, which are now
filed for full particulars of said Building Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.20
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE



Sections:



15.20.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Plumbing Code.



15.20.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Plumbing Code.



   A.   That certain plumbing code, in book form known and designated
as the 2016 California Plumbing Code, Title 24, Part 5 as Published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials prepared and
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical
Officials, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code adopted as the plumbing
code of the city, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if
each and every section, paragraph, subparagraph, word, phrase or clause
contained therein were fully set forth herein, except for those deletions,
modifications, and amendments set forth below. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Appeals Board section 1.8.8 shall be deleted.  Refer to 2016
California Building Code Section 1.8.8 as amended.



   C.   Included specifically are 2016 California Plumbing Code
Appendix A (Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply system), B
(Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste & Vent Systems), D (Drainage
Systems), I (Installation Standards), and K (Private Sewage Systems).



   D.   Section 808.0 of said California Code is amended to read as
follows:



   Section 808.0, Cooling Water.  Discharge of cooling water into the
sanitary sewer system is prohibited. Refer to Section 13.08.500 of City of
Visalia Municipal Code (Prohibition on Unpolluted Water).



   E.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Plumbing Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two copies
filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which are now so
filed for full particulars of said Plumbing Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.24
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE



Sections:



15.24.010   Adoption of 2016 California Mechanical Code.



15.24.010   Adoption of 2016 California  Mechanical Code.



   A.   That certain mechanical code, in book form known and designated
as the 2016 California Mechanical Code, Title 24, part 4 as Published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, based on the
2015 Uniform Mechanical, adopted as the mechanical code of the city, to all
intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every section,
paragraph, subparagraph, word, phrase or clause contained therein were fully
set forth herein, including the appendices, except for those deletions,
modifications, and amendments set forth below. If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Appeals Board section 1.8.8 shall be deleted.  Refer to 2016
California Building Code Section 1.8.8 as amended.



   C.   Included specifically are 2016 California Mechanical Code
Appendix B (Procedures to be followed to Place Gas Equipment into operation),
C (Installation and testing of oil (liquid) fuel-fired equipment), and D
(Unit Conversion Tables).



   D.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Mechanical Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two
copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which are
now so filed for full particulars of said Mechanical Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.28
CALIFORNIA ELECTRIC CODE



Sections:



15.28.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Electric Code.



15.28.010   Adoption of the 2016 California  Electric Code.



   A.   That certain electrical code, in book form known and designated
as the 2016 California Electrical Code, Title 24, Part 3, Published by BNI
Productions, Inc. based on the 2011 National electrical code, copyright
National Fire Production Association, is adopted as the Electric Code of the
city, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every
section, paragraph, subparagraph, word, phrase, or clause contained therein
were fully set forth herein. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the
chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Appeals Board section 89.108.8 shall be deleted.  Refer to
2016 California Building Code Section 1.8.8 as amended.



   C.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Electrical Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two
copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which are
now so filed for full particulars of said electrical code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.36
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



Sections:



15.36.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Historical Building Code.



15.36.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Historical Building Code.



   A.   That certain building conservation code, in book form known and
designated as the 2013 California Historical Building Code, California code
and Regulations Title 24, part 8 as prepared and published by the
International Code Council, is adopted as the Historical Building Code of the
city, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every
section, paragraph, subparagraph, word, phrase or clause contained therein
were fully set forth herein. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the
chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Historical Building Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and
two copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which
are now so filed for full particulars of said 2016 California Historical
Building Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.40
MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS



Sections:



15.40.010   Termite control.



15.40.020   Fences.



15.40.030   Fencing irrigation ditches.



15.40.040   Swimming pools--Protective devices required.



15.40.050   Building on Mill Creek.



15.40.060   The installation of curbs and gutters or gutters in
conjunction with building construction.



15.40.010   Termite control.



   A.   In addition to the termite protection required under Section
2516 (c) of the Uniform Building Code and the flashing protection required by
the Federal Housing Administration, the following alternate construction
procedures are to be observed.



   B.   Exterior porches, landings or patios that are constructed
adjacent to the exterior foundation shall be poured monolithically with the
foundation, or, if not poured monolithically shall have a footing poured
against the foundation stem and extend to the foundation footing of a
thickness not less than the floor slab constructed. (Prior code § 7830)



15.40.020   Fences.



   A.   Fence Ordinance. This section shall be known as the "Fence
Ordinance" applicable to all fences in the city which are six feet or less in
height.



   B.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control location and
height of fences as may be required by city laws, rules, and regulations to
safeguard life or limb, property and public welfare.



   C.   Permit Required. No person, firm, or corporation shall erect,
construct, alter, or move a fence in the city, or cause the same to be done,
without first obtaining a "no fee" permit from the city building department.



   D.   Application. To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file
an application therefore in writing on a form furnished for that purpose.



   E.   Requirements. Every such application shall:



   1.   Describe the land on which the proposed fence is to be built,
by lot, block, tract, or house, and street address, or similar description
that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed fence;



   2.   State that applicant will conform to all city zoning laws and
all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;



   3.   Give such other information as may reasonably be required by
the building department. (Prior code § 7831)



15.40.030   Fencing irrigation ditches.



   All new construction in the city that abuts or is traversed by an
irrigation ditch shall comply with Section 16.36.190. For the purposes of
this section, the irrigation ditches are: Evans, Persian, Watson, Jennings,
Modoc, and Tulare Irrigation Company. (Prior code § 7832)



15.40.040   Swimming pools--Protective devices required.



   A.   1. Fences.  Every person owning land on which there is
situated a swimming pool, fish pond or other body of water which contains
water eighteen (18) inches or more in depth at any point, shall erect and
maintain thereon an adequate fence sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children. Such fence, including gates therein, must not
be less than four and one-half feet above the underlying ground, all gates
must be self latching with latches placed four and one-half feet above the
underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small
children.



   2.   In lieu of maintaining a fence, such person may provide a
competent person who shall keep the pool under observation at all times while
water is kept in the pool. In the event that the pool is not under
observation of a competent person, a pool cover or other protective device
approved by the city council may be used.



   B.   Modifications. The city council may make slight modifications
for good cause shown in individual cases, with respect to the height of the
fence or the nature or position of the latch. The council may permit other
protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree of
protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than
the protection afforded by the fence, gate and latch described herein. (Prior
code § 7833)



15.40.050   Building on Mill Creek.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to so erect,
construct or place any building or other structure or any part of any
building or other structure, that the same, or any part thereof, shall rest
upon or the weight or load thereof shall be borne by any part or portion of
the conduit constituting the improved channel of Mill Creek constructed by
the city, as such conduit now exists or as the same may be hereafter altered
or constructed by said city. (Prior code § 7834)



15.40.060   The installation of curbs and gutters or gutters in
conjunction with building construction.



   A.   Curbs and Gutters. Standard curb and gutter shall be installed,
or standard gutter shall be installed, where same does not now exist, on all
street frontage of properties for which building permits for the following
classes of work are issued:



   1.   New dwellings, or commercial or industrial buildings or vacant
properties, or remodeling of existing dwellings or commercial or industrial
buildings involving the addition of fifty (50) percent or more of the
existing floor space;



   2.   Replacement of existing dwellings, commercial, or industrial
buildings;



   3.   Conversion of existing dwelling occupancies to more intensive
occupancies, i.e., single-family to multiple-family occupancies; residential
occupancies to commercial occupancies;



   4.   New structures on properties created by lot splits or other
subdivisions of land.



   B.   Driveway Approaches. Standard concrete commercial or
residential driveway approaches shall be included in such curb and gutter
construction where driveways exist or are proposed for use by owners or
permittees.



   C.   Sidewalks. Standard concrete sidewalks shall be installed in
accord with the standard plans and policies of the city as to placement and
design on all street frontages on properties on which building permits for
the following classes of work are issued:



   1.   New dwellings or commercial or office buildings, or parking
developments on vacant property, or remodeling of existing dwellings or
commercial industrial buildings involving the addition of fifty (50) percent
or more of the existing floor space;



   2.   Replacement of existing dwellings or commercial or office
buildings, or conversion to parking usage;



   3.   Conversion of existing residential occupancies to commercial,
office or parking occupancy;



   4.   New structures or parking facilities or uses on properties
created by lot splits or subdivision;



   5.   The installation of sidewalks in conjunction with the
construction of single-family dwellings may be deferred to a later date by
the signing of a recordable agreement for those locations where in the
opinion of the city engineer there will not be any other sidewalk
construction for a period of several years. The agreement will stipulate that
the property owners will install the sidewalks at such time as a sidewalk
program is initiated in the neighborhood.



   D.   Condition of Building Permit Issuance. The above installations
shall be a condition of building permit issuance, and final inspections shall
not be performed for buildings, electrical, or plumbing work involved in the
permitted construction until required sidewalk, curb and gutter, or gutter,
and driveway approach construction is completed to city standards. (Prior
code § 7835)



Chapter 15.44
HOUSING STANDARDS



Sections:



15.44.010   Public nuisance declared unlawful.



15.44.020   Definitions.



15.44.030   Enforcement.



15.44.040   Abatement of nuisances.



15.44.050   Notice of public nuisance.



15.44.060   Notice of substandard building nuisance under state housing
law.



15.44.070   Hearing.



15.44.080   Abatement by city.



15.44.090   Account and record of cost.



15.44.100   Notice of report.



15.44.110   Collection of tax roll.



15.44.120   Procedure not exclusive.



15.44.130   Second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment--Abatement of
nuisance--Treble damages.



15.44.140   Subcontractors.



15.44.150   Immediate danger--Summary abatement.



15.44.160   Enforcement of codes for rental and owner-occupied structures.



15.44.170   Notice and order.



15.44.180   Relocation costs paid by owner.



15.44.190   Remedies cumulative.



15.44.200   Attorney fees.



15.44.210   Summary of provisions.



15.44.220   Exceptions.



15.44.230   Duty.



15.44.240   Housing used for drug activity.



15.44.250   Penalties.



15.44.260   Severability.



15.44.010   Public nuisance declared unlawful.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain
property, including structures, in a condition detrimental to public health,
safety and general welfare; or in a condition of deterioration or disrepair
which could cause damage to proximal properties or improvements. (Prior code
§ 7918)



15.44.020   Definitions.



   Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this
section defined are used, they shall have their respective meanings assigned
to them in the following definitions:



   "Abate" means to repair or replace, remove, destroy or  otherwise
remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such
an extent as the enforcement officer deems necessary to conform with state
housing law, or this chapter if applicable, as is necessary in the interest
of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.



   "Abatement standards" means those minimum requirements set forth in the
state housing law and the standards set forth herein by which property shall
be abated and maintained in order to comply with said laws.



   "Displaced" means a tenant is displaced, or ordered to move out of a
rental complex by an order to vacate.



   "Enforcement officer" means the city planner of the city and shall
include any official or officials in the department duly appointed by said
city planner or the city manager to administer the provisions of this chapter.



   "Housing quality standards" means the existence of any buildings or
structures which are structurally unsafe or which constitute a fire hazard or
which otherwise adversely affect the health, safety or well being of a human
life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or
health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, fire or disaster damage, rodent infestation, or abandonment, as
defined in Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code.



   "Notice and order to vacate" means a written notice sent by an
authorized city official to the owner and posted on the affected property
declaring that, due to failure to repair or maintain, the individual dwelling
unit or rental complex shall be vacated.



   "Owner" means the owner of the rental unit(s) at the time an order to
vacate is issued, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and any
successor in interest.



   "Premises" means any apartment houses, hotels, motels, and dwellings,
and buildings and structures accessory thereto. This shall also include
mobile and manufactured homes.



   "Public nuisance" means any of the following conditions:



   1.   Maintaining premises as to permit the same to become unsightly
or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the condition causes
damage to proximal properties or improvements; or



   2.   The existence of any garbage, rubbish or waste materials upon
any premises contrary to the provisions of Chapter 8.28 pertaining to health
and sanitation; or



   3.   The existence of any buildings which are abandoned or boarded
up or partially destroyed; or broken down or discarded furniture, equipment,
waste materials, toys or other debris in front yards; including automobiles
which are parked in areas other than areas specifically designed for use as
driveways; or any illegally parked, inoperative or abandoned vehicles as
defined in Chapter 10.32 of the Visalia Municipal Code; or overgrown
vegetation visible to the public; or garbage cans strewn over the yards and
visible from the street; or unfinished buildings not under active
construction; or dead trees, weed and debris; or packing boxes stored in
yards and visible to the public; or deliberate neglect of premises to spite
neighbors or influence zone changes; or



   4.   Any condition as defined in the Uniform Housing Code, Chapter
4, Definitions for Nuisance, or any condition as defined in the Uniform Code
for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Chapter 3, Definitions for
Dangerous Buildings or any drug-related nuisance as defined in Section
15.44.250 of this Chapter.



   Nothing contained in the definitions above shall be construed to be in
conflict with the State Housing Law, Health and Safety Code, Section 17910 et
seq.



   5.   Any other activity defined as a public nuisance in the Visalia
Municipal Code and the abatement of which by this chapter is not specifically
preempted by state law.



   "Responsible person" means the owner of any premises and/or any agent,
lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of the same.



   "Tenant" means any resident of an affected rental unit who is a tenant
as that term is used in Chapter 2 of Title 5 of Part 4 of the California
Civil Code (1940, et. seq.).



   "Vacate date" means the date by which a tenant is required to vacate a
unit or structure, pursuant to an order to vacate. (Ord. 9605 § 31 (part),
1996: prior code § 7919)



15.44.030   Enforcement.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the city planner, or designee
(hereinafter referred to as "city planner" or "enforcement officer"). In the
enforcement of this chapter, the city planner or designee may enter upon
private or public property to examine such properties and to abate or cause
the abatement of properties or premises declared to be a nuisance pursuant to
the provisions of the chapter. (Ord. 9605 § 31 (part), 1996: prior code §
7920)



15.44.040   Abatement of nuisances.



   A.   All premises declared to be public nuisances shall be abated by
rehabilitation, demolition, removal or repair, pursuant to the procedures set
forth in this code.



   B.   With the exception of substandard buildings, as defined in
Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, which are subject to the abatement
actions provided for under Health and Safety Code Sections 17980 through
17990, whenever an enforcement officer shall determine that any conditions
constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 15.44.030 of this code
exist upon any premises within the city, the enforcement officer may require
or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter and may make
the cost of such abatement a lien on the real property or premises in
question.  Such cost may include relocation cost, associated with tenant(s)
being vacated; administrative costs for overseeing the abatement; inspection
fees; storage cost of items being removed from the premises; and other costs
directly or indirectly associated with the cost of abatement of the
conditions constituting a public nuisance. (Prior code § 7921)



15.44.050   Notice of public nuisance.



   A.   The enforcement officer is authorized and directed to declare,
through an administrative enforcement order issued pursuant to Chapter 1.13
of this Municipal Code or through such other process as may be authorized by
law, that the existence of any of the conditions set forth in Section
15.44.010 or in the definition of “Public Nuisance” contained in Section
15.44.020 constitute a public nuisance and direct the responsible person to
abate any such conditions set forth in Section 15.44.010 which may exist on
said person's property at his or her expense. The responsible person may
appear before the enforcement officer for a hearing at an arranged time and
place to show cause why such conditions should not be abated by the city at
such person's expense.



   B.   Notice of an administrative enforcement order issued pursuant
to this Chapter shall be made in the time and in the manner as set forth in
Chapter 1.13 of the Municipal Code.  Such notice shall, in addition those
elements set forth in Section 1.13.060 (B) of this Municipal Code, include
the following:



   NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that on the  (date) pursuant to Section
15.44.010 of the Municipal Code of the City of Visalia, the City Planner
and/or Enforcement Officer of the City of Visalia declares that the following
conditions exist on said property which are in violation of Section 15.44.010
of the Municipal Code. Said conditions constitute a public nuisance and such
nuisance must be abated by the repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal
of said conditions within thirty (30) days of the date first noted above:



   Conditions to be Abated in Violation of Section 15.44.010:



Restructure, repair or removal of said conditions must becompleted and
maintained by the                   day of               ,  
            as approved by the enforcement officer.



   Failure to abate said conditions by the date specified above
shallresult in the City acquiring jurisdiction to abate the conditions at the
owner's expense pursuant to Section 15.44.050 of the Visalia Municipal Code
and additional administrative penalties may be incurred.



   All property owners or responsible persons who wish to object to the
proposed abatement  of the conditions cited in this notice are hereby
notified that they have the right to attend an appeal hearing as set forth
elsewhere herein.



   Any costs incurred for such abatement, including but not limited to
relocation of displaced tenants, storage of materials and supplies,
attorney's fees, inspection fees, administrative costs, and other related
costs, will constitute a special assessment on the property. The cost of
abating such nuisance shall include a per parcel charge to cover the costs of
administering this Article.  MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 15.44.110 PROVIDES THAT
AFTER THE ASSESSMENT IS MADE AND CONFIRMED; IT IS A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.



   Any property owner, or other responsible person, who, after
notification by the Enforcement Officer, fails to abate a condition as set
forth in Section 15.44.030 shall become liable for the expenses of persons
involved in the abatement of said nuisance, including injury to City
employees or contractors for work performed which is determined to have been
caused by or attributed to said conditions. This shall also include necessary
police assistance in the abatement of said nuisances. Such expenses shall
become a lien on the property.



THE FAILURE OF ANY OWNER OR OTHER PERSON TO RECEIVE THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT
AFFECT THE ENFORCEMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE.



   C.   A notice containing the above provisions shall satisfy the
requirements of Municipal Code Section 15.44.060.



(Ord. 2008-15 § 3, 2008; Ord. 9605 § 31 (part), 1996: prior code § 7922)



15.44.060   Notice of substandard building nuisance under state housing
law.



   Any determination made by the enforcement officer that a person is in
violation of Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3 shall receive the notices
required and the hearings provided for under Title 25, California Code of
Regulations Section 54, 58, 60, 62, 64, 66, 68 and 70 of said Code, as
amended. (Prior code § 7923)



15.44.070   Hearing.



   The administrative enforcement officer’s determination as set forth
in an administrative enforcement order issued pursuant to Municipal Code
Section 15.44.050 and Section 1.13.060 of the Municipal Code shall be subject
to appeal only as provided in Chapter 1.13. (Ord. 2008-15 §4, 2008; Ord.
9605 § 31 (part), 1996: prior code § 7924)



15.44.080   Abatement by city.



   Upon the expiration of the time period set forth in the notice to
property owners pursuant to Section 15.44.060, the city shall acquire
jurisdiction to abate any such condition constituting a nuisance pursuant to
Section 15.44.030 which has not been abated by the property owner in question
or which has been deemed to constitute a nuisance in the course of the
hearing process set forth above. Whenever the city has acquired jurisdiction
to abate such a nuisance, the enforcement officer or his/her designee is
expressly authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating
such conditions and the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner and/or
other responsible person. Any property owner or responsible person shall have
the right to abate said condition or have the same abated at their own
expense; provided, such condition has been abated prior to the arrival of the
enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative. (Prior code § 7925)



15.44.090   Account and record of cost.



   The enforcement officer shall keep an account of the cost of abating
such nuisance and shall embody such account in the report and assessment list
which shall be filed with the city clerk and presented to the city council.
The allowable cost of abating such nuisance shall include a charge sufficient
to cover the costs of administering this chapter. The report and assessment
list shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description
sufficient to be assessed against each such separate lot or parcel. (Prior
code § 7926)



15.44.100   Notice of report.



   The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at
city hall together with the notice of filing thereof and of the time and
place when and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and
confirmation. Said notice shall advise property owners that they may appear
at the time and place of hearing and object to any matter related thereto. A
like notice shall also be mailed to each and every property owner and/or
other responsible person who owns or has control of any lot or parcel listed
on said report. The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the property
owner at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of the
county of Tulare or to the last address known to the enforcement officer.
Notice shall be sent by first class mail to any other such responsible person
at such person's last address known to the enforcement officer. (Prior code
§ 7927)



15.44.110   Collection of tax roll.



   After confirmation of the report and assessment list by the city
council, a copy shall be provided to the city finance officer and payments
may be received by him/her for the amount due until such time as the matter
is referred to the county auditor for placement on the tax rolls. On or
before the 10th day of August of each year, a certified copy of the confirmed
report shall be filed with the Tulare County Auditor for the amounts of the
respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as they appear
on the roll at the same time and in the same manner as municipal taxes. They
shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for property taxes. All laws and ordinances
applicable to the levy collection and enforcement of city taxes are made
applicable to such special assessments, and the lien of said assessment shall
have priority of the taxes with which it is collected. (Prior code § 7928)



15.44.120   Procedure not exclusive.



   The procedure provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in
addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this
city or by state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described
herein, including, summary abatement as provided for under Government Code
Section 38773. An abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other
action, civil or criminal, for maintenance of any such condition. (Prior code
§ 7929)



15.44.130   Second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment--Abatement of
nuisance--Treble damages.



   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within
a two year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, excepting
conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code,
the court may order the owner to pay treble the cost of the abatement. (Prior
code § 7930)



15.44.140   Subcontractors.



   When the enforcement officer has contracted with any person or persons,
such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or
public property to remove or cause the removal of said public nuisance
pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 7931)



15.44.150   Immediate danger--Summary abatement.



   Whenever any condition on or use of property or premises causes or
constitutes or reasonably appears to constitute imminent or immediate danger
to the health or safety of the public or persons, the enforcement officer or
his/her authorized representative shall have the authority to summarily and
without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement shall become a
lien upon the property and be collectible as provided in Sections 15.44.110
through 15.44.130 inclusive. (Prior code § 7932)



15.44.160   Enforcement of codes for rental and owner-occupied structures.



   A.   Right to inspect. The enforcement officer shall have the right
to inspect properties pursuant to this code and other applicable laws. Such
inspection shall be performed to secure compliance with or prevent the
violation of this code or other uniform codes adopted thereunder. Such
inspection may be made in the following circumstances:



   1.   The enforcement officer may inspect a residential unit upon
receiving a complaint regarding public nuisance, substandard building
conditions, or the management quality standards as specified in this code,
from any person upon the premises, who has viewed the property or who has
reason to believe that such conditions exist;



   2.   The enforcement officer may inspect a property which he/she
reasonably believes fails to meet the requirements of this code or other
uniform codes adopted hereunder. In addition, if the enforcement officer
identifies a property as habitually non- compliant, meaning more than one
notice of public nuisance being sent to it in a two-year period, then the
enforcement officer may order mandatory annual inspections for three years as
a condition in addition to abatement of the nuisance.  The property owner or
responsible person shall have the right to object to the mandatory
inspections along with the proposed abatement through the appeal procedures
listed in this Chapter.  If the property owner is required to allow
mandatory inspections, then the property owner may subsequently request in
writing that the code enforcement officer determine that the mandatory
inspection condition may be removed due to substantial changes in property. 
Substantial changes in the property include, but are not limited to, showing
the property has been sold for valid consideration, demolished, or
substantially renovated.  The code enforcement officer’s determination
regarding substantial changes shall be considered an administrative
enforcement order subject to appeal as provided in Chapter 1.13 of the
Municipal Code. If the property owner is not required to abate the
nuisance,  no mandatory inspections may be ordered;



   3.   The owner, after failing to abate nuisance(s) as defined in
this chapter, shall be subject to required annual inspections for a three
year period for the subject property.



   4.   If a rental or owner-occupied structure receives a notice
identifying a public nuisance that qualifies as a structural hazard posing a
danger to human health or safety, then the code enforcement officer may
require the subject property be subject to annual inspections for a
three-year period as a condition in addition to nuisance abatement. 
Examples of such structural hazards include those items described in
California Health & Safety Code Section 17920.3(b), raw sewage, exposed
wiring, no smoke detectors, no legitimate source of heat, or other similar
types of public nuisances.  The property owner or responsible person shall
have the right to object to the mandatory inspections along with the proposed
abatement through the appeal procedures described in this Chapter.  If the
property owner is required to allow mandatory inspections, then the property
owner may subsequently request in writing that the code enforcement officer
determine that the mandatory inspection condition may be removed due to
substantial changes in property.  Substantial changes in the property
include, but are not limited to, showing the property has been sold for valid
consideration, demolished, or substantially renovated.  The code enforcement
officer’s determination regarding substantial changes shall be considered
an administrative enforcement order subject to appeal as provided in Chapter
1.13 of the Municipal Code. If the property owner is not required to abate
the nuisance,  then no mandatory inspections may be ordered;



   B.   Reimbursement Of Inspection Costs. Costs of inspections
pursuant to this chapter shall be determined pursuant to Section 15.44.100 of
this chapter, and unless otherwise provided, shall be paid by the owner of
the residential unit. Provided, that costs of inspections initiated by tenant
complaint shall be paid by the tenant, unless the enforcement officer
determines that the public nuisance or a substandard building exists pursuant
to the state housing law justifying the complaint exists, in which case the
cost shall be paid by the owner.



   C.   Management Quality Standards. The following items shall
constitute reasonable basis for the enforcement officer to believe that a
property is not being properly managed or maintained.  The existence of any
of these circumstances shall justify an inspection of the property by the
enforcement officer.  In addition, violation of these standards may be used
as evidence that a public nuisance exists.



   1.   For an individual residential unit, whether the unit is a
standalone residence or part of a multi-family complex; more than six police
and/or fire calls over a one year period (other than a medical emergency);



   2.   For a complex or building containing multiple residential
units, more than a monthly average of .20 police and/or fire calls per unit
over a six month period (other than a medical emergency);



   3.   Any violation of this chapter or the continued presence of
graffiti for more than a two week period;



   4.   Any determination by the health officer that a pest vector is
present;



   5.   Any violation of the Uniform Building Code or Uniform Housing
Code relating to maximum occupancy or health and safety standards.



(Ord. 2011-03 § 3, 2011; Ord. 2008-15 § 5, 2008; prior code § 7933)



15.44.170   Notice and order.



   If a substandard condition is found during any inspection of a
residential unit, the enforcement officer may issue a notice and/or order to
vacate pursuant to the Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement
of Dangerous Buildings, or the city of Visalia Municipal Code. Appeals from
any notice issued may be made as provided in said codes. (Prior code § 7934)



15.44.180   Relocation costs paid by owner.



   A.   If any notice and order issued under said codes requires the
displacement of a tenant from a rental unit, that tenant shall be paid
relocation benefits by the owner of the rental unit as provided by this
chapter.



   B.   Relocation benefits shall be payable thirty (30) days after the
date the notice and order is first mailed to the owner or posted on the
premises or shall be payable within twenty-four (24) hours before the
vacation date, whichever is later. The city shall provide written notice to
the owner to notify the owner that benefits are payable immediately. 
Failure to provide the notice as specified herein shall not relieve the owner
of any obligations imposed by this chapter.



   C.   The relocation benefits shall be a sum equal to three times the
established monthly rental rate for the dwelling unit being vacated by the
displaced tenant. The relocation benefits shall be paid in addition to the
return, as required by law, of any deposit held by the owner. Relocation
benefits shall also include any costs for security deposits, utility
connection fees, and reasonable moving expenses. Any owner who does not make
timely payment as specified in this section shall be liable to the tenant for
an amount equal to one and one-half times the relocation benefits payable
pursuant to this section. For those units abated with federal funds,
relocation benefits shall be paid according to federal regulations, and owner
shall be responsible for such costs.



   D.   No relocation benefits shall be payable by the owner to any
tenant who has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving
rise to the order to vacate as determined by the enforcement officer.  No
relocation benefits shall be payable by the owner if the residential unit
became unsafe or hazardous during the tenancy (and no more than six months
prior to the order to vacate) as a result of earthquake, flood, fire, or
other disaster not caused by building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or
fire code violations. (Prior code § 7935)



15.44.190   Remedies cumulative.



   The remedies hereunder are cumulative and in addition to any other
remedies available under law. (Prior code § 7936)



15.44.200   Attorney fees.



   In any action brought by a tenant or the city to recover benefits
payable hereunder, the court shall also award reasonable attorney fees.
(Prior code § 7937)



15.44.210   Summary of provisions.



   Any order to vacate issued to an owner or tenant shall be accompanied
by a summary of the provisions of this chapter. Failure to provide a summary
shall not relieve any person of the obligations imposed by this chapter.
(Prior code § 7938)



15.44.220   Exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property owned by the
city, the Visalia Redevelopment Agency, the county of Tulare, the state of
California or any other governmental agency. (Prior code § 7939)



15.44.230   Duty.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law, nothing in this chapter is
intended to impose a mandatory duty pursuant to Government Code Section 815.6
upon the enforcement officer or any other public official. (Prior code §
7940)



15.44.240   Housing used for drug activity.



   A.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:



   1.   "Controlled substance" means a drug, substance, or immediate
precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Health and
Safety Code Section 11054, et. seq., as that Act now exists or as it may
hereafter be amended.



   2.   "Drug-related nuisance" means the holding, maintenance or use
of a residential unit for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving,
storing, keeping, manufacturing, or giving away any controlled substance
and/or the possession of items used for the purpose of weighing, packaging,
cutting or diluting any controlled substance.



   3.   "Drug-related use" means any use of a controlled substance in a
residential unit.



   4.   "Illegal drug dealing activity" means any possession for sale,
any sale, storage, possession, or manufacturing of a controlled substance
from or in a residential unit.



   5.   "Landlord" means an owner, lessor, or sublessor (including any
person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who receives or is
entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent,
representative or successor of any of the foregoing.



   6.   "Rental unit" means any dwelling, apartment, dwelling unit, or
room, including but not limited to, any single-family residence, duplex,
apartment complex, residential hotel and condominium for which rent is paid.
This term shall also include mobile and manufactured homes whether rent is
paid for the home and the land upon which the home is located, or the rent is
paid for the land alone.



   7.   "Tenant" means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, any
person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person who
is using or occupying a rental unit.



   B.   Prohibition. A landlord shall not knowingly cause or permit any
rental unit to be used or maintained for any drug-related use, illegal drug
dealing activity, or drug-related nuisance.



   C.   Notice of Violation.



   1.   If the police chief determines that a rental unit is being used
or maintained in violation of this section, he/she may order the landlord to
comply with said section. The order shall be presented to the landlord either
by personal service or by a letter sent certified mail with a return receipt
requested.  The order shall contain as enclosures sufficient documentation
to establish that the premises are being used or maintained for any
drug-related use, illegal drug activity or drug-related nuisance.



   2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorizing the
release of documentation which would violate an individual's rights to
privacy or any other applicable provision of law that precludes the release
of confidential records. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize a search of
any rental unit or seizure of any property by a landlord under color of
authority of the city or any employee or official thereof.



   D.   Failure to Comply with Notice of Violation. A landlord shall in
good faith comply with the notice prescribed by this section. If the landlord
fails to comply with the notice, then the police chief may take any lawful
action to enforce this section. Good faith compliance may be shown by the
landlord's obtaining the voluntary surrender of the premises by the tenant;
or the landlord's commencement and prosecution of unlawful detainer
proceedings; or the landlord's demonstration in writing to the satisfaction
of the city attorney that commencement of unlawful detainer proceedings is
not supported by the evidence received by the city and by the landlord, taken
as a whole.



   E.   Public Nuisance. In addition to any other remedy provided by
this chapter or in law, a violation of this section shall constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated by civil action.



   F.   Construction. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed or interpreted in such a way as to create a principal-agent
relationship between the city and the landlord.



   G.   Severability. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, part,
or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is
declared that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, part, or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses,
phrases, parts, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior
code § 7942)



15.44.250   Penalties.



   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to maintain property or premises
conducive to creating a public nuisance in violation of this chapter or to
refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so by the enforcement
officer in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state
law where such is applicable. Notwithstanding the classification of a
violation of this chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is
commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court, upon
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense
from a misdemeanor to an infraction.



   A.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and/or thirty (30) days in the county jail for a first violation; (2) a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the
county jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a
fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and/or six
months in the county jail for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year.



   B.   Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall
be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first
violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation
of this chapter within one year.



   C.   Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new
and separate offense.  (Prior code § 7943)



15.44.260   Severability.



   If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, part, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining
sections, sentences, clasues, phrases, parts or portions and the city council
declares that this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, part, or portion thereof, would have been adopted or passed
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses,
phrases, parts, or portions be declared valid or unconstitutional. (Prior
code § 7941)



Chapter 15.48
MOVING BUILDINGS



Sections:



Article 1. Relocation



15.48.010   Relocation permit required.



15.48.020   Application for relocation permit.



15.48.030   Inspection and processing fees.



15.48.040   Posting.



15.48.050   Protest procedure.



15.48.060   Alternate procedure.



15.48.070   Faithful performance bond.



15.48.080   Safety factors.



15.48.090   Utilities.



15.48.100   Denial of permit.



Article 2. Moving of Structures Upon City Streets



15.48.110   Lawful compliance.



15.48.120   Deposit and fees.



15.48.130   Moving permit application.



15.48.140   Faithful performance bond.



15.48.150   Certificate of insurance.



15.48.160   Permit regulations.



Article 1. Relocation



15.48.010   Relocation permit required.



   A.   Any person, firm or corporation, desiring to move any building
in the city shall first obtain a relocation permit issued by the chief
building official. The moving of any building shall include all buildings
moved from one site to another within the city, from outside the city into
the city, from a storage lot to another location within the city, but shall
not include buildings moved from the city to a site outside the city or to
storage lots.



   B.   No permit for the moving of any building or structure shall be
issued until the chief building official has first issued to the owner of the
premises to which the building is to be moved, a permit to relocate the
particular building upon those premises. (Prior code § 7840(a))



15.48.020   Application for relocation permit.



   Every application for a relocation permit shall be in writing and shall
include or be accompanied by the following information:



   A.   The existing location of the building;



   B.   The proposed location and intended use or occupancy of the
building;



   C.   A plot plan, and building plan, if required by the chief
building official, of the building as it is proposed to be located upon the
new site;



   D.   A plan and/or a statement of the remodeling, repairs and
reconstruction proposed for the building;



   E.   A statement of a licensed structural pest control contractor
stating the condition of the building as to the decay and pest infestation;



   F.   A photograph of the building, if required by the chief building
official; and



   G.   Such other information as the chief building official may
require. (Prior code § 7840(b))



15.48.030   Inspection and processing fees.



   An application fee shall be paid to the city before any application for
a relocation permit is accepted. The fee shall be as established  by the
city council pursuant to Section 15.48.110. The fee shall be in addition to
all other fees required by the Uniform Building Code or other ordinances of
the city and shall not be refunded regardless of whether or not the
relocation is approved. (Prior code § 7840(c))



15.48.040   Posting.



   When a relocation permit application is filed and the relocation permit
fee paid to the city, a public notice shall be given of the proposed building
relocation by posting in front of the property under consideration and
adjacent thereto as hereinafter defined, notice of intention to move, printed
in plain type with letters of not less than one inch in height and followed
by a statement in six or eight point type. The notice shall: set forth the
fact that a relocation permit has been applied for a building to be moved to
the subject property; state the present location of the building to be moved
thereto; and indicate the closing date by which protests must be filed with
the chief building official in writing by adjacent property owners, if they
desire to protest the relocation and have the planning commission hold a
hearing thereon. The moving notice shall also be posted on the front of the
building or structure to be moved, and notices shall be posted not more than
one hundred (100) feet apart upon the street which said property fronts for a
distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from
said property. The time of posting shall be seven continuous days, within
which period protests may be filed. (Prior code § 7840(d))



15.48.050   Protest procedure.



   A.   Protests against the moving of said building or structure shall
be signed by two or more individual property owners on the surrounding area,
and filed with the chief building official within the dates prescribed by
this chapter and indicated on the notice of intention to move.



   B.   Upon filing of a protest, the planning commission shall conduct
a hearing within thirty (30) days upon receipt herein at which time the
applicants for relocation and the protestants against such regulation shall
be heard. The planning commission shall approve or deny such relocation and
if approved, shall establish conditions as hereinafter enumerated. The chief
building official shall thereafter issue or deny a relocation permit in
accordance with the conditions set forth by the planning commission. (Prior
code § 7840(c))



15.48.060   Alternate procedure.



   A.   If no written protests are filed, the chief building official
is authorized to approve or deny the relocation permit upon the conditions
enumerated in this article, and/or to establish such conditions for the
relocation permit, in accordance with the intent of this article, as are
necessary to assure compliance herewith.



   B.   If the applicant for the relocation permit feels that denial of
a permit or conditions imposed thereon by the chief building official are not
in accordance with the intent of this article, he/she may appeal the chief
building official's decision to the planning commission who will consider the
matter at a public hearing, notice of which is given by posting as provided
in Section 15.48.040. (Prior code § 7840(f))



15.48.070   Faithful performance bond.



   A faithful performance bond shall be filed in the office of the chief
building official before any relocation permit shall be issued. The bond
shall be in an amount at least ten percent more than the chief building
official's estimated cost of the work required under terms and conditions
imposed upon the relocation permit. Said bond shall guarantee that the
required work shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the date on which
said building is moved to its new location; provided, however, that such time
may be extended by the chief building official upon written application
showing good cause therefore. In lieu of said faithful performance bond, a
cash deposit in the required amount may be made with the chief building
official. (Prior code § 7840(g))



15.48.080   Safety factors.



   A.   No permit shall be issued to relocate a building or structure,
if the building or structure has any of the following deficiencies or
characteristics:



   1.   Constructed or in such a condition to be dangerous and
unsanitary;



   2.   Unfit for human habitation;



   3.   Dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such condition of
deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would
cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or
improvements in the district within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet
from the proposed site;



   4.   Prohibited in the zone in which it is to be relocated; or



   5.   Prohibited at the proposed location by any fire district
ordinance, or any other law or ordinance.



   B.   If, in the judgment of the chief building official or planning
commission, the structure admits the practical and effective repair, a
relocation permit may be issued upon such conditions as the chief building
official and planning commission may deem reasonable and proper. The
conditions required prior to issuance of a relocation permit may include
changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to the building or
structure so that the relocation will not be materially detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to the surrounding property
and improvements in the district to which it is to be moved.



   C.   The conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be
written upon the permit or appended in writing thereto. (Prior code §
7840(h))



15.48.090   Utilities.



   A.   Each person making application for a moving permit must make
separate arrangements with public utilities for necessary utility relocations
and for payment of all costs associated herewith. The city assumes no
liability for route approval with respect to utility relocation.



   B.   Signatures shall be required from Southern California Edison
Company, Southern California Gas Company, Pacific Bell, California Water
Service Company and Continental Cablevision acknowledging that all services
have been disconnected from the structure to be moved. (Prior code § 7840(i))



15.48.100   Denial of permit.



   A relocation permit shall be denied, if the unlawful, dangerous or
defective condition of the building or structure proposed to be relocated is
such that remedy or correction cannot practicably and effectively be made, or
it is found that the structure will be materially detrimental to surrounding
property. (Prior code § 7840(j))



Article 2. Moving of Structures Upon City Streets



15.48.110   Lawful compliance.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any
building, structure or portion of any building or structure on any street in
the city without first filing a written application for a moving permit and
securing a permit therefore from the city engineer in the manner provided by
this article. The permit must be in the possession of the movers during the
move and must be shown if requested by a police officer along the route.
(Prior code § 7841(a))



15.48.120   Deposit and fees.



   A.   Each moving permit application shall be accompanied by a
deposit. The amount of the deposit shall be based upon the size of the
project and the amount of cleanup involved.



   B.   A basic fee shall be charged for each permit for any structure
to be moved.



   C.   In addition to the basic fee, the city engineer shall determine
when the interests of the city require that moving of the structure requires
inspection by the city and assess a fee for each hour for such inspection.



   D.   The chief of police of the city shall determine when public
interest, in terms of traffic hazard abatement, require convoy by police of
the structure being moved. The charge for such convoy shall be based on the
hourly rate for the personnel and equipment used.



   E.   The schedule of fees shall be those amounts established by
resolution of the council adopted prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter and shall remain in effect until July 1,
1991. Effective July 1, 1991, and each succeeding July 1st thereafter, said
schedule of fees shall be adjusted in accordance with the formula used by the
city council to establish the expenditure control budget. If, in the
determination of the city engineer, the adjustment of the schedule of fees
produced by the above procedure is not representative of the actual change in
costs of issuing the building relocation permit, the city engineer may, in
lieu of the procedures set forth in this section, compute a new schedule of
fees for adoption by resolution of the council. In the event of the adoption
of a new schedule of fees by resolution of the council, such new schedule of
fees shall become effective on adoption thereof by the council. The
adjustment of such new schedule of fees shall begin the July 1st next
occurring after adoption of the new schedule.



   F.   The foregoing fees, including the basic fee, shall be deducted
from the deposit, and the balance remaining, if any, after completion of the
moving of the structure to the new site, shall be returned to the permittee.
If the total of such fees is greater than the deposit, the permittee shall
pay all such fees.



   G.   No deposit shall be returned until all debris and litter has
been removed and all utilities and sewers disconnected and/or capped to the
satisfaction of the city engineer and chief building official. If such
removal, disconnection and/or capping is not performed to his/her
satisfaction within fifteen (15) days, he/she shall proceed without notice to
remove, disconnect or cap as required, deducting the cost of same from the
deposit. (Prior code § 7841(b))



15.48.130   Moving permit application.



   At least three days prior to the date of the actual move a completed
application form shall be submitted to the city engineer on an approved
application form. The following information shall be included on the
application:



   A.   The kind of structure to be moved;



   B.   The street location or other identifying description of the
site to which the structure is to be moved;



   C.   The route over, along, across, and upon which such structure is
to be moved;



   D.   The time it is proposed to move the structure and within which
removal will be completed;



   E.   Signatures from the following utility companies acknowledging
that they have seen and approved the proposed route over which the structure
is to be moved;



   1.   Southern California Edison,



   2.   Pacific Bell,



   3.   Continental Cablevision;



   F.   The loaded height;



   G.   The loaded length;



   H.   The loaded weight;



   I.   The type and number of wheels of the truck or dolly;



   J.   Other information as required by the city engineer to review
the application. (Prior code § 7841(c))



15.48.140   Faithful performance bond.



   A.   Each application for a moving permit shall be accompanied by a
faithful performance bond, in an amount specified by the city engineer not to
exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), guaranteeing completion
of the moving work within the time specified in the moving permit. Said bond
shall guarantee completion of the moving and the repair or costs of repair
for damage to curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, pavements, signs, trees,
poles, signals and other facilities belonging to the city.



   B.   Faithful performance bond for moving shall not be required for
residential garages. When both a relocation and moving faithful performance
bond are required, they may be combined as one bond. A continuing faithful
performance bond in the minimum amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for moving only may be maintained on file with the city engineer by persons
engaged in the business of house moving. (Prior code § 7841(d))



15.48.150   Certificate of insurance.



   A.   Every person, firm, company, corporation, or organization
applying for a permit shall file with the engineering department a policy,
true copy thereof, or certificate of insurance, accompanied by an endorsement
signed by the underwriter or an authorized representative, as evidence that
the applicant has obtained and maintains the following insurance requirements:



   1.   Comprehensive general liability coverage with limits of not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage;



   2.   Automobile liability coverage with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for occurrence for
bodily injury, personal injury and property damage;



   3.   Worker's compensation coverage with limits as required by the
Labor Code of the state of California and employers liability coverage with
limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident.



   B.   The city, its officers, agents and employees are to be named as
additional insured with respect to the contractor's general liability. The
contractor's insurance shall be considered primary with respect to any
insurance or self-insurance programs maintained by the city. The contractor
shall also agree to hold the city, its officers, agents and employees
harmless from any and all causes of action, penalties, liabilities or loss
resulting from claims or court actions arising out of any accidents, loss or
damage to persons or property occurring as a result of any work performed by
the contractor or his subcontractors. Franchised public utilities operating
under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission are
exempt from the provisions of this article for work performed by their own
forces. (Prior code § 7841(e))



15.48.160   Permit regulations.



   House moving permits shall be conditional upon such requirements as may
be established by the city engineer subject to the following regulations:



   A.   Any truck with metal tires used for moving buildings shall not
exceed six hundred (600) pounds per inch of tire surface width while loaded.



   B.   If rollers are used to move a building, planks shall be placed
under the rollers of such width and in such a manner as to protect the
surface of the street.



   C.   Buildings shall be moved upon rollers or upon a truck or dolly
having wheels equipped with pneumatic, solid rubber, or metal tires.



   D.   Buildings shall be allowed to remain stationary on a street
only where they will not obstruct an intersection or obstruct access to any
fire hydrant, standpipe or other fire fighting equipment, located upon or
adjacent to such street.



   E.   Structures shall not be allowed to be moved on the public
right-of-way between the hours of thirty (30) minutes after sunset to thirty
(30) minutes before sunrise.



   F.   The fire, police, and engineering departments of the city shall
be notified of the exact location of the building being moved twice each
twenty-four (24) hours while the building is being moved. One time shall be
between six p.m. and midnight of each twenty-four (24) hours.



   G.   Provision shall be made for the protection of any tree, shrub
or plant located in, or on any street, park boulevard, alley or public place
in the city.



   H.   Buildings shall not be moved upon any street at any other time,
to any other destination or in any other manner than as stated in a valid
permit.



   I.   The local utilities shall be notified of the time and place
where the moving operations will be carried on.



   J.   Preparation work on the structure to be moved will not be
allowed prior to the issuance of the moving permit.



   K.   The city engineer may require such additional regulations as
he/she may deem necessary to protect the public health and safety. (Prior
code § 7841(f))



Chapter 15.52
MOBILE HOME PARKS



Sections:



15.52.010   Conditional use permit approval.



15.52.020   Minimum park size.



15.52.030   Density.



15.52.040   Site size.



15.52.050   Site width.



15.52.060   Clearances and setbacks.



15.52.070   Patios and pads.



15.52.080   Parking.



15.52.090   Streets.



15.52.100   Driveways.



15.52.110   Lighting.



15.52.120   Storm drainage.



15.52.130   Sanitary sewers.



15.52.140   Water system.



15.52.150   Undergrounding.



15.52.160   Street name signs.



15.52.170   Recreation areas, pedestrian ways and bikeways.



15.52.190   Landscaping and screening.



15.52.200   Utility connections.



15.52.210   Other facilities.



15.52.220   Miscellaneous regulations.



15.52.010   Conditional use permit approval.



   Conditional use permit approval by the city includes bonding and or
cash deposit requirements as set forth in the subdivision regulations to
insure development in accord with conditions imposed, said bonds and/or cash
deposits to include all facilities in public rights-of-way and other site
development requirements. (Prior code § 7185(1))



15.52.020   Minimum park size.



   The minimum mobile home park shall be ten gross acres. (Prior code §
7185(2))



15.52.030   Density.



   A maximum of 7.5 mobile home sites per gross acre will be permitted.
(Prior code § 7185(3))



15.52.040   Site size.



   Each mobile home site shall be not less than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet in area including pad, parking, private access,
landscaping and private storage areas. (Prior code § 7185(4))



15.52.050   Site width.



   No mobile home site shall be less than thirty (30) feet in width.
(Prior code § 7185(5))



15.52.060   Clearances and setbacks.



   A.   Front yard         20 feet



      Side yard (interior)      10 feet



      Side yard (street)      20 feet



      Rear yard         20 feet



   B.   Mobile home sites:



      Front yard         10 feet



      Side yard         7.5 feet



      Rear yard         5 feet



   C.   No mobile home shall be located in any required yard space,
except that tow bars may extend into such yard space and covered porches or
patios may extend not more than one-half the distance into a required side
yard.



   D.   Required mobile home park yards shall be fully landscaped,
sprinklered and maintained, in accord with landscape plans to be submitted
and approved with conditional use permit applications.



   E.   No travel trailer or boat shall be stored in any required yard
area or elsewhere on any mobile home site.



   F.   Mobile home sites shall be so designed, the mobile homes so
placed, as to maintain fifteen (15) feet side to side, ten feet corner to
corner, and ten feet end to end clearances. (Prior code § 7185(6))



15.52.070   Patios and pads.



   A.   Each mobile home site shall have a hard surfaced patio area of
concrete or asphalt concrete not less than two hundred (200) square feet in
area. Any permanent porch greater than fifteen (15) square feet in area shall
be counted as part of the required patio area.



   B.   Each mobile home site shall have a mobile home support pad
consisting of a dust-free surface over a base adequate to support the mobile
home. Said spaces shall be kept free of obstacles such as porches and storage
sheds. (Prior code § 7185(7))



15.52.080   Parking.



   A.   Not less than one guest parking space shall be provided at a
central location or locations for each four mobile home sites.



   B.   Adequate parking in accord with Chapter 17.30 shall be provided
for central recreation buildings, mobile home park offices, and similar
approved facilities.



   C.   Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, non-occupied travel
trailers and other uses shall be provided at a ratio of one space to each ten
mobile home sites. Said parking shall be clustered and shall be screened from
view by means of solid fence and/or landscaping.



   D.   All parking areas shall be constructed and maintained in accord
with Section 17.32.050. (Prior code § 7185(8))



15.52.090   Streets.



   A.   Entrance streets shall be located not less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet from public street intersections, and the location and
design thereof shall be approved by the city. Entrance streets, and other
collector streets within the mobile home park shall be not less than
thirty-six (36) feet minimum width.



   B.   All other streets within the mobile home park shall be of
thirty (30) feet minimum width.



   C.   Cul de sacs shall be a maximum of six hundred (600) feet in
length with a fully paved turn-around at the end of eight feet minimum
diameter.



   D.   Parking shall be permitted on both sides of entrance and
collector streets and on only one side of other streets, and shall be so
signed. Such parking may be calculated in total mobile home park or
individual mobile home property requirements.



   E.   Streets shall be designed in accord with the current structural
cross-section requirements for city subdivision streets, except that widths
shall be as per this code section and concrete center-gutters of not less
than twenty-four (24) inches width and such greater width as may be
determined by the city to be necessary to carry storm drainage may be
substituted for standard curb and gutter. (Prior code § 7185(a))



15.52.100   Driveways.



   Driveways for individual sites and to community areas shall be improved
as prescribed in Section 17.32.050. (Prior code § 7185(10))



15.52.110   Lighting.



   Public right-of-way lighting, with underground wiring, shall be
provided abutting mobile home parks, with a minimum installation of one.
(Prior code § 7185(11))



15.52.120   Storm drainage.



   A.   Mobile home parks shall pay a storm drainage fee per acre
equivalent to that charged for multifamily developments.



   B.   The mobile home park application shall be accompanied by a
complete drainage plan, including proposed ultimate disposal, and the city
will review same for conformity with drainage master plans for the area.



   C.   Maintenance of all mobile park drainage facilities shall be the
responsibility of the developer. Underground and pump facilities shall be
built to current city subdivision standards. (Prior code § 7185(12))



15.52.130   Sanitary sewers.



   A.   All mobile home parks shall be connected to the city sanitary
sewer system.



   B.   All sanitary sewers in mobile home park streets shall be
designed in full accord with current city public sewer standards, except that
the city engineer may approve six-inch mains not to exceed two hundred (200)
feet in length with cleanouts at the end of such six-inch mains in lieu of
manholes.



   C.   All sewer laterals to individual mobile home sites shall comply
fully with applicable city codes for single-family residential dwelling
connections. (Prior code § 7185(13))



15.52.140   Water system.



   A.   All mobile home parks shall be served by a central water supply
system approved by the city.



   B.   All water system design shall meet the standards prescribed by
the city fire chief as required to maintain Class IV fire rating
requirements, including line sizes, pressures, stand-by pumps and/or well
supplies, storage and fire hydrant specifications and placement. All required
fire hydrants shall be installed and paid for by the developer within the
park and on adjacent public rights-of-way. (Prior code § 7185(14))



15.52.150   Undergrounding.



   All public utilities shall be installed underground, including
electrical supply, telephone, street lighting cable, community antenna t.v.
and ducting provision for cable television. A community t.v. antenna shall be
provided; usage of individual antenna on each mobile home will not be
permitted. (Prior code § 7185(15))



15.52.160   Street name signs.



   Approved street names and street name signs shall be provided and
maintained at each in-park street intersection and at each entrance to a
public street. (Prior code § 7185(16))



15.52.170   Recreation areas, pedestrian ways and bikeways.



   A.   Common recreation areas shall be required and shall conform to
the following regulations:



   1.   In all mobile home parks there shall be one or more outdoor
recreation areas easily accessible to all park residents and available for
year-around recreational use.



   2.   Recreation areas shall contain a minimum of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet, and shall contain an additional two hundred (200)
square feet for every mobile home site in excess of seventy-five (75).
Recreation areas may include a community center.



   3.   Recreation areas shall be centrally located and free of traffic
hazards.



   B.   For the purpose of computing available common recreation area,
required mobile home and travel trailer park yard areas and pedestrian ways,
management offices, and laundry or tenant storage areas shall not be included.



   C.   The planning commission shall encourage pedestrian ways and
bike ways within mobile home parks. (Prior code § 7185(18))



15.52.190   Landscaping and screening.



   Mobile home parks shall provide permanently maintained landscaped areas
and site screening in conformance with the following regulations:



   A.   Mobile home parks which abut upon a public roadway shall
provide a landscaped border adjacent to the road right-of-way of not less
than ten feet in width;



   B.   Precise landscape plans to be submitted and approved prior to
the approval of a conditional use permit for a mobile home park development
on the site;



   C.   Mobile home parks shall provide solid perimeter screen fencing,
a maximum of six feet in height, along all side and rear property lines where
the park adjoins a R-A, R-1 or R-M district;



   D.   Mobile home parks abutting upon a public roadway shall provide
a masonry wall or fence not less than three feet in height, along all public
street frontages located not less than ten feet nor more than twenty (20)
feet behind the property line. (Prior code § 7185(19))



15.52.200   Utility connections.



   A.   All required conditions, including paving, landscaping, street
signs, etc., shall be completed prior to connection to a sanitary sewer for
any mobile home park or site therein. Seven thousand (7,000) lumen ornamental
pole electrolier at the park entrance, one at any abutting public street
intersection, and/or one at each three hundred thirty (330) foot interval
along park street borders.



   B.   Interior park lighting, with underground service shall provide
for all interior streets. (Prior code § 7185(20))



15.52.210   Other facilities.



   A.   Each mobile home park shall have a laundry building for clothes
washing and drying. A yard area may be provided adjacent to said building for
clothes hanging, and shall, if provided, be screened with a six foot masonry
wall.



   B.   The park owner shall utilize city-approved disposal bins for
disposal of all trash and garbage. Locations of disposal bins shall be shown
on the site plan and approved by the city. Common outdoor garbage collection
areas shall be screened with a six foot high masonry fence and shall be so
located as not to cause a visual traffic hazard.



   C.   No in-park commercial facilities, including the sale of
convenience goods, will be allowed except for vending machine sales which may
be permitted in central recreation or management areas only.



   D.   In-park commercial mobile home sales will be permitted only
where the mobile home park is located adjacent to a C-4, service commercial
district, and the sales activity is carried on in such area. (Prior code §
7185(21))



15.52.220   Miscellaneous regulations.



   A.   Open irrigation ditches within or adjacent to a mobile home
park shall be piped or fenced in accord with this code.



   B.   No permanent shed other than storage shed, mobile home porch
and steps or temporary sun screen or windscreen shall be erected on any
mobile home site.



   C.   All mobile homes shall be fitted with appropriate metal or
screen block skirts obscuring stands at the time of placement on the site.



   D.   The maximum permitted height of any structure or mobile home
shall be thirty (30) feet. (Prior code § 7185(22))



Chapter 15.56
TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS



Sections:



15.56.010   Definitions.



15.56.020   Supplemental regulations.



15.56.030   Prohibitions.



15.56.040   Conditional use permit.



15.56.050   Travel trailer park locational factors.



15.56.060   Travel trailer park standards.



15.56.010   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Mobile home" means a structure exceeding eight feet in width and forty
(40) feet in length, having a chassis and designed to be movable, with
kitchen, bathroom, and living facilities, designed for use as a single family
dwelling unit when connected to appropriate utility lines, and has no
foundation other than wheels or temporary stabilizing units.



   "Recreational vehicle" means a travel trailer.



   "Travel trailer" means any vehicle which at no time exceeds eight feet
in width at its widest point and is less than forty (40) feet in length at
its longest point, and is designed for human habitation whether
self-propelled or drawn by a motor vehicle, which is intended for permanent
or semi- permanent use and which has no foundation other than wheels and
temporary stabilizing units.



   "Travel trailer park" means any parcel, or contiguous parcels of land
under single ownership designed or intended to be used to accommodate travel
trailers and/or other recreational vehicles on a transient basis (one month
continued occupancy or less) regardless of whether or not a charge is made
for such accommodations.



   "Travel trailer site" means any portion of a travel trailer park
designed, intended for or designated for occupancy of one travel trailer and
approved on-site structures in connection with such occupancy. (Prior code §
7186)



15.56.020   Supplemental regulations.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be considered supplemental to
applicable state regulations and to other pertinent city ordinances. Where
this chapter, and such regulations and other ordinances do not control, the
provisions of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development's
Mobile Home Court Development Guide, FHA G 4200.7, January 1970 or successor
documents thereto, shall be used by the city as "minimum standards" guide to
administrative decisions regarding travel trailer park developments. (Prior
code § 7187)



15.56.030   Prohibitions.



   A.   Travel trailers, other than those being offered for sale in
properly zoned commercial areas, when occupied, shall be located only within
approved travel trailer parks or in existing travel trailer parks which are
nonconforming uses.



   B.   Mobile homes shall not be located or occupied in travel trailer
parks except as hereinafter specified.



   C.   Commercial activities, including the sale of travel trailers,
whether or not appurtenant to the operation of a travel trailer park, shall
not be permitted in travel trailer parks.



   D.   No more than one travel trailer shall be allowed on each travel
trailer site.



   E.   Recreational units incapable of state of California vehicle
registration and licensing shall not be located or occupied in travel trailer
parks including tents. Tents and other temporary shelter shall not be
permitted on a travel trailer site except for awnings and covers attached to
any travel trailer.  (Prior code § 7188)



15.56.040   Conditional use permit.



   A.   A conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 17.38.010 shall
be granted prior to the commencement of construction of any travel trailer
park in the C-4 and C-5 zoning districts.



   B.   Applications for a conditional use permit under the zoning
regulations of the city shall be accompanied by the following information:



   1.   A complete plot plan showing all physical features of the
proposed travel trailer park site and adjacent public streets and areas;



   2.   A complete storm drainage plan providing for the ultimate
disposal of storm water showing on-site facilities and off-site storm lines;



   3.   A complete sanitary sewer plan for the entire site, and
individual travel trailer sites, including all off-site lines and, where
necessary, lift stations, adequate to serve the proposed development;



   4.   A complete water source and distribution plan for the entire
travel trailer park;



   5.   A complete plot plan of sites, landscaping, parking areas,
recreation and storage areas. (Prior code § 7189)



15.56.050   Travel trailer park locational factors.



   A.   Travel trailer parks shall be evaluated in terms of their
impact upon adjacent areas in order to avoid the creation of land use and
circulation problems and/or undesirable environments for the occupants of the
travel trailer parks or surrounding properties.



   B.   Travel trailer parks shall be served by existing public sewer
and water systems. The development of such parks with individual water and
sewer systems will not be permitted.



   C.   All travel trailer park entrances and exits shall have direct
access to a primary, secondary or collector street as shown on the approved
streets and highways plan. Access to travel trailer parks shall not be
permitted from minor streets. (Prior code § 7190)



15.56.060   Travel trailer park standards.



   A.   Conditional use permit approval by the city includes bonding
and/or cash deposit requirements as set forth in the subdivision regulations
to insure development in accord with conditions imposed, said bonds and/or
cash deposits to include all facilities in public rights-of-way and other
site development requirements.



   B.   Minimum Park Size. The minimum travel trailer park shall be
five gross acres.



   C.   Density. A maximum of fourteen (14) travel trailer sites per
gross acre will be permitted.



   D.   Site Size. Each travel trailer site shall be not less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area including pad, parking, private access,
landscaping, and private storage areas.



   E.   Site Width. No travel trailer site shall be less than
twenty-five (25) feet in width.



   F.   Clearances and Setbacks.



   1.   Travel trailer parks.



      Front yard            20 feet



      Side yard (interior)         10 feet



      Side yard (street)         20 feet



      Rear yard            20 feet



   2.   Travel trailer sites.



      Front yard            10 feet



      Side yard            5 feet



      Rear yard            5 feet



   3.   No travel trailer shall be located in any required yard space,
except that tow bars may extend into such yard space and covered porches may
extend not more than one half the distance into a required side yard.



   4.   Required travel trailer park yards shall be fully landscaped,
sprinklered and maintained, in accord with landscape plans to be submitted
and approved with conditional use permit applications.



   5.   Travel trailer sites shall be so designed, and travel trailers
so placed, as to maintain ten feet side-to-side, ten feet corner-to-corner,
and ten feet end-to-end clearances.



   G.   Patios and Pads.



   1.   Each travel trailer site shall have a hard surfaced patio area
of concrete or asphalt concrete not less than one hundred (100) square feet
in area.



   2.   Each travel trailer site shall have a travel trailer support
pad consisting of a concrete or asphaltic concrete surface over a base
adequate to support the travel trailer. Said pads shall be kept free of
obstacles such as porches and storage sheds.



   H.   Parking.



   1.   Not less than one guest parking space shall be provided at a
central location or locations for each ten travel trailer sites.



   2.   Adequate parking in accord with Chapter 17.30 shall be provided
for central recreation buildings, park offices, and similar approved
facilities.



   3.   Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, non-occupied travel
trailers and other such vehicles shall be provided at a ratio of one space to
each ten travel trailer sites. Said parking shall be clustered and shall be
screened from view by means of solid fencing.



   4.   All parking areas shall be constructed and maintained in accord
with Section 17.32.050.



   I.   Streets.



   1.   Entrance streets shall be located not less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet from public street intersections, and the location and
design thereof shall be approved by the city.



   2.   All other streets within the travel trailer park shall be of
twenty-eight (28) feet minimum width.



   3.   Cul-de-sacs shall be a maximum of six hundred (600) feet in
length with a fully paved turn-around at the end of eighty (80) feet minimum
diameter.



   4.   Parking shall be permitted on both sides of entrance and
collector streets and on only one side of other streets, and shall be so
signed. Such parking may be calculated in total parking requirement.



   5.   Streets shall be designed in accord with the current structural
cross-section requirements for city subdivision streets, except that widths
shall be as per this code section and concrete center gutters of not less
than twenty-four (24) inches width and such greater width as may be
determined by the city to be necessary to carry storm drainage may be
substituted for standard curb and gutter.



   J.   Driveways. Driveways for individual sites and to community
areas shall be improved as prescribed in Section 17.32.050.



   K.   Lighting.



   1.   Public right-of-way lighting, with underground wiring, shall be
provided abutting travel trailer parks, with a minimum installation of one
seven thousand (7,000) lumen ornamental pole electrolier at the park
entrance, one at any abutting public street intersection, and/or one at each
three hundred thirty (330) foot interval along park street borders.



   2.   Interior park lighting, with underground wiring shall be
provided for all interior streets.



   L.   Storm Drainage.



   1.   Travel trailer parks shall pay a storm drainage fee per acre
equivalent to that charged for commercial developments.



   2.   The travel trailer park application shall be accompanied by a
complete drainage plan, including proposed ultimate disposal, and the city
will review same for conformity with drainage master plans for the area.



   3.   Maintenance of all travel trailer park drainage facilities
shall be the responsibility of the developer. Underground and pump facilities
shall be built to current city subdivision standards.



   M.   Sanitary Sewers.



   1.   All travel trailer parks shall be connected to the city
sanitary sewer system.



   2.   All sanitary sewers in travel trailer park streets shall be
designed in full accord with current city public sewer standards, except that
the city engineer may approve six-inch mains not to exceed two hundred (200)
feet in length with clean-outs at the end of such six-inch mains in lieu of
manholes.



   3.   All sewer laterals to individual travel trailer sites shall
comply fully with applicable city codes for single family residential
dwelling connections.



   N.   Water System.



   1.   All travel trailer parks shall be served by a public water
supply system approved by the city.



   2.   All water system design shall meet the standards prescribed by
the city fire chief as required to maintain Class IV fire rating
requirements, including line sizes, pressures, stand-by pumps and/or well
supplies, storage and fire hydrant specifications and placement. All required
fire hydrants shall be installed and paid for by the developer within the
park and on adjacent public rights-of-way.



   O.   Undergrounding. All public utilities shall be installed
underground, including electrical supply, telephone, street lighting cable,
and ducting provisions for cable television. Community antenna television
shall be supplied to each trailer site by underground ducting.



   P.   Recreation Areas.



   1.   In all travel trailer parks there shall be one or more outdoor
recreation area easily accessible to all park occupants and available for
year-around recreational use.



   a.   In all travel trailer parks there shall be one or more outdoor
recreation area easily accessible to all park occupants and available for
year-around recreational use.



   b.   Recreation areas shall contain a minimum of five thousand
(5,000) square feet, and shall contain an additional one hundred (100) square
feet for every travel trailer site in excess of seventy-five (75).



   c.   Recreation areas shall be centrally located and free of traffic
hazards.



   2.   For the purpose of computing available common recreation 
area, required travel trailer park yard areas, management offices, and
laundry or occupant storage areas shall not be included.



   Q.   Landscaping and Screening. Travel trailer parks shall provide
permanently maintained landscaped areas and site screening in conformance
with the following regulations:



   1.   Travel trailer parks which abut upon a public roadway shall
provide a landscaped border adjacent to the road right-of-way of not less
than ten feet in width;



   2.   Precise landscape plans to be submitted and approved prior to
the approval of a conditional use permit for a travel trailer park
development on the site;



   3.   Travel trailer parks shall provide perimeter screen fencing, a
minimum of six feet in height, along all side and rear property lines;



   4.   Travel trailer parks abutting upon a public roadway shall
provide screen fencing, a minimum of three feet in height along all public
street frontages located not less than ten feet nor more than twenty (20)
feet behind the public right-of-way line;



   5.   Perimeter screen fencing shall be of a view obscuring durable
material or combination of materials approved by the planning commission;



   6.   Street frontage screen fencing shall be of a view obscuring
concrete block or masonry material with no portion more than twenty-five (25)
percent open. A combination of materials may be considered with planning
commission approval.



   R.   Utility Connections. All required conditions, including paving,
landscaping, street signs, etc., shall be completed prior to connection to a
sanitary sewer for any travel trailer park or site therein.



   S.   Other Facilities.



   1.   Each travel trailer park shall have centrally located restroom
and laundry building(s) for bathing, clothes washing and drying. A yard area
may be provided adjacent to said building for clothes hanging, and shall, if
provided, be screened with a six-foot masonry wall.



   2.  The park owner shall utilize city approved disposal bins for
disposal of all trash and garbage. Locations of disposal bins shall be shown
on the site plan and approved by the city. Common outdoor garbage collection
areas shall be screened with a six-foot high masonry fence enclosed on at
least three sides and shall be so located as not to cause a visual traffic
hazard.



   3.   No in-park commercial facilities, including the sale of
convenience goods, will be allowed except for vending machine sales which may
be permitted in central recreation or management areas only.



   Commercial travel trailer sales and/or service will be permitted only
in C-4, service commercial district, distinctly separate from the travel
trailer park.



   T.   Miscellaneous Regulations.



   1.   Open irrigation ditches within or adjacent to a travel trailer
park shall be piped or fenced in accord with this Municipal Code.



   2.   No permanent shed other than storage shed, travel trailer porch
and steps or temporary sun screen or wind screen shall be erected on any
travel trailer site.



   3.   The maximum permitted height of any structure or travel trailer
shall be fifteen (15) feet. (Prior code § 7190)



Chapter 15.60
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS



Sections:



15.60.010   Statutory authorization, short title, findings of fact,
purpose and methods.



15.60.020   Definitions.



15.60.030   General provisions.



15.60.040   Administration.



15.60.050   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.



15.60.060   Variance procedures.



15.60.070   Board of appeals.



15.60.010   Statutory authorization, short title, findings of fact,
purpose and methods.



   A.   Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the state has in
Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local
government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
city does adopt the following floodplain management regulations in compliance
with the requirements for floodplain management established by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in Title 44, Chapter 1, Part 60, Subpart A of the
Code of Federal Regulations.



   B.   Short Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the “City of Visalia Floodplain Management Ordinance.”



   C.   Findings of Fact.



   1.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   2.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect
of obstruction in special flood hazard areas, which increase flood heights
and velocities, may also contribute to the flood loss.



   D.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:



   1.   Protect human life and health;



   2.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding events and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in special flood hazard areas;



   6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future
blighted areas caused by flood damage;



   7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is
located in a special flood hazard area; and



   8.   Ensure that those who occupy properties located in special
flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions.



   E.   Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its
purpose, this chapter includes regulations to:



   1.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards;



   2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;



   4.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and



   5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas. (Ord. 2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code
§ 7192)



15.60.020   Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain
administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to
three (3) feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be
evident. The city is predominately an area of shallow flooding with a
designated AE zone on the FIRMs. There are select areas that are depressed
where the base flood depths exceed three (3) feet. These areas are public
spaces and do not contain structures.



   “Base flood” means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation shown on the FIRMs
for Zone AE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood
that has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.



   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor
subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.



   “Breakaway walls” means any type of walls, whether solid or
lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic
or any other suitable building material which are not part of the structural
support of the building and which are so designed as to break away, under
abnormal water action without damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be
carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading
resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per
square foot. Use of breakaway walls shall be certified by a registered
engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:



   1.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and



   2.   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously in the event of the base flood.



   “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within a special flood hazard area.



   “Encroachment” means the advance of infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into
a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means parcel (or
contiguous parcel) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the
original effective date of this chapter on July 5, 1984.



   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).



   “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition
of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



   1.   The overflow of inland waters; and/or



   2.   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.



   “Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)” means the official maps on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zone applicable to the
community.



   “Flood Insurance Study (FIS)” means the official report provided by
the FEMA that includes flood profiles, the FIRMs, and the water surface
elevations of the base flood.



   “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and
preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the
floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control)
and other application of police power which control development in
flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.



   “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see “Flood”).



   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.  For guidelines on dry
and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins 2-08, 3-93, and 7-93.



   “Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   “Fraud and victimization” as related to the variance procedures of
Section 15.60.060, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or
victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one
hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the
BFE are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from
floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are
subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.



   “Governing body” is the local governing unit that is empowered to
adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry.



   “Hardship” as related to the variance procedures of Section
15.60.060, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to
grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to development next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:



   1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



   2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



   3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



   4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved
programs.



   “Inactive alluvial fan flooding” means flooding that is similar to
traditional riverine flood hazards, but occurs only on alluvial fans. It is
characterized by flow paths with a higher degree of certainty in realistic
assessments of flood risk or in the reliable mitigation of the hazard.
Inactive alluvial fan flooding hazard is characterized by relatively stable
flow paths. Areas of inactive alluvial fan flooding may be subject to
sediment deposition and erosion, but to a degree that does not cause flow
path instability and uncertainty.



   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a
levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage
devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound
engineering practices.



   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement (see “Basement”).



   1.   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest
floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access,
building crawlspace or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor; provided, it conforms to applicable
nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:



   a.   The anchoring standards in Section 15.60.050A1;



   b.   The construction materials and methods standards in Section
15.60.050A2;



   c.   The flood openings standard in Section 15.60.050A3c;



   d.   The crawlspace construction standards in Section 15.60.050A3e;



   e.   The standards for utilities in Section 15.60.050B.



   “Manufactured home” means a structure that is transportable in one
(1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational
vehicle, except for travel trailers, park trailers, and similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.



   “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.



   “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to
replace the structure in new condition (land value deducted) and adjusting
that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the
structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be
based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost
estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount
of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and
physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence, but
shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of
replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those
contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered
only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent
professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the
differences. The owner of the structure is responsible to determine the
market value and submit a report thereof to the floodplain administrator for
review and acceptance.



   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood
Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which BFEs shown
on a community's FIRMs are referenced.



   “New construction”, for floodplain management purposes, means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after
the original effective date of this chapter on July 5, 1984, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale, or installed on foundations on or after the original
effective date of this chapter on July 5, 1984.



   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall,
wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, snare or collect
debris carried by the flow of water, or is likely to be carried downstream.



    “One-Hundred-Year-Flood” or “100-Year Flood.” See “Base
flood.”



   “Public safety and nuisance” as related to the variance procedures
of Section 15.60.060, means that the granting of a variance must not result
in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community,
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs
the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake,
river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:



   1.   Built on a single chassis;



   2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



   3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck; and



   4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.



   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.



   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other
development into compliance with state or local floodplain management
regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to
the structure or other development.



   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



   “Sheet Flow Area.” See “Area of shallow flooding.”



   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain
subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.  It is shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1 A30, AE, A99, or, AH.



   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the
start of construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For manufactured
homes not within a manufactured home park or subdivision, start of
construction means the affixing of the manufactured home to its permanent
site. For manufactured homes within manufactured home parks or subdivisions
start of construction is the date on which the placement of the manufactured
home on a foundation takes place.



   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building or manufactured home
that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank
or a manufactured home.



   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.



   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the “start of construction” of the improvement. If multiple or
phased improvements are involved, said total costs shall be cumulative for a
five (5) consecutive year period prior to the start of construction.
Substantially improved structures are considered new construction and shall
meet all the provisions of this chapter for new construction. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:



   1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;



   2.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.



   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development
to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.



   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo,
channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816
(part), 1998: prior code § 7193)



15.60.030   General provisions.



   A.   Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply
to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the city.



   B.   Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. The
special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA in the FIS and accompanying
FIRMs dated June 16, 2009 and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and
attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and
may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of
this chapter and which are recommended to the city by the floodplain
administrator The FIS and accompanying FIRMs are on file at City Hall, 315 E.
Acequia Avenue, Visalia, California.



   C.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



   D.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   E.   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this
chapter, all provisions shall be:



   1.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



   F.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased
by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside
the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or FEMA, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.



   G.   Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are
declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by
the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the chapter as a whole or any portion thereof, other than the
section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 2010-08 (part),
2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code § 7194)



15.60.040   Administration.



   A.   Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall
be obtained before any construction, or other development including
manufactured homes, begins within any special flood hazard area established
in Section 15.60.030B. The applicant for a development permit shall submit
such application on application forms furnished by the city. The applicant
shall provide the following minimum information during the course of applying
and completing the development permit:



   1.   During the application process, provide three sets of plans,
drawn to scale, showing:



   a.   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their
location;



   b.   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;



   c.   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;



   d.   BFE information as shown on the FIRMs referenced in Section
15.60.030B.



   e.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and



   f.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed as required in Section
15.60.050A3b of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 3-93.



   g.   For a structure with a crawlspace foundation, proposed
locations and total net area of flood openings as required in Section
15.60.050A3e of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-08
and 7-93.



   2.   During the application process, provide a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
the development permit.



   3.   During the permit issuance and inspection process, provide
preliminary certification from a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor of the proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all residential structures.



   4.   Prior to requesting a final occupancy of the structure, provide
the following certifications as applicable:



   a.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3a (lowest floor
elevations);



   b.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3b (elevation or
floodproofing of nonresidential structures);



   c.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3c (flood openings);



   B.   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Chief Building
Official or authorized designee agent acting in the official's behalf is
appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.



   C.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include,
but not be limited to:



   1.   Permit Review.



   a.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   b.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;



   c.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;



   d.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where BFEs have been determined but a floodway has not been
designated. This adverse affect on carrying capacity shall be determined by
the analysis required in Section 15.60.050F1.



   2.   Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When BFE
data is not available per Section 15.60.030B, the floodplain administrator
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to
administer Section 15.60.050. The floodplain administrator shall require that
BFEs be obtained using one (1) of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication,
FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A
Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated
July 1995.



   3.   Notification of Other Agencies.



   a.   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:



   i.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;



   ii.   Submit evidence of such notification to FEMA; and



   iii.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.



   b.   BFE changes due to physical alterations:



   i.   Within 6 months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit
or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to
FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).



   ii.   All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to
the issuance of building permits.  Building Permits shall not be issued
based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMR's).  Approved CLOMR's
allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation
as specified in the “start of construction” definition.



   Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those
physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.



   4.   Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain
for public inspection and make available as needed the following:



   a.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3a (lowest floor
elevations);



   b.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3b (elevation or
floodproofing of nonresidential structures);



   c.   Certification required by Section 15.60.050A3c (flood openings);



   d.   Certification of elevation required by Section 15.60.050C1
(subdivisions and other residential development);



   e.   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance.



   5.   Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas; for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in Section 15.60.070.



   6.   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this
chapter as specified in Section 15.60.030C.



   7.   Non-conversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. To
ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking
vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for
use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the
floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the
floodplain administrator shall:



   a.   Determine which applicants for new construction and/or
substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are five (5) feet or higher; and



   b.   Require the applicant to enter into a “NON-CONVERSION
AGREEMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION WITHIN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS” or equivalent with
the city.  The agreement shall be recorded with the Tulare County Recorder
as a deed restriction.  The non-conversion agreement shall be in a form
acceptable to the floodplain administrator and city attorney; and



   c.   Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the
BFE to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least seventy-two (72) hours.



(Ord. 2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code § 7195)



15.60.050   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.



   A.   Standards of Construction. In all special flood hazard areas,
the following standards are required:



   1.   Anchoring.



   a.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.



   b.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of
Section 15.60.050D1.



   2.   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall
be constructed:



   a.   With materials, which are located below the BFE, that are flood
damage resistant per FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-08; and



   b.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and



   c.   With mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems and other
service systems that are either elevated above the BFE if possible or, if
below the BFE, designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the system components during conditions of flooding per FEMA 348.



   3.   Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.60.020,
definitions for “Basement,” “Lowest floor,” “New construction,”
“Substantial damage” and “Substantial improvement.”)



   a.   Residential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement:



   i.   In an AE Zone, elevated to or above the BFE.



   ii.   In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered
A zone], elevated to or above the BFE; as determined under Section
15.60.040C2.



   iii.   Certified by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, and verified by the city building inspector, to be properly
elevated prior to issuance of the final inspection of the structure. Such
certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain
administrator.



   b.   Nonresidential construction. All new or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
with Section 15.60.050A3a or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:



   i.   Be floodproofed to one (1) foot above the BFE so that the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and eligible to receive an insurance rate equivalent to a building
with its lowest floor elevated to the BFE;



   ii.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



   iii.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, and verified by the city building inspector, that the
floodproofing requirements of this Section 15.60.050A3b are satisfied prior
to issuance of final occupancy of the structure. Such certification shall be
provided to the floodplain administrator.



   c.   Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
(excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, building crawlspace or storage, and which are subject to
flooding, shall:



   i.   Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.



   ii.   Be designed to provide a minimum of two (2) openings on
different exterior walls having a total net area of not less than one (1)
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
Buildings with more than one (1) enclosed area shall have two (2) openings on
different exterior walls for each enclosed area to allow the automatic entry
and exit of floodwater in each enclosed area.



   iii.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, and verified by the city building inspector, that the flood
openings requirements of this Section 15.60.050A3c are satisfied prior to
issuance of the final inspection of the structure. Such certification shall
be provided to the floodplain administrator.



   d.   Manufactured homes shall meet the standards in Section
15.60.050D.



   e.   Crawlspace Construction. This sub-section applies to buildings
with crawlspaces up to two (2) feet below grade.  Below-grade crawlspace
construction that is done in accordance with the requirements listed below
will not be considered to be a basement.



   i.   Crawlspace construction shall be done per the guidance provided
in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.



   ii.   The building shall be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Crawlspace construction is not allowed at sites with flood velocities greater
than five (5) feet per second and other foundation types should be used;



   iii.   The crawlspace is a fully enclosed area below the BFE and, as
such, shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. For guidance on flood openings,
see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1-08;



   iv.   Crawlspace construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile
or column foundations that withstand storm surge and wave forces are required
in V zones;



   v.   Portions of the building below the BFE shall be constructed
with materials that are flood damage resistant per FEMA Technical Bulletin
2-08. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to
elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials
that extend below the BFE; and



   vi.   Any mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems located within
the crawlspace shall be elevated above the BFE if possible or designed so
that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components
during flood conditions per FEMA 348.



   vii.   Requirements for all below-grade crawlspace construction, in
addition to the above requirements, to include the following:



   (a)   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE shall not be
more than two (2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown
as D in figure 3 of Technical Bulletin 11-01;



   (b)   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawlspace foundation
wall shall not exceed 4 feet (shown as L in figure 3 of Technical Bulletin
11-01) at any point; and



   (c)   There shall be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event, not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours.



   B.   Standards for Utilities.



   1.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.



   2.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   C.   Standards for Subdivisions and Other Residential Development.



   1.   All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed residential
development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, greater than ten (10) lots or three (3) acres, whichever is the
lesser, shall:



   a.   Identify the location of the SFHA and label the BFE lines on
the record map.



   b.   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed
structures and pads on the record map and construction plans.



   c.   Place fill to raise the pads for the structures to or above the
BFE. The following as-built information shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and included as part of an
application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to FEMA:



   i.   Lowest lot elevation or pad elevation.



   ii.   Lowest adjacent grade to structure. (for cases with existing
structures)The application for the LOMR-F shall be submitted to the
floodplain administrator for review prior to submission to FEMA. The
floodplain administrator shall complete the community acknowledgement form
(FEMA Form 81-87B) for inclusion with the application.



   2.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed residential
development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   3.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed residential
development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   4.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed residential
development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood
hazards and shall comply with the provisions of Section 15.60.050F1.



   D.   Standards for Manufactured Homes.



   1.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or
subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home
has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:



   a.   Within Zone AE on the community's FIRMs, be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to or above the BFE and be securely fastened to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.



   b.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, and verified by the city or state building inspector, that the
lowest floor (including basement) is properly elevated prior to issuance of
the final inspection of the structure. Such certification and verification
shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.



   2.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zone AE
on the community's FIRMs that are not subject to the provisions of Section
15.60.050D1 shall:



   a.   Be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement; and



   b.   Be elevated so that either:



   i.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
BFE; or



   ii.   The chassis of the manufactured home is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.



   c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or land
surveyor, and verified by the city or state building inspector, that the
lowest floor (including basement) is properly elevated prior to issuance of
the final inspection of the structure. Such certification and verification
shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.



   E.   Standards for Recreational Vehicles.



   1.   All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zone AE on the
community's FIRMs will either:



   a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



   b.   Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.60.040 and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section
15.60.050D2.



   F.   Regulatory Floodways. FEMA has stated in the FIS that the city
is characterized as an urbanized, inactive alluvial fan system, which
consists of highly trained creeks and irrigation channels. This system of
creeks and channels does not have the capacity to contain the base flood and
therefore the establishment of regulatory floodways is not possible. The
resulting flooding from the base flood consists of areas of shallow flooding
with overland flows characterized by relatively stable flow paths through the
community with flow velocities ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 feet per second. This
velocity range of the flood flows is considered low and not extremely
hazardous; therefore, the following provisions apply:



   1.   New construction, substantial development, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE when it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with
all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the city, or
alternatively, it is demonstrated: (1) that the proposed development does not
substantially increase the water surface elevation of the base flood within
the vicinity of the proposed development, and (2) the proposed development is
designed to allow the flow of the base flood to substantially pass through.
This analysis shall be done under the direction of the floodplain
administrator and upon satisfactory completion shall be prepared into a
report to be accepted by the floodplain administrator.



   2.   If Section 15.60.050F1 is satisfied, all new construction,
substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.60.050.
(Ord. 2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code § 7196)



15.60.060   Variance procedures.



   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property
and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of
property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the
applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be
unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique
characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, it's
inhabitants, or the property owners.



   A.   Conditions for Variances. Generally, variances may be issued
for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the BFE, providing the procedures of
Sections 15.60.040, 15.60.050 and 15.60.070B1-11 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.



   B.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures (as defined in Section 15.60.020) upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.



   C.   Variances shall not be issued within any regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of
deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of
variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes
will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.



   E.   Variances shall only be issued upon:



   1.   Receipt of a written request for variance from the owner of
record, stating the conditions that constitute an extreme hardship;



   2.   A showing of good and sufficient cause such as renovation,
rehabilitation or reconstruction. Variances issued for economic
considerations, aesthetic, or because variances have been used in the past,
are not good and sufficient causes;



   3.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



   4.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization to the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   F.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



   1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage; and



   2.   Such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and
property. (It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by
the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Tulare County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land).



   G.   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Section
15.60.060A-E are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a
public nuisance.



   H.   Upon consideration of the factors of this section and the
purpose of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter.



   I.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the FEMA upon request. (Ord.
2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code § 7196.1)



15.60.070   Board of appeals.



   In order to determine if an error in any requirements, decision or
determination by the floodplain administrator has been made and to provide
for reasonable interpretations of this chapter, there shall be and is created
a board of appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and
training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are
not employees of the jurisdiction. Request for appeal shall be made in
writing to the floodplain administrator on forms available at City Hall, 315
E. Acequia Avenue, Visalia, California. The floodplain administrator shall be
an ex-officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board. The board of
appeals shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at its
pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its
business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
appellant with a duplicate copy to the floodplain administrator.



   A.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the civil court as provided in the
state law.



   B.   In passing upon such application, the appeal board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards, etc.,
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



   1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;



   2.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   4.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   6.   The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed
uses that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   9.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site;



   11.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and
bridges. (Ord. 2010-08 (part), 2010; Ord. 9816 (part), 1998: prior code §
7196.2)



Chapter 15.64
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE



Sections



15.64.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Residential Code.



15.64.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Residential Code.



   A.   That certain residential buildings code in book form known and
designated as the 2016 California Residential Code, as prepared and published
by the International Code Council is adopted as the Residential Code of the
city, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every
section, paragraph, word, phrase or clause contained therein were fully set
forth herein, except for those deletions, modifications, and amendments set
forth below. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Appeals Board section 1.8.7 shall be deleted.  Refer to 2016
California Building Code Section 1.8.8 as amended.



   C.   Included specifically are the 2016 California Residential Code
Appendix H (Patio Covers).



   D.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Residential Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two
copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which are
now so filed for full particulars of said 2016 California Residential Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.68
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE



Sections



15.68.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code.



15.68.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code.



   A.   That certain green standards building code in book form known
and designated as the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, as
prepared and published by the International Code Council is adopted as the
Green Building Standards Code of the city, to all intents and purposes and to
the same effect as if each and every section, paragraph, word, phrase or
clause contained therein were fully set forth herein, except for those
deletions, modifications, and amendments set forth below.  If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Included specifically are the 2016 California Green Building
Standards Code Appendix A4 (Residential Voluntary Measures), and A5
(Nonresidential Voluntary Measures) including Tiers 1 & 2 which will remain
voluntary measures.



   C.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California Green
Building Standards Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and
two copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which
are now so filed for full particulars of said 2016 California Green Building
Standards Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.72
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE



Sections



15.72.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Energy Code.



15.72.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Energy Code.



   A.   That certain energy standards code in book form known and
designated as the 2016 California Energy Code, as prepared and published by
the International Code Council is adopted as the Energy Code of the city, to
all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every section,
paragraph, word, phrase or clause contained therein were fully set forth
herein, except for those deletions, modifications, and amendments set forth
below.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California Energy
Code one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and two copies filed in
the office of building safety division of the city, which are now so filed
for full particulars of said 2016 California Energy Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.76
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE



Sections



15.76.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Existing Buildings Code.



15.76.010   Adoption of the 2016 California Existing Buildings Code.



   A.   That certain existing buildings code in book form known and
designated as the 2016 California Existing Buildings Code, as prepared and
published by the International Code Council is adopted as the Existing
Buildings Code of the city, to all intents and purposes and to the same
effect as if each and every section, paragraph, word, phrase or clause
contained therein were fully set forth herein, except for those deletions,
modifications, and amendments set forth below.  If any section, subsection,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the chapter.



   1.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed
or modified by the city attorney based on a recommendation of the building
official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and non-compliance
respectively be guilty of a misdemeanor, or infraction as determined by the
city attorney.



   2.   Such violation shall be subject to penalties in accordance with
Section 1.12.010.



   B.   Reference is made to three copies of the 2016 California
Existing Buildings Code, one copy filed in the office of the city clerk and
two copies filed in the office of building safety division of the city, which
are now so filed for full particulars of said 2016 California Existing
Buildings Code. 



(Ord. 2016-28 § 1 (part), 2016)



Chapter 15.80
RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS



Sections



15.80.010   Definitions.



15.80.020   Purpose.



15.80.030   Applicability.



15.80.040   Solar system energy requirements.



15.80.050   Duties of city in reviewing small residential rooftop solar
energy system applications.



15.80.060   Permit review and inspection requirements.



15.80.010   Definitions.



   "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated
association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.



   "Common interest development" means any of the following:



   1.   A community apartment project.



   2.   A condominium project.



   3.   A planned development.



   4.   A stock cooperative.



   "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one  (1) or more of
the following:



   1.   Email.



   2.   The internet.



   3.   Facsimile.



   "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those
restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or
significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow
for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy
conservation benefits.



   "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system
or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means:



   1.   For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating
systems: an amount exceeding 10 percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but
in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the
efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent
(10%), as originally specified and proposed.



   2.   For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and
proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10
percent  (10%) as originally specified and proposed.



   "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the
following:



   1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.



   2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state
fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended
by the city and all state and city, health and safety standards.



   3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex
family dwelling.



   4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum
legal building height as defined by the city.



   "Solar energy system" means either of the following:



   1.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water
heating.



   2.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water
heating.



   "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the
date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



15.80.020   Purpose.



   The purpose of the chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with state law and provides for timely and
cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy
systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing
unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city to
install solar energy systems.  This chapter allows the city to achieve these
goals while protecting the public health and safety.  (Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



15.80.030   Applicability.



   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop
solar energy systems in the city.  Small residential rooftop solar energy
systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this
chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical
modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size,
type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to
require new permitting.  Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind
replacements shall not require a permit.  (Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



15.80.040   Solar energy system requirements.



   A.   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and
safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city,
including Visalia fire department, city building officials, and utility
director, if applicable. 



   B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family
residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications
shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the
California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.



   C.   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.  (Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



15.80.050   Duties of city in reviewing small residential rooftop solar
energy system applications.



   A.   All documents required by the city to be completed for the
submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made
available on the publicly accessible city website. 



   B.   Electronic submittal of the required permits application and
documents by email, the internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all
small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.



      An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all
forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. Safety
and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code shall
provide an electronic "notarized" copy of proof of ownership of said property
and the contractor utilized by the applicant shall provide proof of current
contractor's license and insurance.



   C.   The city building division shall adopt a standard plan and
checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar
energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review.  This
standard plan and checklist will be updated and reviewed periodically by the
building division and revised if necessary to comply with all applicable
requirements. 



   D.   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process,
standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall conform to the most current state
codes. 



   E.   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential
rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code sections
65850.55, 66015, 66016, and State Health and Safety Code section 17951. 
(Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



15.80.060   Permit review and inspection requirements.



   A.   The city building department shall adopt an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems within thirty (30) days of the adoption on this
chapter. Building department shall periodically review and update the
administrative process. The building department shall issue a building permit
or other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter
applications or within one (1) to three (3) business days for electronic
applications of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements
of the approved administrative process and standard plan. The building
official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official
finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have
a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions
may be appealed to the city building advisory committee (BAC).



   B.   Review of the application shall be limited to the building
official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal
health and safety requirements.



   C.   If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an
application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based
upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would
have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse
impact.  Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the
potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such
decisions may be appealed to the building advisory committee and/or planning
commission.



   D.   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest
possible cost.



   E.   "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective
method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly
situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.  The
city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method,
condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of state law, including but not
limited to subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of
Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly
increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified
performance.



   F.   The city shall not condition approval of an application on the
approval of an association, meaning a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated
association created for the purpose of managing a common interest
development, as the term "association" is defined in section 4080 of the
Civil Code.



   G.   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction
notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional
information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit
issuance shall be sent to, or given to the applicant for resubmission.



   H.   Only one (1) inspection shall be required and performed by the
building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible
for expedited review. The city building division has the
authority/responsibility) to perform safety inspections regarding ingress and
egress on roof clearance's regarding solar panels at rooftops and at leading
edges. The building division will also inspect for proper flashing
installation requirements as part of this inspection



   I.   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should
include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two
(2) business days of a request and provide a two (2)-hour inspection window.



   J.   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails
inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the
requirements of this chapter. 



(Ord. 2015-09, 2015)



Chapter 15.90
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS



Sections



15.90.010   Purpose.



15.90.020   Definitions.



15.90.030   Expedited permitting process.



15.90.040   Permit application processing.



15.90.050   Technical review.



15.90.060   Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.



15.90.070   Appendices.



15.90.080   Partial invalidity.



15.90.090   Right of appeal.



15.90.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to create an expedited, streamlined
permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting
public health and safety and to mitigate or prevent specific adverse impacts
in the installation and use of such charging stations.  This chapter is also
purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.020   Definitions.



   "Building Official" means the officer or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter by the City
of Visalia.



   "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any
level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built
in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads
on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source
outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.



   "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the
following:



   A.   Electronic mail or email.



   B.   The internet.



   C.   Facsimile.



   "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public
health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the
date the application submitted for a charging station was deemed complete by
the city.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.030   Expedited permitting process.



   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official
shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric
vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with
which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be
eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process
and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current
version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist"
of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook"
as published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The city's
adopted checklist shall be published on the city's website.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.040   Permit application processing.



   A.   Prior to submitting an application for processing, the
applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging
station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety
and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not
limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring,
bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by
charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station
equipment; disability access; and vehicle parking.



   B.   A permit application that satisfies the information
requirements in the city's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be
promptly processed.  Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the
permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the
city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health
and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government
Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary
permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize
the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the
County. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is
incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the
applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional
information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.



   C.   Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building
Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered
by this chapter and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such
permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic
signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a
wet signature by any applicant.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.050   Technical review.



   A.   If the Building Official makes a finding based on substantial
evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific
adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter,
the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.



   B.   In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with
Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition
the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval
of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code
Section 4080.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.060   Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.



   A.   Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the
requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive
Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the
Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding
safety and reliability.



   B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and
associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective
devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable
provisions of the California Electrical Code.



   C.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be
incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical
services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. 
Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.



   D.   Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric
vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California
Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions
of the manufacturer's installation instructions.  Mounting of charging
stations shall not adversely affect building elements.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.070   Appendices.



   Any provision of the City of Visalia Municipal Code or appendices
thereto, inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, to the extent of
such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed or modified to that
extent necessary to effect the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.080   Partial invalidity.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any
court of any competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each and every section,
subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase not declared invalid or
unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of the chapter would
be subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



15.90.090   Right of appeal.



   Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building
may appeal from any action or decision of the Building Official under this
title by filing an appeal in writing to the planning commission as provided
in Visalia Municipal Code Section 17.28.050.  Failure of any person to file
an appeal in accordance with Section 17.28.050 shall constitute an
irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative appeal.



   The Building Official may collect and require a separate appeal fee. 
The applicable appeal fee shall be set by separate city council resolution
passed in accordance with state and local law, the fee shall be set at a rate
sufficient to recover the city costs incurred to conduct such an appeal.  If
the fee is required, then no appeal shall proceed without payment of the fee
or without the applicant requesting and being granted a fee waiver pursuant
to the granting of a hardship waiver in accordance with Visalia Municipal
Code Section 1.13.080. 



(Ord. 2017-09 § 1 (part), 2017)



Visalia, CA Municipal Code


Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS



Chapters:



16.04   General Provisions



16.08   Definitions.



16.12   Design and Construction Standards



16.16   Tentative Maps



16.20   Vesting Tentative Maps



16.24   Final Maps



16.28   Parcel Maps



16.32   Lot Line Adjustments



16.36   Improvements



16.40   Drainage Fees



16.44   Transportation Impact Fees



16.46   Public Safety Impact Fees



16.48   Environmental Impact Mitigation



16.50  General Facilities Impact Fees



16.52   Area of Benefit



16.54   Groundwater Overdraft Mitigation



Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



16.04.010   Authority for local regulations.



16.04.020   Purpose and scope.



16.04.030   Responsibilities.



16.04.040   Appeals.



16.04.050   Exceptions.



16.04.060   Merger and reversion to acreage.



16.04.070   Certificates of compliance.



16.04.080   Planned unit developments.



16.04.085   School site dedications and reservations.



16.04.090   Penalties.



16.04.100   Ordinances repealed.



16.04.110   Severability.



16.04.010   Authority for local regulations.



   This title is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Division 2 of Title
7 of the Government Code of the State of California, referred to herein as
the Subdivision Map Act.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9000)



16.04.020   Purpose and scope.



   A.   The subdivision ordinance is adopted to preserve, protect and
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. More specifically,
the subdivision ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following
objectives:



   1.   To aid in the implementation of the general plan of the city,
and elements thereof, as adopted by the City Council;



   2.   To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for
the purposes for which they are to be used;



   3.   To provide streets of adequate capacity for the anticipated
traffic that would utilize them and to ensure that they are designed to
promote a safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation system;



   4.   To accommodate new development in a manner that will preserve
and enhance the city's living environment and create new beauty through
skilled subdivision design;



   5.   To provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage,
solid waste collection and other utilities and facilities that are required
by conditions of an urban environment;



   6.   To ensure that the costs of providing rights-of-way, street
improvements, utilities and public areas and facilities needed to service new
developments are borne fairly and equitably by the subdivider rather than by
property owners of the city at large.



   B.   The subdivision ordinance is enacted for the purpose of
regulating subdivision of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act of
the state of California and any future amendments thereto and repeals all
other regulations of the city in conflict with this title; provided, however,
that such repeal shall not affect any agreement, contract, or bond executed
pursuant to such regulations or any rights of action accruing thereunder. The
regulations hereinafter in this title contained shall apply to all
subdivisions and parcel maps or parts of subdivisions and parcel maps
hereafter made entirely or partially within the city. The provisions of this
title shall be in addition to and shall be considered as supplemental to the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California, as now in
effect or hereinafter amended.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
9005)



16.04.030   Responsibilities.



   A.   City Attorney.  The city attorney shall be responsible for
approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and subdivision
improvements securities.



   B.   City Council.  The City Council shall have final jurisdiction
in the approval of final maps if the acceptance of land and improvements is
proposed for dedication to the city.



   C.   City Engineer.  The city engineer or his/her designee shall be
responsible for:



   1.   Establishing design and construction details, standards and
specifications;



   2.   Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with
the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act and for reporting
the findings together with any recommendations for approval, or conditional
approval, of the tentative map to the city planner;



   3.   The processing and checking of final maps, parcel maps,
reversion to acreage maps, amended maps, subdivision improvement plans, lot
line adjustment maps, mergers and certificates of compliance;



   4.   The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements;



   5.   The approval of private improvements (improvements not to be
maintained by the city).



   D.   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is the designated
official body charged with the duty of conducting public hearings, making
investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed
divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions
thereon, and shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps.



   E.   City Planner. The city planner shall be responsible for:



   1.   Investigating proposed subdivisions and parcel maps for
conformity to the general plan, specific plans, and zoning ordinances of the
city and reporting his finding together with recommendations for approval,
conditional approval, or disapproval to the Planning Commission;



   2.   Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial
conformance to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map.



   F.   Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan Review Committee
shall be responsible for the review of tentative parcel maps, tentative
subdivision maps, vesting tentative subdivision maps, and vesting tentative
parcel maps and shall provide the subdivider and the Planning Commission with
the committee's comments, and requirements for conformance to city ordinances
and policies.



   G.   Subdivider. The subdivider shall prepare maps consistent with
the standards contained herein, design public improvements consistent with
the public improvement standards of the city, and shall process said maps in
accordance with the regulations set forth herein.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9010)



16.04.040   Appeals.



   A.   The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may,
upon payment of an appeal fee as may be established by resolution of the City
Council, appeal any decision, determination, or requirement of the Planning
Commission by filing a notice thereof in writing with the city clerk, setting
forth in detail the action and the grounds upon which the appeal is based
within ten (10) days after the action that is the subject of the appeal. Such
notice shall state specifically where it is claimed there was an error or
abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission.



   B.   Upon the filing of an appeal, the City Council shall set the
matter for hearing. Such hearings shall be held within thirty (30) days after
the date of filing the appeal or receipt of council member request.  City
clerk shall give notice of the hearing according to the procedure required
for the initial action by the Planning Commission, except that the timing of
such notice shall be no less than ten (10) days before the hearing date.



   C.   In holding the hearing on the matter, the council may receive
any and all information pertinent to the matter, regardless of whether such
information was first presented to the Planning Commission.  In the case of
decisions by the Planning Commission that followed a public hearing, the City
Council shall hold a new public hearing on the matter.



   D.   Upon the close of the hearing, the Council shall vote to either
confirm the decision of the Planning Commission, overturn the decision, or
confirm the decision with modifications, and the Council may continue the
item to the next meeting if necessary to direct staff to prepare a conforming
resolution with findings, which shall be considered by the Council at the
next scheduled Council meeting. In the case of tentative maps, the Council
may also take any action identified in Section 16.16.120.  Planning
Commission.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2010-02 § 1, 2010: Ord.
2006-18 § 2 (part), 2007: prior code § 9015)



16.04.050   Exceptions.



   A.   Petition. The Planning Commission may authorize conditional
exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
title. Application for any such exception shall be made by a petition of the
subdivider stating fully the ground of the application and the facts relied
upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the tentative map
of the subdivision and shall be on a form provided by the city. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



   B.   Findings.



   1.   In order for the property referred to in the petition to come
within the provision of this section, it shall be necessary that the Planning
Commission make the following findings:



   a.   That there are special circumstances and conditions affecting
this property;



   b.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;



   c.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which
said property is situated.



   2.   In approving such exceptions the Planning Commission shall
secure substantially the objectives of the regulations to which exceptions
are requested, and shall act to protect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare.



   3.   In approving any exception under the provisions of this
section, the Planning Commission shall report its findings with respect
thereto and all facts in connection therewith, and shall specifically and
fully set forth the exception recommended and conditions designated.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9020)



16.04.060   Merger and reversion to acreage.



   Subdivided real property may be merged or reverted to acreage pursuant
to provisions of Chapter 6, Article 1 of the state Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9315)



16.04.070   Certificates of compliance.



   Any eligible person may apply for a certificate of compliance pursuant
to the provisions of Section 66499.34 of the Government Code of the state of
California.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9320)



16.04.080   Planned unit developments.



   Where, in accordance with provisions of the zoning ordinance, a use
permit has been granted authorizing a planned unit development on the land or
a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided, the plan of the subdivision
shall conform with the plan of the planned unit development as approved by
the Planning Commission and City Council. Exceptions to the subdivision
regulations that are necessary to execute the planned unit development as
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council may be authorized by the
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.04.050. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9325)



16.04.085   School site dedications and reservations.



   A.   In considering the approval or the conditions of approval of a
parcel map or subdivision map, as those terms are defined in the Subdivision
Map Act, the City Council or the Planning Commission may require the
reservation or dedication of school sites in a manner that is consistent with
the provisions of Government Code sections 66478 and 66479, provided that the
council or the commission, as the case may be, is able to determine that the
conditions enumerated in those sections, as they may from time to time be
amended, are applicable to the proposed subdivision map or parcel map.



   B.   The planning director, in cooperation with the official
designated by the Visalia Unified School District, shall develop and keep in
place a policy establishing the manner in which this section shall be
implemented by the City Planner and his or her designees.  Such policy shall
be established at the discretion of the City Planner, provided the policy is
consistent with the Government Code sections 66478 and 66479.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2006-01 § 5, 2006)



16.04.090   Penalties.



   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or co-partnership who
willfully violates any of the provisions or fails to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor, pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 7, Article 1 of the Subdivision Map Act.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9030)



16.04.100   Ordinances repealed.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances of the city, in conflict
herewith to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby
repealed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9035)



16.04.110



16.04.110   Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is
for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council declares that it
would have passed this title in each section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9025)



Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS



Sections:



16.08.010   Definitions.



16.08.010   Definitions.



   A.   The following definitions shall be used to define words or
phrases in this title.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are
not defined herein, but are defined in the Subdivision Map Actor in Title 17
(Zoning Ordinance), such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply
as though set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a
contrary intention.



   "Arterial streets" means streets intended to provide the majority of
the city's traffic carrying capacity; provides connections to the freeway
system and to collector streets; provides access to major travel generators;
typically designed with four lanes for through traffic, two
parking/transit/right-turn lanes, and a median with single left-turn lane at
intersections.



   "Block" means the area or parcels of land that is entirely bounded by
subdivision boundaries, streets, highways or railroad tracks, excepting
alleys.



   "Collector streets" means streets intended to provide connectivity
between local streets and the arterial street system; also provides access to
adjacent land uses; typically designed with two lanes for through traffic,
two parking/transit lanes and a median for left-turn access.



   "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an
undivided common interest in a parcel of real property together with a
separate interest of space in a residential, industrial or commercial
building on such real property. A condominium may include, in addition, a
separate interest in other portions of such real property. Apartment
cooperatives shall be defined as condominiums.



   "Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership of existing real
property together with a separate interest in the space of a residential,
industrial or commercial building.



   "Design" means street alignments, grades and widths; drainage and
sanitary facilities, and utilities, including alignments and grades; location
and widths of all required easements and right-of-ways; access drives and
pedestrian ways; lot size and configuration; traffic access; grading; land to
be dedicated for park or recreational uses; and such other specific
requirements as necessary to conform to the general plan or any adopted
specific plan.



   "Environmental impact report" means an informational document which,
when its preparation is required, shall be considered by every public agency
prior to its approval or disapproval of a project. The purpose of an
environmental impact report is to provide public agencies and the public in
general with detailed information about the effect which a proposed project
is likely to have on the environment; to list ways in which the significant
effects of such a project might be minimized; and to indicate alternatives to
such a project, as specified in Section 21100 of the California Environmental
Quality Act.



   "Freeways" means streets intended exclusively for movement of high
volumes of inter-city, regional, and longer local trips at high speeds.



   "General Plan" means the general plan of the City of Visalia and any
amendment thereto.



   "Improvement" means and includes street construction, storm drainage
facilities, utilities, culverts, landscaping, sanitary sewer facilities,
traffic control devices and other facilities as necessary for the general use
of the owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic.



   "Local streets" means streets intended exclusively to provide access to
adjacent land uses; typically designed with two through lanes with parking on
both sides.



   "Lot" means a parcel of land separated from other parcels of land as
the result of a recorded subdivision map or parcel map.



   "Lot line adjustment" means an adjustment of the lot line between four
(4) or fewer adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added
to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally
existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved
by the city planner.



   "Major arterial streets" means streets intended to provide a high level
of capacity in selected high volume corridors; provides connections to the
freeway system and to collector streets; provides access to major travel
generators; typically designed with six lanes for through traffic, a
parking/transit/right-turn lane, and a median with dual left-turn lanes at
intersections.



   "Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land,
under one ownership, into one parcel.



   "Parcel map" means a map prepared to divide or consolidate in
accordance with the provisions of this title and the map act.



   "Reversion to acreage" means a map prepared for the purpose of
reverting to acreage land previously subdivided.



   "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
associate who causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for
himself, herself, or for others; except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers.



   "Subdivision" means the division of any improved or unimproved
contiguous land for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether
immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even
if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad
rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined herein
or in Section 1350 of the Civil Code or a community apartment project, as
defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance
of land to a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility shall not
be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of
parcels.



   Subdivision does not include:



   1.   Buildings divided into apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks, or trailer parks for the purpose of lease or financing;



   2.   Land divided by mineral, oil, or gas leases;



   3.   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and
Safety Code of the State of California.



   "Subdivision improvement standards" means standard details, standard
specifications, and other standards approved by the City Council shall govern
the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this title and Subdivision Map
Act.



   "Subdivision Map Act" means the latest edition of the Subdivision Map
Act of the state of California.



   "Street" means a thoroughfare, dedicated as such or acquired for public
use as such, other than an alley, which afford the principal means of access
to abutting land. "Street" includes streets, avenues, courts, drives,
parkways, ways, or lands.



   "Tentative map" means and refers to a map made for the purpose of
showing the design of a proposed subdivision or parcel map and the existing
conditions in and around it.



   "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential
subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words
"Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9040)



Chapter 16.12
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



Sections:



16.12.010   Streets and highways.



16.12.020   Alleys.



16.12.030   Street names.



16.12.040   Blocks.



16.12.050   Lots.



16.12.060   Reserve strips.



16.12.070   Grading and erosion control.



16.12.080   Watercourses.



16.12.090   Ponding lots.



16.12.100   Walls and Fences



16.12.010   Streets and highways.



   A.   The public street and highway design shall conform both in
width and alignment with any general plan circulation element, precise street
plans and other precise plans adopted by the City Council, and right-of-way
for any such street or highway indicated on the general plan or precise plans
shall be dedicated to the city by the subdivider.



   B.   Streets and highways not otherwise designated on the
Circulation Element of the General Plan shall not be less than those set
forth in this title; except where it can be shown by the subdivider that the
topography of the land is such as to justify narrower width. Increased widths
may be required for bicycle lanes or transit stops when determined necessary
by the Planning Commission in the public interest. Approval or determination
of street classification shall be made by the City Council by adopting
improvement standards for:



   Divided arterial streets



   Undivided arterial streets



   Collector streets/local streets



   Minor loop streets



   Cul-de-sac streets



   Frontage road



   C.   Relationship to Existing Streets. The street system in the
proposed subdivision shall relate functionally to the existing streets in the
area adjoining the subdivision.



   D.   Centerlines. The centerlines of all streets, wherever
practicable, shall be the continuations of the centerlines of existing
streets or shall be offset at least one hundred fifty (150) feet.



   E.   Intersections. Each street intersection shall be as near to a
right angle as is practicable, and no intersection of streets at angles less
than sixty (60) degrees shall be approved unless necessitated by
topographical conditions as determined by the city engineer.



   F.   Corners. At street intersections, the block corners shall be
angled to provide sufficient right-of-way, and shall correspond to approved
develop improvement standards.



   G.   Cul-de-sacs or Dead End Streets. No cul-de-sac or dead end
street shall be more than eight hundred (800) feet in length. Where necessary
to give access to or permit a satisfactory future development of adjoining
land, streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting
dead-end streets may be approved with a temporary turn-around. In all other
cases, a turn-around having a minimum radius of fifty-three (53) feet,
measured to the property line, and a minimum of forty-three (43) feet to curb
face shall be required.



   H.   Curve Radius. The centerline curve radius on arterial streets
shall be designed in accordance with acceptable safe engineering practices
and in no case shall be less than five hundred (500) feet. Centerline curve
radius on other streets shall not be less than two hundred (200) feet.



   I.   Frontage Streets.  When any lot fronts or sides on any
arterial street, expressway, or freeway, the subdivider may be required to
dedicate and improve a frontage street to provide ingress to and egress from
such lots.



   J.   Private Road and Alleys. Private roads and alleys shall not be
permitted unless approved by the Planning Commission.



   K.   Grades. Grades of streets shall not be less than two-tenths
(0.2) percent and not greater than seven (7) percent unless, because of
topographical conditions or other exceptional conditions, the city engineer
determines that a grade less than two-tenths (0.2) percent or in excess of
seven (7) percent is necessary.



   L.   Access on Arterials. When the rear of any lot borders an
arterial, the subdivider may be required to execute and deliver to the city
an instrument prohibiting the right of ingress and egress from said arterial
to said lot.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9045)



16.12.020   Alleys.



   A.   Alleys shall be optional in residential subdivisions. The
Planning Commission for any one of the following reasons may require alleys.
If alleys are required, they shall be constructed to city standards:



   1.   Unusual size, shape or topographical character of the property
to be subdivided;



   2.   The relationship to existing or proposed commercial, industrial
or high density residential development or adjacent railroad right-of-way;



   3.   The special nature of the design or density of a residential
subdivision where dwellings are grouped in such a manner as to require access
from other than the street frontage;



   4.   The need to maintain continuity of existing alleys where the
property to be subdivided is located immediately between existing residential
blocks where alleys are provided.



   B.   Residential alleys shall have a minimum dedicated width of
twenty (20) feet.



   C.   Alleys shall be provided where needed to serve existing or
proposed commercial or industrial subdivisions and shall have a minimum
dedicated width of thirty (30) feet with adequate provisions for ingress and
egress.



   D.   A twenty (20) foot corner diagonal cut off measured along the
property lines from the point of intersection will be required where two
alleys intersect.



   E.   Alleys shall be so laid out and aligned as to provide
reasonable access for utilities and other services.



   F.   Dead end alleys shall be prohibited.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9050)



16.12.030   Street names.



   Streets shall be named in accordance with Chapter 12.06.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9607 § 2, 1996: prior code § 9055)



16.12.040   Blocks.



   A.   Block Length.  Blocks shall not exceed fifteen hundred (1,500)
feet in length unless existing adjacent property alignment, topographic, or
traffic conditions justify a variation. Long blocks shall be provided
adjacent to arterial and collector streets in order to minimize the number of
street intersections.



   B.   Block Width.  The width of each block shall be sufficient for
an ultimate layout of two tiers of lots, therein of a size required by the
provisions of this chapter unless the conditions justify or make necessary a
variation from this requirement.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
9060)



16.12.050   Lots.



   A.   Lot Width.



   1.   Each residential lot or parcel shall have frontage width not
less than that required by the zoning ordinance, as set forth in Title 17 of
the Municipal Code.  Each residential lot or parcel on a dead end street,
cul-de-sac, or on a curbed street, when the side lines thereof are diverging
from the front to the rear of such lot or parcel, shall have a width not less
than that required by the zoning ordinance.



   B.   Lot Depth.  The depth of all lots shall comply with the
requirements of the zoning ordinance relative to each particular zoning
district.



   C.   Lot Area.  The area of all lots shall comply with the
requirements of the zoning ordinance relative to each particular zoning
district.



   D.   Lot Frontage.  Lots shall have a single frontage on a street;
new double frontage lots or lots without street frontage will not be
permitted except where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
topographic or unusual physical conditions justify a deviation from this rule.



   E.   Side Lines. The side lines of lots shall, wherever practicable,
be required to run at right angles or radially to the street upon which the
lot faces.



   F.   Lot Numbering and Dimensions.  Lot numbers shall begin with
the numeral "1" and shall continue consecutively through each unit of the
tract with no omissions or duplications, and no block numbers shall be used.



   G.   Suitability of Lots.  All lots shall be suitable for the
purpose for which they are intended to be sold. Land subject to flooding or
deemed by the Planning Commission to be uninhabitable shall be indicated on
the final map.



   H.   Land Remnants.  All remnants of below minimum size left over
after the subdivision of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather
than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 9065)



16.12.060   Reserve strips.



   A.   A one-foot reserve strip shall be provided at the dead end of a
stubbed street or at the edge of a partial width street and shall be offered
for dedication to the city for future street purposes.



   B.   Reserve strips shall be designated on the final map of the
subdivisions and shall be specifically referred to in dedication and
acceptance certificates.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9070)



16.12.070   Grading and erosion control.



   Every map approved pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on
compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including
the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, and is
subject to the review and approval of the city engineer.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 9075)



16.12.080   Watercourses.



   A.   In the event that the subdivision is traversed by any
watercourses, channels, streams or creeks, the subdivider shall dedicate
rights-of-way or easements for storm drainage purposes conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourses, channels, streams or
creeks or shall provide by dedication further and sufficient rights-of-way or
easements as shall be required for structures or channel changes, or both, to
dispose of such surface and storm waters.



   B.   The Planning Commission may disapprove a tentative map of a
subdivision because of flood hazard and inundation and require protective
improvements to be constructed as a condition precedent to approval of the
map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9080)



16.12.090   Ponding lots.



   A.   Detention or retention ponds will only be allowed in areas
where it has been determined by the city engineer that other methods of
drainage are not practical.



   B.   Permanent detention or retention ponds shall be a minimum of
five (5) acres and dedicated to the city for maintenance. Landscaping and
irrigation systems shall be installed as approved by the director public
services.



   C.   Temporary detention or retention ponds may be approved until
such time as drainage facilities are available for connection and shall be
dedicated to the city in easement form.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 9085)



16.12.100   Walls and Fences.



   A.   For proposed residential subdivisions, security walls or fences
that are proposed for residential developments along arterial or collector
streets shall provide pedestrian access between the arterial or collector and
the development to allow access when transit vehicles operating on an
arterial or collector street.



   B.   Exceptions consistent with Chapter 17.42 may be granted during
the Planning Commission approval process in accordance with 16.16.110 or
subsequent Council action in accordance with 16.16.120.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



Chapter 16.16
TENTATIVE MAPS



Sections:



16.16.010   Preliminary review.



16.16.020   Review by site plan review committee.



16.16.030   Tentative subdivision maps.



16.16.040   Subdivision filing fees.



16.16.050   Size of maps.



16.16.060   Information required.



16.16.070   Accompanying reports and statements.



16.16.080   Distribution of filed maps.



16.16.090   Staff reports.



16.16.100   Hearing and notice.



16.16.110   Commission approval.



16.16.115   Denial of tentative map or parcel map.



16.16.120   Council action.



16.16.130   Expiration of maps and extensions.



16.16.010   Preliminary review.



   Prior to filing of a tentative subdivision map, a conceptual map shall
be submitted to the Site Plan Review Committee in accordance with Chapter
17.28 of the Zoning Ordinance. The map shall be drawn at a scale large enough
to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish
this end. The map shall show the entire parcel proposed for subdivision
including: approximate lot lines, street alignments, adjacent streets and
adjacent land uses. The Site Plan Review Committee will prepare comments,
recommendations, and requirements of the tentative subdivision map for the
subdivider's review.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9090)



16.16.020   Review by site plan review committee.



   A.   All tentative subdivision maps shall be reviewed by the Site
Plan Review Committee prior to the submission of a tentative map to the
Planning Commission.



   B.   The Site Plan Review Committee shall examine and review the
following:



   1.   The completeness and accuracy of the tentative map and the
suitability of the land for purposes of subdivision;



   2.   Conformity of the overall design of the subdivision to the
general plan and all pertinent requirements of this title and other laws and
plans of the city;



   3.   The provisions for, and suitability of street improvements,
underground utilities, fire hydrants, street lights, storm drains, streets,
trees and sidewalks. The adequacy of the water supply, solid waste
collection, sewage disposal and easements for utilities and drainage;



   4.   Provisions for public areas, including parks, schools, public
utilities facilities, etc.



   C.   If any portion of the subdivision is in conflict with any of
the requirements of this title, other ordinances, or state law, the Site Plan
Review Committee shall, to the best of its ability, advise the subdivider of
such conflicts.



   D.   The Site Plan Review Committee may deem it advisable to
recommend additional improvements, easements or dedications to be included;
in which case, the subdivider shall be duly informed of the nature of the
recommendations following the Site Plan Review Committee meeting.



   E.   The Site Plan Review Committee shall make a report of its
recommendations to the Planning Commission, and shall furnish a copy of that
report to the subdivider, in accordance with Chapter 17.28.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 9095)



16.16.030   Tentative subdivision maps.



   A.   The tentative map shall be prepared by a registered civil
engineer or a licensed land surveyor in accord with the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and this title and shall be filed with the city planner.
Such filing shall be prior to the completion of final surveys of streets and
lots and before the start of any grading or construction work within the
proposed subdivision.



   B.   A minimum of thirty (30) copies of the tentative map, and
accompanying reports and statements shall be submitted to the city planner at
the time of filing. Filing of required documents will be deemed official upon
written receipt from the city planner.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9100)



16.16.040   Subdivision filing fees.



   Filing fee to cover the costs of processing and checking shall be paid
for each tentative map at the time of filing thereof in amounts as may be
adopted by the City Council yearly by resolution. If, after approval of a
tentative map, revisions of the initial map are filed or a new tentative map
is filed covering the same or additional land, each filing shall be
considered as a new subdivision. There shall be no charge for filing of
changes in tentative maps to meet the requirements of the city.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9110)



16.16.050   Size of maps.



   The tentative map shall show the entire subdivision on one or more
eighteen (18) inch by twenty-six (26) inch sheets at a scale large enough to
show all details clearly.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9115)



16.16.060   Information required.



   Each tentative map shall contain the following information:



   1.   The name of the proposed subdivision, and designation as a
tentative map;



   2.   The name and address of the owner of the property proposed to
be subdivided;



   3.   The name and address of the subdivider;



   4.   The name of the engineer, surveyor or firm who prepared the map;



   5.   The approximate acreage;



   6.   The north point;



   7.   The scale;



   8.   The date;



   9.   The boundary line;



   10.   The location and width of all streets and alleys within the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision;



   11.   The proposed names of all streets within the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision; proposed streets that are obviously in line with others
already named and existing should be given the same name;



   12.   The name, location and width of adjacent streets;



   13.   The lot lines and approximate dimensions; lots shall be
numbered consecutively;



   14.   The approximate location and width of watercourses or areas
subject to inundation from floods, including flood plain boundaries, and the
location of structures, irrigation ditches, and other permanent physical
features;



   15.   An accurate description of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision or legal description of the property comprising the subdivision,
a vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed subdivision in
relation to the surrounding area or region;



   16.   The width and location of all existing or proposed public or
private easements;



   17.   The proposed use of lots as to desired residential,
commercial, industrial or other uses;



   18.   Any railroads;



   19.   The approximate radius of curves;



   20.   The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is
located;



   21.   The general plan use designation for the area of the proposed
subdivision;



   22.   Any public areas proposed;



   23.   The dimensions and locations of any existing buildings that
are to remain in place on the property; the variety, size and location of all
existing trees having a diameter of four inches or greater, except orchard
trees, which shall be shown by general area, location and spacing or rows;



   24.   The locations of any existing wells, pipelines or septic tanks;



   25.   The location of city limit lines;



   26.   Oak trees having a trunk diameter exceeding four inches,
measured at a point five feet above the existing ground level;



   27.   Any of the foregoing information as may not be practicably
shown on the map shall be contained in a written statement accompanying the
map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9120)



16.16.070   Accompanying reports and statements.



   A.   The tentative map shall contain or be accompanied by reports
and/or written statements from the subdivider giving essential information
regarding the following matters:



   1.   The source of water supply;



   2.   The type of street improvements and utilities that the
subdivider proposes to install;



   3.   The proposed method of sewage disposal;



   4.   The proposed method of solid waste collection;



   5.   The proposed public bus stops and turnouts;



   6.   The proposed storm water sewer or other means of drainage;



   7.   The proposed tree planting and related landscaping;



   8.   Preliminary title reports of entire property;



   9.   A preliminary soils report. The preliminary soils report may be
waived if the city engineer determines that, due to the knowledge he has of
the quality of the soils of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is
necessary;



   10.   If a subdivision is to be developed as consecutive individual
units, it shall be so stated on the tentative map, and the order and
approximate dates of completion of each unit shall be given at the time of
filing of the tentative map;



   11.   A map showing the properties within a three hundred (300) foot
radius of the proposed tentative map and a property owners list keyed to the
three hundred (300) foot radius map.



   B.   The information required in the written reports and statements
may be shown on the tentative map itself if feasible.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9125)



16.16.080   Distribution of filed maps.



   A.   When the tentative maps, accompanying reports and statements
are filed, and the Site Plan Review Committee has approved the map, the city
planner shall immediately forward copies of each to the following agencies
when affected:



   1.   Caltrans;



   2.   Southern California Edison Company;



   3.   California Water Service;



   4.   Southern California Gas Company;



   5.   Visalia Unified School District;



   6.   United States Postmaster;



   7.   Tulare County Health Department;



   8.   Tulare County Public Works Department;



   9.   Federal Housing Authority;



   10.   Comcast Cable;



   11.   Water Quality Control Board;



   12.   AT&T;



   13.   Affected irrigation or drainage district.



   B.   With the exception of school districts, such agencies shall
respond within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such tentative map for
their comments to be considered by the commission. School districts shall
respond within twenty (20) working days of



the date on which the notice was mailed to the school district for comment. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9130)



16.16.090   Staff reports.



   Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff of the
commission or council shall be in writing and a copy thereof served on the
subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by
the commission or council.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9135)



16.16.100   Hearing and notice.



   A.   The city Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an
application for a tentative subdivision map or vesting tentative subdivision
map.



   B.   Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten
days or more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by
mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to property owners
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area proposed for
subdivision.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9140)



16.16.110   Commission approval.



   Within fifty (50) days after the tentative map has been filed with the
city planner or at such later date as may be required to concurrently process
the appurtenant environmental impact review documents required by state law
and local ordinances, the commission shall report in writing to the
subdivider their decision regarding approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval of the map and the conditions on which such action is based. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9145)



16.16.115   Denial of tentative map or parcel map.



   This section shall apply to both tentative maps and parcel maps for
which a tentative map is not required.



   A.   The Planning Commission shall deny approval of a tentative map,
or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, if it makes any
of the following findings:



   1.   The proposed map is not consistent with the General Plan;



   2.   The proposed map is not consistent with an applicable specific
plan adopted in accordance with Government Code Section 65451;



   3.   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with the General Plan or with an applicable specific plan.



   4.   The site is not physically suitable for the type of development.



   5.   The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of
development.



   6.    The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.



   7.   The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely
to cause serious public health problems.



   8.   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements acquired by the public at large that are either of
record or have been established by judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, that are for access through, or use of, property within the
proposed subdivision, and that there are no feasible alternate easements for
access or for use that will be substantially equivalent to ones previously
acquired by the public.



   B.   In determining whether to approve or deny a tentative map, the
Planning Commission shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and
standards in effect at the date the City Planner has determined that the
application is complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65943.



   C.   If the Planning Commission finds that the land is subject to
any of the following, then the Planning Commission shall deny approval of a
tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required if,
after reviewing Government Code Section 66474.4, it finds that either the
resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to
sustain their agricultural use or the subdivision will result in residential
development not incidental to the commercial agricultural use of the land:



   1.   A contract entered into pursuant to the California Land
Conservation Act of 1965 (Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 51200) of Part 1
of Division 1 of Title 5), including an easement entered into pursuant to
Section 51256.



   2.   An open-space easement entered into pursuant to the Open-Space
Easement Act of 1974 (Chapter 6.6 (commencing with Section 51070) of Part 1
of Division 1 of Title 5.)



   3.   An agricultural conservation easement entered into pursuant to
Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 10260) of Division 10.2 of the Public
Resources Code.



   4.   A conservation easement entered into pursuant to Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 815) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Civil Code. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.16.120   Council action.



   The City Council may overrule or modify any ruling or determination of
the commission in regard to a tentative map and may make conditional
exceptions if special circumstances pertaining to the property involved
justify a variance from the provisions of this title.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9150)



16.16.130   Expiration of maps and extensions.



   A.   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative
map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date the map was approved
or conditionally approved.



   B.   Extension. The person filing the tentative map may request an
extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by written
application to the city planner who shall forward it to the Planning
Commission for action. Such application shall be filed before the approval or
conditional approval is due to expire. The application shall state the
reasons for requesting the extension.



   C.   Time Limit on Extensions. An extension or extensions of
tentative map approval or conditional approval shall not exceed an aggregate
of three years.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996:
prior code § 9155)



Chapter 16.20
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS



Sections:



16.20.010   General.



16.20.020   Procedures.



16.20.030   Development rights.



16.20.010   General.



   A.   Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority
granted by Article 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of
Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter
referred to as the "Vesting Tentative Map Statute").



   B.   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish
procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map
Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this
title. Except as other noted, the provisions of this title shall apply to the
vesting tentative map section.



   C.   Consistency.  No land shall be subdivided and developed
pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose that is inconsistent with
the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the
zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of the municipal code.



   D.   Application.



   1.   This chapter shall apply only to residential developments.
Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and
supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map or
tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map
may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof.



   2.   If a subdivider does not seek the right conferred by the
Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall
not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit
for construction, or work preparatory to construction.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017; prior code § 9105(A))



16.20.020   Procedures.



   A.   Filing and Processing. A vesting tentative map shall be filed
in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports
and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in Section 16.16.030
for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:



   1.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have
printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map."



   2.   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider may
also be required to supply the following information:



   a.   Height, size, and location of buildings;



   b.   Sewer, water, storm drain and road detail;



   c.   Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put;



   d.   Detailed grading plans;



   e.   Geological studies;



   f.   Flood control information;



   g.   Architectural plans.



   B.   Fees. Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall
pay the fees required by Section 16.16.040 for the filing and processing of a
tentative map.



   C.   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting
tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be
subject to the same extensions, as provided for the expiration of the
approval or conditional approval of a tentative map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9105(B))



16.20.030   Development rights.



   A.   Vesting on Approval of Vesting Tentative Map.



   1.   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map
shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial
compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in
Government Code Section 66474.2.



   2.   However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed,
the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer
a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the
ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting
tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.



   3.   Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit,
approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any
of the following are determined:



   a.   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision
or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their
health, or safety, or both;



   b.   The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with
state or federal law.



   4.   The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is
not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided
in Section 16.20.020(C). If the final map is approved, these rights shall
last for the following periods of time:



   a.   An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps
are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting
tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the
final map for that phase is recorded.



   b.   The initial time period set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this
section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a granting permit or for design or architectural
review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete
application is filed.



   c.   A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time
before the initial time period set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section
expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to
the City Council within fifteen (15) days.



   d.   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in subsections
(A)(4)(a)--(A)(4)(c) of this section, the rights referred to herein, as they
apply to the lot for which the application is filed, shall continue until the
expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.



   B.   Applications Inconsistent with Current Policies.
Notwithstanding any provision of this title, a property owner or his or her
designee may seek approvals or permits for development that depart from the
ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 16.20.030(A)(1), and
local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent
that the departures are authorized under applicable law.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 9105(C))



Chapter 16.24
FINAL MAPS



Sections:



16.24.010   Filing.



16.24.020   Form and content.



16.24.030   Survey and monument requirements.



16.24.040   Dedications and reservations.



16.24.050   Improvement agreements.



16.24.060   Improvement security.



16.24.070   Approval of the city engineer and city planner.



16.24.080   Approval by the council.



16.24.090   Disapproval by the council.



16.24.100   Transmittal to county.



16.24.110   Amending of final maps.



16.24.010   Filing.



   The subdivider may file the original and three (3) copies of the final
map and required accompanying data with the city engineer. When a final map
is submitted to the city engineer in accordance with this code, it shall be
accompanied by the following documents:



   A.   Plans, profiles and specifications of the proposed public and
private improvements, designed in accord with the requirements of the city
engineer;



   B.   A filing fee to cover the expense of checking in an amount to
be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution;



   C.   A preliminary subdivision guarantee issued by a title insurance
company, in the name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit
and protection of the city, showing all parties whose consent is necessary
and their interest therein, except where the land included in such
subdivision is registered under the Land Registration Act. If the land is so
registered, a copy of the certificate of title shall be furnished, certified.



   D.   Calculation and traverse sheets, used in computing the
distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and
proposed monuments, and showing closures, within the allowable limits of
error specified in the ordinance, for exterior boundaries of the subdivision
and for each irregular block or lot of the subdivision.



   E.   Two (2) copies of the proposed deed restrictions, if any. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9160)



16.24.020   Form and content.



   A.   The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn polyester base
film. All lines, letters, figures, certifications, acknowledgments and
signatures shall be made in black waterproof opaque ink; except that
affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or
printed upon the map with black opaque ink. If ink is used on a polyester
base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to
assure permanent legibility.



   B.   The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when
filed that good legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. The size
of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches. A
marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet leaving an entirely
blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show
all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.



   C.   The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a
distinctive border. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of
figures or other data. The final map shall consist of a title sheet
containing all required certificates and acknowledgments and other sheets as
necessary to show required lot dimensioning and survey data as mentioned
herein.



   D.   When the final map consists of more than two sheets, a key map
showing the relation of the sheets shall be placed on sheet one. Every sheet
comprising the map shall bear the sheet number and number of sheets
comprising the map.



   E.   All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to
locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and
exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown including bearings
and distances of straight lines and radii and tangent distance and central
angle and arc length for all curves, lot dimensions; such information as may
be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves, tangent
points and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision
boundaries.



   F.   The final map shall show clearly any stakes, monuments, or
other evidence found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract.
The corners of adjoining subdivisions or portions thereof shall be identified
by lot numbers, subdivision name with proper ties and recording information
shown. Whenever the city engineer has established the centerline of a street
or alley, adjacent to or in the proposed subdivision, the data shall be shown
in the final map indicating all monuments found and making reference to a
field book or map. If the points were reset by ties, the course and detail of
relocation data used shall be stated.



   G.   The map shall show the location and description of all
monuments found or placed in making the survey of the subdivision with proper
reference sufficient for relocation.



   H.   Any unimproved natural watercourses wholly or partially within
the proposed subdivision shall be indicated on the final map. The final map
shall also show areas within the subdivision that are subject to inundation
or flood hazard.



   I.   The lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the
number one, with no omissions or duplications; provided, however, where the
subdivision is a continuation of, or an addition to, an existing subdivision,
the lot numbers may commence with the number immediately following the last
or highest number of such existing subdivision and, in all other respects,
shall conform with the preceding requirements. Each lot shall be shown
entirely on one sheet.



   J.   Each final map shall contain the following information:



   1.   The tentative subdivision map number and date of preparation;



   2.   The tract name, date, north arrow and scale;



   3.   A general description of the land included;



   4.   Names and addresses of the owners of the property being divided;



   5.   The location, names without abbreviations, and right-of-way
widths of all:



   a.   Proposed streets;



   b.   Proposed public areas and easements; and



   c.   Adjoining streets;



   6.    All dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot to the
nearest one-hundredth of a foot (0.01'); all necessary angles and bearings
shall be provided to the nearest second of a degree (00º-00'-01");



   7.   The dimensions of all lots, including lot area in square feet,
and a lot number for each lot;



   8.   The centerline data for streets including bearings and
distances;



   9.   The radius, arc length, and central angle of curves;



   10.   Suitable primary survey control points;



   11.   The location and description of permanent monuments;



   12.   The boundaries of any public and/or private easement, whether
an easement of record or a prescriptive easement, shall be shown; the party
holding interest in the easement shall be shown on the map;



   13.   Location and widths of all easements to be dedicated, if
required;



   14.   The location and widths of watercourses and areas subject to
inundation and location of selected flood lines within the parcels being
created; properties located in a Special Flood Hazard Area shall comply with
all requirements of Chapter 15.60;



   15.   Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved;



   16.   Required Certifications;



   a.   All required dedications of rights-of-way or easements shall be
certified on the final map in accordance with Section 66447 of the
Subdivision Map Act;



   b.   All parties having any record title interest in the real
property subdivided shall sign a certificate on the final map in accordance
with Subsection 66445(e) of the Subdivision Map Act;



   c.   A certificate of the registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor who prepared the survey and the final map, in compliance with
Section 66449 of the Subdivision Map Act;



   d.   A certificate for execution by the City Engineer/ City Surveyor
that complies with Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act;



   e.   A certificate for execution by the city planner on behalf of
the parcel map committee certifying that the final map conforms to the
approved tentative subdivision map; and



   f.   All other certificates as required;



   17.   Any other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.



   K.   The final map shall contain survey information that only
affects record title interest. However, additional survey and map information
such as but not limited to: building setback lines, flood hazard zones,
seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping and archaeological sites, if
appropriate, shall be shown on an additional map sheet that shall indicate
its relationship to the final map, and shall contain a statement that the
additional information is for informational purposes, describes conditions as
of the date of files, and is not intended to affect record title interest.
The additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional
information is derived from public records or reports, and does not imply the
correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the
additional map sheet. The acceptance of the additional map sheet by the city,
similarly does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or
reports. The additional map sheet shall be recorded simultaneously with the
final map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9165)



16.24.030   Survey and monument requirements.



   A.   The final map shall show the centerlines of all streets; the
lengths, tangents, radii and central angle or radial bearings of all curves;
the bearings of radial lines to each beginning and end of a curve; the total
width of each street; the width of the portion being dedicated, the width of
the existing dedication, and the width each side of the centerline; and the
width of rights-of-way of railroads, flood control or drainage channels, and
any other easements appearing on the map.



   B.   Sufficient data shall be shown to readily determine the bearing
and length of each line. Dimensions of lots shall be the net dimensions. No
ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show net
acreage to the nearest hundredth.



   C.   Surveys in connection with the preparation of subdivision maps
shall be made in accordance with standard practices and principles for land
surveying. A traverse of the boundaries of the subdivision and all lots and
blocks shall close within a limit of error of 0.005 feet.  Distances shall
be to nearest one-thousandth (0.001) of a foot.  Bearings and angles shall
be to the nearest second of a degree (00º-00'-01").



   D.   The final map shall show clearly what monuments or other
evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract.
The corners of adjoining subdivisions, or portions thereof, shall be
identified, and distances thereto shall be shown.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9170)



16.24.040   Dedications and reservations.



   A.   Dedications. All streets; alleys, access rights, drainage
and/or sewer easements; and other easements and parcels of land shown on the
final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for
public use.



   B.   Waiver of Direct Access Rights. The council, at its discretion,
may require that offers of dedications of streets include a waiver of direct
access rights from any property shown on the final map as abutting thereon.



   C.   Reservations. At the discretion of the council, areas of real
property within the subdivision may be reserved for future needs for schools,
fire stations, libraries, recreational facilities, or other public uses,
pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9175)



16.24.050   Improvement agreements.



   A.   All improvements necessary to conform the proposed subdivision
to the standards and policies of the city existing at the time of filing the
tentative map shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider.



   B.   Prior to the approval by the council of the final map, the
subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between himself and the city
providing that within a twelve (12) month period in which he or his agent or
contractor, shall complete all improvement work and providing that if he
shall fail to complete such work within such period, the city may complete
the same and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider.
The agreement shall provide for the inspection of all improvements by the
city engineer. Such agreement shall include such stipulations as may be
required to assure completion of the subdivision in accord with the
requirements of the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9180)



16.24.060   Improvement security.



   A.   The subdivider shall file with the agreement a bond or security
for such sum as the city engineer deems sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements and to assure the faithful performance of such improvements.



   B.   Such security shall be in the manner, form and kind provided by
the Subdivision Map Act and acceptable to the city attorney. The security
shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of
the improvements, conditioned upon the faithful performance of this agreement
by the subdivider, and in the additional amount of fifty (50) percent of such
sum securing the payment by the subdivider to his contractor, his
subcontractors, and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or
materials to them for improvements.



   C.   The security provided shall guarantee maintenance and/or repair
of all defects in required public improvements for a period of one year
following acceptance of said improvements by the city.



   D.   In lieu of a one hundred (100) percent performance bond and
fifty (50) percent labor and materials bond, surety may be assured by the
filing of an instrument of credit, a passbook account, or deposit of
negotiable bonds, which creates a trust fund in an amount equal to one
hundred fifty (150) percent of the cost of the work estimated by the city
engineer. Said trust fund shall be maintained in a financial institution
subject to regulation by the state and federal government with the trust fund
limited to the following conditions:



   1.   Fifty (50) percent of the cost, representing a labor and
materials deposit, to be retained for thirty-five (35) days after the
recording date of the notice of completion;



   2.   Funds may be discharged from the balance of the faithful
performance surety account from time to time as work is completed, up to
ninety (90) percent of value of work completed, with authorization of the
city engineer, until all work is completed and the notice of completion is
filed;



   3.   Prior to final acceptance by the city of improvements, the
subdivider shall provide the city with a one-year maintenance bond or other
accepted surety in the amount of ten percent of the estimated cost of
improvements.



   4.   The form of the instrument of credit, passbook account or
deposit of negotiable bonds shall be acceptable to the city attorney.



   E.   Completion of Work by City.  In the event the subdivider shall
fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the city shall have completed the same, or if the subdivider
shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of incidental expenses or to
cover the cost or replacement and the repair of existing streets or other
improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision or requiring
repair or replacement during the one-year guarantee period, the city shall
demand performance of the agreement by the bonding company, or use the cash
or other security deposit placed with the city by the subdivider to do such
work and reimburse itself for the cost of work agreed to be performed by the
subdivider. If the amount of the surety bond or cash deposit exceeds all
costs and expenses incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder
of such bond or certification less the cost and expense incurred by the city.
The subdivider shall be liable to the city for any costs additional to those
secured, in an action to be brought therefore by the city.



   F.   Cash Payments.  In addition to the required securities the
subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of
Section 16.24.060 a cash payment in an amount deemed sufficient by the city
engineer to pay all city improvement costs, or city fees required by this
chapter and/or other city ordinances and resulting from or required with the
approval and/or construction of the subdivision.



   G.   Assessment Act Financing of Improvements--Subdivision
Improvement Security.  Upon approval by the director of public works and
upon the furnishing by the contractor of the faithful performance and labor
and material bonds required as part of any special assessment proceedings,
the improvement security required to be provided in connection with a
subdivision may be reduced by an amount corresponding to the amount of such
bonds so furnished by the contractor constructing/installing the
improvements.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9185)



16.24.070   Approval of the city engineer and city planner.



   After the issuance of a receipt by the city engineer for the final map
and improvement drawings, the city engineer and city planner shall examine
them as to conformity with the tentative map, as to the sufficiency of
affidavits and acknowledgments, correctness of surveying data, mathematical
data and computations, and such other matters as require checking to insure
compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
The city engineer and city planner shall return one copy of the map to the
subdivider or his engineer, showing necessary corrections. If the final map
is found to be in correct form and the matters shown thereon are sufficient,
the city engineer and city planner shall endorse their approval thereon and
transmit it to the City Council for approval.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9190)



16.24.080   Approval by the council.



   At its first regular meeting following the filing of the final map, the
agreement, the bonds or other security and the fees, or within ten days
following the filing thereof, the council shall consider the final map, the
plan of subdivision improvements, and the offers of dedication in accord with
the requirements of this chapter. The council may reject any or all offers of
dedication and the city engineer shall certify on the final map such action
by the council. If the council determines that the map is in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the final map.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9195)



16.24.090   Disapproval by the council.



   If the council shall determine that the final map is not in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter or the tentative map, it shall
disapprove the map, specifying its reason or reasons therefore and the city
clerk shall advise the subdivider in writing of such disapproval and the
reason or reasons for such disapproval. If the council has disapproved any
map, the subdivider may file with the city clerk a map altered to meet the
approval of the council. In such case the subdivider shall conform to all the
requirements imposed upon him by this chapter when filing the first final map
with the city, and the same proceedings shall be required as are prescribed
by this chapter upon the filing of the first final map with the city.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9200)



16.24.100   Transmittal to county.



   When the City Council has approved the map the city clerk or
representative, shall transmit the map to the clerk of the county board of
supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 9205)



16.24.110   Amending of final maps.



   After a final map is filed in the office of the county recorder, such a
recorded final map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an
amending map if the city finds that there are changes in circumstances that
make any or all of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or
necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on
the present feeowner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter
any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded
map and the local agency finds that the map, as modified, conforms to the
provisions of Section 66474 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any such
modifications shall be set for public hearing as provided for in Section
16.16.100. The legislative body shall confine the hearing to consideration of
the action on the proposed modification.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 9206)



Chapter 16.28
PARCEL MAPS



Sections:



16.28.010   Purpose.



16.28.020   Advisory agency.



16.28.030   Review by site plan review committee.



16.28.040   Tentative parcel maps.



16.28.050   Form and content.



16.28.060   Hearing and notice.



16.28.070   Consideration of tentative parcel maps.



16.28.080   Appeals.



16.28.090   Time limit on tentative parcel map.



16.28.100   Improvements.



16.28.110   Right-of-way dedications.



16.28.120   Final parcel maps.



16.28.125   Filing.



16.28.130   Survey requirements.



16.28.140   Information on final parcel map.



16.28.150   Waiver of final parcel map.



16.28.160   Amending of parcel maps.



16.28.010   Purpose.



   The council incorporates this chapter in its subdivision ordinance in
order to establish the requirements and procedures for processing
subdivisions that are authorized to be made through the parcel map procedure
by Sections 66426 and 66428 of the Government Code of the state of
California. Where a tentative parcel map is required, a vesting tentative
parcel map may be filed conferring development rights as indicated in Chapter
16.20.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9210)



16.28.020   Advisory agency.



   The Planning Commission is designated as the advisory agency referred
to in Article 2 of the Subdivision Map Act and is charged with the duty of
making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed
divisions of land under this chapter. The city planner is designated as the
clerk to the advisory agency with authority to receive parcel maps.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9215)



16.28.030   Review by site plan review committee.



   A.   All tentative parcel maps shall be reviewed by the Site Plan
Review Committee prior to the submission of said tentative parcel map to the
Planning Commission.



   B.   The Site Plan Review Committee shall examine and review the
following:



   1.   The completeness and accuracy of the tentative parcel map and
the suitability of the land for purposes of subdivision;



   2.   Conformity of the overall design of the subdivision to the
general plan and all pertinent requirements of this chapter and other laws
and plans of the city;



   3.   The provisions for, and suitability of street improvements,
underground utilities, fire hydrants, street lights, storm drains, streets,
trees and sidewalks. The adequacy of the water supply, solid waste
collection, sewage disposal and easements for utilities and drainage;



   4.   Provisions for public areas, including parks, schools, public
utilities facilities, public bus stops and turnouts, etc.



   C.   If any portion of the subdivision is in conflict with any of
the requirements of this chapter, other ordinances, or state law, the Site
Plan Review Committee shall, to the best of its ability, advise the
subdivider of such conflicts.



   D.   The Site Plan Review Committee may deem it advisable to
recommend additional improvements, easements, or dedications, to be included,
in which case the subdivider shall be duly informed of the nature of the
recommendations following the Site Plan Review Committee meeting.



   E.   The Site Plan Review Committee shall make a report of its
recommendations to the Planning Commission, and shall furnish a copy of that
report to the subdivider, in writing, no less than three days prior to the
Planning Commission meeting at which the tentative parcel map is to be
considered by the commission.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
9220)



16.28.040   Tentative parcel maps.



   A.   The person or agency dividing land under this section shall
file a tentative parcel map with the community development director not less
than thirty (30) days before the date of the commission meeting at which such
map is to be considered. Such filing shall be prior to the start of any
grading or construction work within the proposed division of land. The
tentative parcel map shall be submitted in the same manner as provided for
subdivisions as to area improvement and design, flood and water drainage
control, and as to required public improvements.



   B.   A person desiring to divide land subject to the provisions of
this chapter shall submit the tentative parcel map, therefore in accord with
the following requirements:



   1.   Filing. Twenty-five (25) copies of the tentative parcel map
shall be filed with the community development director. The tentative parcel
map shall be legibly drawn, on eighteen (18) inch by twenty-six (26) inch
tracing paper suitable for reproduction, to a scale and in a manner to best
illustrate the proposed division.



   2.   Fees. At the time of filing of the tentative parcel map, a fee
shall be paid to the city in such amount as may be established by the City
Council, on a yearly basis, by resolution.



   3.   Acceptance. The city engineer and community development
director shall examine any such tentative parcel map within five working days
of presentation and shall not accept such map unless the map is in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act of
the state of California, as to form, data, information, and other matters
required to be shown on or furnished therewith.



   4.   Distribution. The community development director shall
immediately forward copies of the tentative parcel map to each of the
following when affected:



   a.   Southern California Gas Company;



   b.   Southern California Edison Company;



   c.   California Water Service;



   d.   AT&T;



   e.   Comcast Cable;



   f.   Visalia Unified School District.



   5.   Agency Action. With the exception of school districts, the
agency receiving a copy of the tentative parcel map shall file a report
within fifteen (15) days after the receipt thereof. School districts shall
respond within twenty (20) working days of the date on which the notice was
mailed to the school district for comment. If a reply is not received prior
to the meeting at which consideration of the map is made, it will be assumed
that the map conforms to the requirements of the particular agency
concerned.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior
code § 9225)



16.28.050   Form and content.



   The tentative parcel map shall contain the following information:



   A.   The name and address of the engineer or surveyor preparing the
map and the legal owner of record of the land, and the applicant, if
different from the legal owner of record;



   B.   The boundary lines of the entire parcel, including the area to
be divided, with dimensions based on existing survey data or property
descriptions;



   C.   The proposed division lines, approximate dimensions, and
approximate acreage or square footage of each proposed parcel;



   D.   The identification of each parcel with a number designation;



   E.   All existing surface and underground structures and
improvements located on the original parcel, together with their dimensions,
the distances between them, the distances to division and property lines, and
the number of stories or the height of each structure;



   F.   The names, widths and locations of all existing and proposed
streets abutting or traversing the original parcel, and a statement if the
street is private and/or a statement if the street does not actually exist on
the ground;



   G.   The location, purposes, width and recorded owners of all
existing and proposed easements or private rights-of-way abutting or
traversing any part of the original parcel easement boundaries shall be shown
by means of dotted lines;



   H.   An accurate description of the original parcel;



   I.   The date of preparation, north arrow and scale of the drawing.
Said scale shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough
sheets shall be used to accomplish this end;



   J.   The existing and proposed uses of the property;



   K.   The proposed method of sewage disposal;



   L.   The proposed domestic water supply;



   M.   The assessor's parcel numbers;



   N.   The proposed street names;



   O.   The approximate location and width of watercourses or areas
subject to inundation from floods, and the location of structures, irrigation
ditches and other permanent fixtures;



   P.   Any railroads;



   Q.   The approximate radius of curves;



   R.   A location map showing the original parcels and the surrounding
area;



   S.   The existing zone district designation of the original parcels;



   T.   The proposed use of the property;



   U.   Oak trees having a trunk diameter exceeding four inches,
measured at a point five feet above the existing ground level;



   V.   The proposed method of solid waste collection;



   W.   The proposed public bus stops and turnouts, if any;



   X.   A map showing the properties within a three hundred (300) foot
radius of the proposed tentative parcel map and a property owners list keyed
to the three hundred (300) foot radius map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 9230)



16.28.060   Hearing and notice.



   A.   The city Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an
application for a tentative parcel map or vesting tentative parcel map.



   B.   Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten
days or more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by
mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to property owners
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area proposed for
subdivision.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9235)



16.28.070   Consideration of tentative parcel maps.



   The commission shall review the tentative parcel map and approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the map within thirty (30) days after
the receipt of such map, or at such later date as may be required to
concurrently process the appurtenant environmental documents required by
state law and local regulations adopted in implementation thereof.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9240)



16.28.080   Appeals.



   If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the Planning
Commission, he may, within ten days after the decision of the Planning
Commission, appeal in writing to the council for a hearing thereon. Such
hearing need not be concluded on the day thus set but may be continued. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9245)



16.28.090   Time limit on tentative parcel map.



   Failure to file a final parcel map with the county recorder within
twenty-four (24) months after the date of approval or conditional approval of
the tentative parcel map shall automatically revoke said approval, and a
final parcel map shall not be recorded until a new tentative parcel map has
been filed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
However, upon application by the owner or his authorized agent, an extension
of not more than an additional thirty-six (36) months may be granted by the
Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission denies an application for an
extension of time, the owner or his authorized agent may appeal the action to
the City Council in the manner set forth in Section 16.28.080.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9250)



16.28.100   Improvements.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider
shall install, construct and/or provide all on or off-site improvements as
recommended by the city engineer and as required by the commission. Such
improvements shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements
and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the
parcels being created. The nature, extent and design of such improvements and
the guaranteeing of completion thereof shall be in full conformance with the
provisions in Chapter 16.36.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9255)



16.28.110   Right-of-way dedications.



   A.   Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall
provide such dedication of right-of-way and/or easements as may be required
by the Planning Commission.



   B.   The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, require that
offers of dedication or dedication of streets include a waiver of direct
access rights to any such streets from any property shown on the final map as
abutting thereon, in accord with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9260)



16.28.120   Final parcel maps.



   Within the time limit designated in Section 16.28.090 and upon the
accomplishment of all dedications by certification on the map and required
construction of all public improvements, or the execution of an agreement and
provision of surety providing therefore, and the payment of all applicable
fees and charges, the applicant may file a final parcel map with the city
engineer and community development director, who shall approve the final
parcel map if it substantially conforms to the approved tentative parcel map
and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.
The appropriate certificates, as provided by the applicant in accordance with
the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, shall be signed by the city
engineer and community development director upon the parcel map, and the
final parcel map shall be transmitted by the city clerk to the clerk of the
county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county
recorder.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior
code § 9265)



16.28.125   Filing.



   The subdivider may file the original and three (3) copies of the final
parcel map and required accompanying data with the city engineer. When a
final parcel map is submitted to the city engineer in accordance with this
code, it shall be accompanied by the following documents:



   A.   Plans, profiles and specifications of the proposed public and
private improvements, designed in accord with the requirements of the city
engineer;



   B.   A filing fee to cover the expense of checking in an amount to
be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution;



   C.   A preliminary subdivision guarantee issued by a title insurance
company, in the name of the owner of the land, issued to or for the benefit
and protection of the city, showing all parties whose consent is necessary
and their interest therein, except where the land included in such
subdivision is registered under the Land Registration Act. If the land is so
registered, a copy of the certificate of title shall be furnished, certified.



   D.   Calculation and traverse sheets, used in computing the
distances, angles and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and
proposed monuments, and showing closures, within the allowable limits of
error specified in the ordinance, for exterior boundaries of the subdivision
and for each irregular block or lot of the subdivision.



   E.   Two (2) copies of the proposed deed restrictions, if any. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.28.130   Survey requirements.



   If the division of land creates four or less parcels, the final parcel
map may be compiled from recorded or filed data when survey information
exists on recorded or filed maps to sufficiently locate and retrace the
exterior boundary lines of the final parcel map and when the location of at
least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing
monumented line. In all other cases, the final parcel map shall be based on a
field survey of the land conducted in accordance with the Land Surveyor's Act
of the state of California. All new lot corners shall be monumented and based
on a field survey.  (Ord. 2017-01 § 1 (part), 2017: prior code § 9270)



16.28.140   Information on final parcel map.



   A.   Each parcel shall be consecutively numbered. Each parcel shall
have its area shown to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) of an acre or nearest
square foot. The exterior boundary of the land included within the parcel or
parcels being created shall be indicated by a distinctive border. Such border
shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data. The map
shall show the definite location of such parcel or parcels, and particularly
the relationship to existing surveys.



   B.   Each final parcel map shall contain the following information:



   1.   The tentative parcel map number and date of preparation;



   2.   The tract name, date, north arrow and scale;



   3.   A general description of the land included;



   4.   Names and addresses of the owners of the property being divided;



   5.   The location, names without abbreviations, and right-of-way
widths of all:



   a.   Proposed streets;



   b.   Proposed public areas and easements; and



   c.   Adjoining streets;



   6.    All dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of a foot to the
nearest one-hundredth of a foot (0.01'); all necessary angles and bearings
shall be provided to the nearest second of a degree (00º-00'-01");



   7.   The dimensions of all lots, including lot area in square feet,
and a lot number for each lot;



   8.   The centerline data for streets including bearings and
distances;



   9.   The radius, arc length, and central angle of curves;



   10.   Suitable primary survey control points;



   11.   The location and description of permanent monuments;



   12. The boundaries of any public and/or private easement, whether an
easement of record or a prescriptive easement, shall be shown; the party
holding interest in the easement shall be shown on the map;



   13.   Location and widths of all easements to be dedicated, if
required;



   14.   The location and widths of watercourses and areas subject to
inundation and location of selected flood lines within the parcels being
created; properties located in a Special Flood Hazard Area shall comply with
all requirements of Chapter 15.60;



   15.   Ties to any city or county boundary lines involved;



   16.   Required Certifications;



   a.   All required dedications of rights-of-way or easements shall be
certified on the final parcel map in accordance with Section 66447 of the
Subdivision Map Act;



   b.   All parties having any record title interest in the real
property subdivided shall sign a certificate on the final parcel map in
accordance with Subsection 66445(e) of the Subdivision Map Act;



   c.   A certificate of the registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor who prepared the survey and the final parcel map, in compliance with
Section 66449 of the Subdivision Map Act;



   d.   A certificate for execution by the City Engineer/City Surveyor
that complies with Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act;



   e.   A certificate for execution by the city planner on behalf of
the parcel map committee certifying that the final parcel map conforms to the
approved tentative parcel map; and



   f.   All other certificates as required;



   17.   Any other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act.



   B.   The final parcel map shall contain survey information that only
affects record title interest. However, additional survey and map information
such as, but not limited to, building setback lines, flood hazard zones,
seismic lines and setback, geologic mapping and archaeological sites, if
appropriate, shall be shown on an additional map sheet that shall indicate
its relationship to the final parcel map, and shall contain a statement that
the additional information is for informational purposes, describes
conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record
title interest. The additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the
additional information is derived from public records or reports, and does
not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the
preparer of the additional map sheet. The acceptance of the additional map
sheet by the city, similarly does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of
those records or reports. The additional map sheet shall be recorded
simultaneously with the final parcel map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 9275)



16.28.150   Waiver of final parcel map.



   The Planning Commission or City Council may, at its discretion, waive
the final parcel map when a finding is made that the proposed division of
land complies with the requirements established by this chapter as to area,
improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved
public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability,
environmental protection, and other requirements of this chapter.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9280)



16.28.160   Amending of parcel maps.



   After a parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder such a
recorded parcel map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an
amending map if the local agency finds that there are changes in
circumstances that make any or all of the conditions of such a map no longer
appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any
additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the
modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property
reflected on the recorded parcel map and the local agency finds that the map,
as modified, conforms to the provisions of Section 66474 of the Subdivision
Map Act. Any such modifications shall be set for public hearing as provided
for in Section 16.28.060 of this chapter. The legislative body shall confine
the hearing to consideration of an action on the proposed modification. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9281)



Chapter 16.32
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS



Sections:



16.32.010   Purpose.



16.32.020   Requirements.



16.32.030   Form and content.



16.32.040   Consideration of lot line adjustment maps.



16.32.050   Appeals.



16.32.060   Exceptions.



16.32.010   Purpose.



   A.   Section 66412 of the Government Code of the state of California
provides that lot line adjustments are excluded from the requirements of the
Subdivision Map Act when they have been approved by the local agency or
advisory agency. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for
granting such approval.



   B.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit a subdivider
from proposing lot line adjustments in conjunction with a subdivision of land
that is being processed by means of a final map or parcel map. In addition,
an applicant may follow the parcel map procedure set forth in Chapter 16.28
to accomplish a lot line adjustment as an alternative to following the
procedures in this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9285)



16.32.020   Requirements.



   A.   A lot line adjustment map as described in Section 16.32.030 is
required for all lot line adjustments.



   B.   The applicant for a lot line adjustment shall deliver to the
city planner, twelve (12) copies of a lot line adjustment map on which the
proposed lot line adjustment is shown.



   C.   At the time of delivering the lot line adjustment map, the
applicant shall pay to the city planner a fee that shall be established from
time to time by resolution of the City Council.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9290)



16.32.030   Form and content.



   A.   The lot line adjustment map shall be on paper eight and
one-half (8.5) by eleven (11) inches or eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26)
inches. The lot line adjustment map shall be legibly drawn in pencil or ink
and shall use a decimal or an engineer's scale adequate and appropriate for
the map. The lot line adjustment map shall clearly show the following
information:



   1.   The boundary lines of the original parcels, with dimensions.
Such information shall be based on existing survey or other record data;



   2.   The proposed division lines with dimensions and the net area of
each lot within such lot line adjustment;



   3.   All existing surface and underground structures and
improvements located on the original parcels within fifty (50) feet of the
boundary of each unit of land to be transferred or conveyed between adjoining
lots or parcels;



   4.   The names, locations and widths of all abutting streets;



   5.   The location, purpose and width of all existing streets and
easements affected by or in close proximity to the land to be conveyed
between adjoining lots;



   6.   The existing use of the property;



   7.   The existing water supply;



   8.   The existing method of sewage disposal;



   9.   A description of all the property involved in the lot line
adjustment sufficient to identify it on the county assessor's maps, including
the section, township and range in which the property is located;



   10.   Such other information as the city planner determines is
necessary for him to properly consider the proposed lot line adjustment.



   B.   The lot line adjustment map shall be accompanied by the
following information:



   1.   Legal descriptions of each adjusted parcel shown on the lot
line adjustment map;



   2.   A certificate signed by the legal owner or owners or an
authorized agent stating that a lot line adjustment is requested and
certifying that the information shown on the map is true and correct. If the
certificate is signed by an agent of the legal owner, such agent shall submit
written authorization from the owner to file the map.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9295)



16.32.040   Consideration of lot line adjustment maps.



   A.   1.   The city planner shall limit the review and approval of
lot line adjustment maps to a determination of whether or not the parcels
resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to zoning and building
ordinances. The city planner shall not impose conditions or exactions on the
approval of the lot line adjustment except to conform to local zoning and
building ordinances, or except to facilitate the relocation of existing
utilities, infrastructure, or easements.



   2.   Whenever the city planner determines that conditions or
exactions may be necessary in order to carry out the provisions of Section
16.32.040(B), he shall immediately refer the lot line adjustment map to the
Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan Review Committee shall review the
map and determine what conditions or exactions, if any, should be placed on
the application. The Site Plan Review Committee shall not require any
conditions or exactions on the lot line adjustment except to conform to local
zoning and building ordinances, or except to facilitate the relocation of
existing utilities, infrastructures or easements. The Site Plan Review
Committee shall thereafter advise the city planner what conditions or
exactions are to be required. If the Site Plan Review Committee determines
that conditions or exactions are required, the committee shall determine at
what time such conditions or exactions are to be fulfilled under the same
provisions of this chapter as they apply to parcel maps. Agreements for
fulfilling such conditions or exactions, security for such agreements and all
other matters pertaining to such conditions or exactions shall also be
governed by the same provisions of this chapter as they apply to parcel maps.



   B.   The city planner shall approve the proposed lot line adjustment
whenever all of the following conditions are complied with:



   1.   The lots that will result from the proposed lot line adjustment
conform to all the applicable zoning and building ordinances in effect and
comply with regulations set forth in this chapter pertaining to size, shape
and dimensions of lots in subdivisions for which tentative and final maps are
required.



   2.   The proposed lot line adjustment will not, under the
circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or to the
general welfare of the city.



   C.   In addition to any other basis for disapproval, the city
planner may disapprove a lot line adjustment if he or she determines that
there is no real relationship between the existing parcels and the proposed
new parcels and that the proposal is more adequately processed as a merger
and resubdivision pursuant to Section 66499.20-1/2 of the Government Code of
the state of California.



   D.   1.   The city planner shall review the proposed lot line
adjustment map and, within fifteen (15) days after the lot line adjustment
map was filed, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the lot line
adjustment map. However, if the lot line adjustment map is referred to the
Site Plan Review Committee, pursuant to Section 16.32.040, the city planner
shall have thirty (30) days after the map was filed to take such action. Said
time limits may be extended by mutual consent of the city planner and the
applicant.



   2.   The city planner shall give written notice of his action to the
applicant and to the affected city departments and to each public and private
agency to which a copy of the lot line adjustment map was transmitted.



   E.   1.   If the city planner approved the lot line adjustment
map, the written decision of the city planner approving the adjustment shall
be filed for record with the county recorder. Such decision shall contain a
legal description of each parcel resulting from the lot line adjustment and
shall be recorded concurrently with the appropriate deed(s) or record of
survey pursuant to Government Code Section 66412(d).



   2.   The lot line adjustment shall not be effective until the
decision of the city planner approving the map has been recorded as set forth
in subsection (E)(1) of this section. Said decision shall not be recorded
until the appeal period specified in Section 16.32.050 has expired without an
appeal having been filed or until the applicant waives his right to appeal,
whichever occurs first. If an appeal is filed, said decision shall not be
recorded until the termination of the appeal proceedings.



   3.   If conditions or exactions are required by the Site Plan Review
Committee, the decision of the city planner shall not be recorded until the
required conditions and exactions have been made fulfilled and, if required
by the Site Plan Review Committee, an agreement with security is on file for
fulfilling such conditions or exactions.



   4.   The recording of the decision of the city planner and
subsequent deed(s) or record of survey shall supersede all prior recorded
parcel maps, subdivision maps or other documents that create the superseded
parcels and the boundaries created by the decision of the city planner shall
prevail over the earlier recorded boundaries, and the recorded decision of
the city planner shall so state.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 §
32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9300)



16.32.050   Appeals.



   After the action by the city planner on the lot line adjustment map,
the applicant may appeal in writing to the Planning Commission within ten
days after the decision of the city planner.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 9305)



16.32.060   Exceptions.



   The procedure set forth in Section 16.04.050 pertaining to exceptions
shall apply to lot line adjustments. The city planner shall carry out the
required duties in connection with such exceptions and public hearings shall
not be held in connection with said exceptions.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9605 § 32 (part), 1996: prior code § 9310)



Chapter 16.36
IMPROVEMENTS



Sections:



16.36.010   General requirements.



16.36.020   Engineering Standard Specifications and Engineering Standard
Details.



16.36.030   Improvement plans and profiles.



16.36.040   Notice of improvement work.



16.36.050   Inspection of improvement work.



16.36.060   Underground utilities.



16.36.070   Streets and highways.



16.36.080   Structures.



16.36.090   Curbs and gutters.



16.36.100   Sanitary sewers.



16.36.110   Storm drains.



16.36.120   Water mains, fire hydrants and fire department access.



16.36.130   Street name signs, traffic control devices, traffic signals
and access barricades.



16.36.140   Street lights.



16.36.150   Railroad crossings.



16.36.160   Monuments.



16.36.170   Improvements inspection.



16.36.180   Lot grading.



16.36.190   Irrigation ditches.



16.36.200   Supplemental improvements – Required.



16.36.210   Supplemental improvements – Reimbursement agreement.



16.36.220   Building permits prior to completion of subdivision
improvements.



16.36.010   General requirements.



   The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the city
policies, with the general requirements set forth in this chapter, and to the
specific requirements of conditional use permits or planned unit development
permits. The city engineer may require changes in typical street sections and
construction details if unusual conditions pertain to the subdivision or
arise during the construction of the subdivision improvements.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.020   Engineering Standard Specifications and Engineering Standard
Details.



   All improvements shall conform to the City of Visalia Engineering
Standard Specifications and the Engineering Standard Details approved by the
City Council as amended by the city engineer from time to time. A copy of
these plans is available for examination by the public in the office of the
city clerk and copies are available for purchase at the city engineer's
office.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.030   Improvement plans and profiles.



   Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans, profiles and
details for such work have been approved by the city engineer. Such plans
must be approved before the final map is approved. All such plans and
profiles shall be drawn on a minimum twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36)
inch paper. An estimate of the quantities of improvement work for purposes of
determining security agreement requirements shall accompany the plans. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.040   Notice of improvement work.



   Improvement work shall not begin until the city engineer has been
notified in advance, and, if work has been discontinued, it shall not be
begun until the city engineer has been notified.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.050   Inspection of improvement work.



   All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of,
and to the approval of, the city engineer.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2013-07, 2013)



16.36.060   Underground utilities.



   All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed
in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to
the surfacing of such streets. Service connections for all underground
utilities and sanitary sewers shall be extended to prevent the necessity of
disturbing the street or alley improvements when connections thereto are
made.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.070   Streets and highways.



   All streets and highways shall be graded and surfaced to cross sections
and grades approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of any
building permit. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all
subdivision streets, highways, or public ways to the intercepting paving line
of any county road, city street, or state highway.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.080   Structures.



   Structures shall be installed as required for drainage, access and/or
public safety. Such structures shall be placed to grades and shall be of a
design approved by the city engineer.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2013-07, 2013)



16.36.090   Curbs and gutters.



   Curbs and gutters shall be installed to grades and at locations
approved by the city engineer prior to the issuance of building permit on any
site within the subdivision. Sidewalks shall be required as a condition of
building permits, except as follows:



   A.   Double fronting lots, where allowed, shall have the sidewalk
installed along the frontage from which the lot will not be receiving access,
as a condition of final map approval.



   B.   A corner lot where a fence or wall is constructed along the
street-side lot line as a part of the subdivision, improvements shall have
sidewalks installed along the street-side as a condition of final map
approval.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.100   Sanitary sewers.



   Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer
system shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades, locations, design
and size approved by the city engineer. Location of house sewer laterals
shall be marked on curb tops with a letter "S." Sanitary sewers when
necessary shall be extended to the subdivision limits to permit the extension
to adjacent subdivision. Trunk and main lines shall be located in conformance
with the city master sewer plan or policy. All sewer facilities located in
private streets shall be considered side-sewers and maintained by the
property owner up to its connection to the sewer at the manhole in the public
street, alley or public sanitary sewer easement.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.110   Storm drains.



   Storm drains shall be installed as required by the city engineer, or as
required by a specific adopted master storm drain plan.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.120   Water mains, fire hydrants and fire department access.



   The subdivider shall install water mains, fire hydrants and provide
fire department access when required. The costs associated with such
installations shall be at the expense of the subdivider. Fire hydrants, water
mains and fire department access shall be installed in accordance with the
following:



   A.   The water system, including water mains and fire hydrants,
shall be installed and in operation prior to the commencement of building
construction on any site within the subdivision unless otherwise authorized
by the fire marshal, fire chief and/or their designee.



   B.   Fire hydrants shall be of a type approved by the fire marshal,
fire chief and/or their designee.



   C.   The minimum water main line size to serve any fire hydrant
shall be six (6) inches in diameter.



   D.   A gate valve shall be installed between the tee in the main and
the fire hydrant.



   E.   Minimum water flow shall comply with the following requirements:



   1.   Single-family developments shall require a minimum flow of one
thousand (1,000) gallons per minute at twenty (20) psi residual pressure at
any required fire hydrant.



   2.   Multi-family, one or two story, zero lot line clearance,
condominiums, and mobile home parks, shall require a minimum flow of two
thousand (2,000) gallons per minute at twenty (20) psi residual pressure at
any required fire hydrant.



   3.   Multi-family, three stories or higher, shall require a minimum
flow of two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons per minute at twenty (20)
psi residual pressure at any required fire hydrant.



   4.   Commercial and industrial development shall require a minimum
flow consistent with the current adopted Fire Code.



   F.   Water systems, other than California Water Service Company
mains, supplying fire hydrants shall comply with the current adopted Fire
Code.



   G.   Fire hydrant spacing shall comply with the following
requirements:



   1.   Single-family residential developments shall be provided with
fire hydrants every six hundred (600) lineal feet of residential frontage. In
isolated developments, no less than two (2) fire hydrants shall be provided
not more than six hundred (600) lineal feet apart from one another.



   2.   Multi-family, zero lot line clearance, mobile home park or
condominium developments shall be provided with fire hydrants every four
hundred (400) feet of residential frontage. In isolated developments, no less
than two (2) fire hydrants shall be provided not more than four hundred (400)
lineal feet apart from one another.



   3.   Multi-family or condominium developments with one hundred (100)
percent coverage fire sprinkler systems shall be provided with fire hydrants
every six hundred (600) lineal feet of multi-family or condominium frontage.
In isolated developments, no less than two (2) fire hydrants shall be
provided not more than six hundred (600) lineal feet apart from one another.



   4.   Commercial and industrial fire hydrant spacing shall meet the
current adopted Fire Code.



   5.   The exact location of fire hydrants within or adjacent to
subdivisions and the final decision as to the number of fire hydrants shall
be at the discretion of the fire marshal, fire chief, and/or their designee.



   H.   Fire department access shall comply with current adopted Fire
Code.



   I.   Fire department access shall be provided prior to the
commencement of building construction on any site within the subdivision
unless otherwise authorized by the fire marshal, fire chief and/or their
designee.



   J.   Nothing in the above regulations shall prevent the fire
marshal, fire chief, and/or their designee from making special requirements
as based on the appropriate level of fire protection for a particular system.



   K.   The fire chief may adopt, amend and enforce regulations
necessary to implement this section, in accord with the procedures outlined
in the city's policy permitting adoption, amendment or repeal of
regulations.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.130   Street name signs, traffic control devices, traffic signals
and access barricades.



   Street name signs shall be installed by the city at the subdivider's
expense at locations required by the city engineer. Traffic control devices
shall be installed by the subdivider at the subdivider's expense at locations
required by the city engineer. Any required barricades to prevent traffic
access at dead end streets shall be provided by the subdivider and shall
become the property of the city. The subdivider shall pay proportionate share
of future traffic signals where determined by the city engineer, and when
such traffic signal bears a reasonable relationship to the subdivision being
processed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.140   Street lights.



   Street lights shall be installed by the subdivider, at locations
consistent with the adopted development improvement standards.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.150   Railroad crossings.



   Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary
to provide access to, or circulation within, the proposed subdivision,
including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the
Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. The establishment and
improvement of protection devices shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.160   Monuments.



   A.   Subdivision Boundaries and Street Centerlines.



   1.   Permanent monuments in accordance with the standard
specifications and improvement standards shall be set at all angle and curve
points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at all street
intersections, at all angle points of street lines, and at all simple and
compound curve points of street centerlines.



   2.   Monuments in street intersections and at angle and curve points
of street lines shall be set on street centerlines unless otherwise directed
by the city engineer; provided, however, such permanent monuments need not be
set at angle and curve points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision
when such points on the exterior boundaries of the subdivision have been
previously monumented and accepted by the city.



   B.   Lot Markers. The registered engineer or licensed surveyor shall
set at all corners a marker not less substantial and enduring than a one-half
(0.5) inch iron pipe eighteen (18) inches long with a non-corroding material
and the registered engineer's or licensed land surveyor marker on the head
thereof.



   C.   Replacement of Monuments. Any monument as required by the
provisions of this chapter, which is disturbed or destroyed as a result of
subdivision improvement work shall be replaced by a registered engineer or
licensed surveyor at the subdivider's expense.



   D.   Setting of Monuments. Monuments shall be set before the council
acceptance of the improvements.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07,
2013)



16.36.170   Improvements inspection.



   A.   General. All required improvements shall be constructed under
the inspection of the city engineer. The cost of inspection of work shall be
paid by the subdivider in an amount, as determined by the city engineer,
sufficient to pay for said inspection.



   B.   Approval. No extension of time, progress payments from cash
deposits, or releases of surety bond or cash deposit shall be made except
upon the certification by the city engineer that work covered thereby has
been satisfactorily completed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07,
2013)



16.36.180   Lot grading.



   The subdivider shall grade the entire area of the subdivision so that
all lots drain to grades approved by the city engineer.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.190   Irrigation ditches.



   All irrigation ditches traversing, abutting, or adjoining property to
be subdivided, shall be permanently abandoned, permanently pipelined, fenced
with chain link fencing of minimum six (6) feet height, or otherwise totally
enclosed in a manner satisfactory to the city and the irrigation company.
Fencing provisions may be waived by the city planner and the city engineer if
necessary to provide a public amenity consistent with the city Open Space,
Recreation and Parks Element of the City's General Plan. All natural creeks
and channels, Packwood Creek, Mill Creek, and Saint John's River, shall be
treated according to city plans and policies. The improvement plans for any
subdivision for which an irrigation ditch or natural creeks are traversing,
abutting or adjoining, shall be reviewed and approved by the irrigation or
ditch company prior to the approval by the city engineer.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.200   Supplemental improvements – Required.



   The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit
of the subdivision that may contain supplemental size, capacity, or number
for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition
precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter to
dedicate such improvements to the public.  "Supplemental size, capacity, or
number" shall mean that size, capacity, or number in excess of the minimum
standard city requirements.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.210   Supplemental improvements – Reimbursement agreement.



   A.   The city shall enter into an agreement for reimbursement to the
subdivider of the cost of the supplement capacity, size or number. However,
the subdivider shall be reimbursed only for that portion of the cost of such
improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would cost the
subdivider to install improvements to serve the subdivision only and the
actual cost of oversized improvements.



   B.   To pay the cost of such a reimbursement the City Council may at
its discretion:



   1.   Immediately reimburse the subdivider for the entire cost of
oversizing and thereafter levy a charge upon the real property benefitted
thereby; or



   2.   Collect a reasonable use charge for the account of the
subdividers from persons not within the subdivision using the oversized
improvements; or



   3.   Establish and maintain local benefit districts for the levy and
collection of the charge attributable to the property benefitted by the
supplemental capacity.



   C.   No such user charge, levy or local benefit district shall be
established unless the City Council finds that the fee or charge and the area
of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of
such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries
thereof.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



16.36.220   Building permits prior to completion of subdivision
improvements.



   Notwithstanding the timing restrictions on issuance of building permits
contained in Visalia Municipal Code Title 16 (Subdivisions), building permits
for individual lots may be issued prior to completion of subdivision
improvements identified in said Title 16 if authorized by the fire chief, or
his/her designee, in compliance with the Fire Department Access and Water
Guidelines for Residential Construction, as amended, promulgated by the
Visalia Fire Department. However, no occupancy of such residential
construction shall occur unless and until the conditions prompting the
restriction on building permits in the above-referenced Title 16 have been
satisfied.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-07, 2013)



Chapter 16.40
DRAINAGE FEES



Sections:



16.40.010   Purpose.



16.40.020   Definitions.



16.40.030   Drainage fees required—When payable.



16.40.040   Timing of fee payment.



16.40.050   Development without payment of local drainage fee prohibited.



16.40.060   Fee schedule—Computation of fee.



16.40.070   Credits, reimbursements for fees and facilities previously
paid and installed—Conditions.



16.40.010   Purpose.



   The council declares and finds that the development of land for urban
uses substantially accelerates the concentration of surface and storm waters
and that it is necessary to provide for the construction of and establishment
and collection of drainage fees to defray all or a part of the actual or the
estimated cost of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of
surface and storm waters from drainage areas in order to promote and protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the accomplishment of
the purposes more particularly set forth as follows:



   A.   To provide for planned drainage facilities within the city
required for the removal of surface and storm waters;



   B.   To provide for an alternate method of financing construction of
planned drainage facilities within the city;



   C.   To provide a source of information regarding development of
planned drainage facilities for present and prospective residents, developers
and investors in property within the city;



   D.   To obviate the menace to public safety arising from inadequate
provision for removal of surface and storm waters occurring as the result of
development of property within the city;



   E.   To prevent deterioration of property values and impairment of
conditions making for desirable residential, commercial or industrial
development, as the case may be, that would result from the failure to
construct planned drainage facilities;



   F.   To prevent deterioration of public streets and other public
facilities that would result from failure to construct planned drainage
facilities;



   G.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority under the
Government Code of the state of California and the Charter of the city of
Visalia to provide for collection of drainage fees for construction of
planned drainage facilities within the city at the time of the division of
land, or at the time of other development thereof; except as herein excepted,
such fees being, however, subject to credits as herein provided for revenues,
assessments and other receipts theretofore collected with respect to any such
parcel or parcels of land for construction of planned drainage facilities
within the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9435)



16.40.020   Definitions.



   Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this chapter shall govern the construction, meaning,
and application of the words and phrases defined, and their derivatives and
derivatives therefrom wherever applicable, whenever used in this chapter.



   "Development" means any building, structure, or other improvement or
the construction, erection, or installation thereof, in, over or upon any
parcel of land. Development does not include any temporary building,
structure or other improvement, or the construction, erection or installation
thereof, which under the terms of any permit issued therefore or the
provisions of this code or pursuant to such other assurance as the engineer
may require, may be maintained not to exceed one year or, if erected or
installed for use in the performance of the work of a construction project,
until completion of such work. The term improvement shall include, without
limitation, any development activity that, as determined by the engineer,
materially alters the natural surface of the land or restricts the
imperviousness of the soil and includes without limitation paving (concrete,
asphalt, oil or other means of soil stabilization) and landscaping.



   "Division" means the dividing of any parcel of land into one or more
lots or parcels, including, but not limited to, a division as described in
Section 16.08.010, or any parcel of land that has been so divided.



   "Drainage area" means the area of the city for which planned drainage
facilities for the collection and removal of surface and storm waters
therefrom, and the total estimated costs of constructing such facilities, are
set forth in a drainage plan.



   "Drainage fees" means fees established and levied as provided in this
chapter to pay all or a part of the costs of planned local drainage
facilities and their appurtenances.



   "Drainage plan" means the storm drainage master plan, adopted by the
council; such plan delineating therein a plan for the drainage area that
contains an estimate of the total costs of constructing the drainage
facilities required by the plan, together with their appurtenances, and a map
of the drainage area showing generally its boundaries and the location of the
planned local drainage facilities.



   "Engineer" means the city engineer of the City of Visalia.



   "Gross acreage" means the area of a parcel of land, or the area of a
proposed division, including those portions designated for streets and alleys
and including those portions of all abutting streets and alleys measured to
the center lines thereof or to a line parallel with and thirty (30) feet from
the property line, whichever shall be the lesser. In the case of a
single-family residential use occupying a corner parcel, the area of the
street abutting the shortest side of such parcel, or one side in the case of
a square parcel, shall not be included.



   "Parcel of land" means any real property improved or unimproved, shown
on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a parcel and reflected by
the assessor's parcel maps prepared by the office of the county assessor of
the county of Tulare.



   "Planned drainage facilities" means drainage facilities required for
the drainage area. The term facilities shall include, without limitation,
real property and rights in property for use for and in connection with the
installation of planned drainage facilities, conduits, drainage channels,
drainage retention, detention and recharge basins, and things incidental
thereto, all as may be required for the collection and removal of surface and
storm waters from the drainage area.



   "Planned drainage facilities fund" means a separate fund established by
the finance director for the drainage area, into which all drainage fees
collected on property within the drainage area shall be deposited, and the
monies in which shall be expended solely for acquisition for construction or
reimbursement for acquisition or construction of planned drainage facilities
within the drainage area for which such fund was established.



   "Zoning ordinance" means the zoning ordinance (Title 17) of the City of
Visalia.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 9440)



16.40.030   Drainage fees required—When payable.



   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the drainage fee
shall be paid on each parcel of land in the drainage area prior to the
commencement of the work of any development thereon or, in the case of any
division of a parcel of land, prior to the approval of the final subdivision
or parcel map, or development, and shall be composed of an acquisition fee
and a development fee to be paid as follows:



   1.    The acquisition fee shall be paid on each parcel of land in
the drainage area prior to the approval of the final subdivision or parcel
map. The amount of the acquisition fee payable prior to the approval of the
final subdivision map or parcel map shall be as determined by Section
16.40.030(E). When no final subdivision or parcel map is submitted for final
approval prior to the commencement of the work of any development on each
parcel of land, the acquisition fee shall be paid prior to the commencement
of the work of any development thereon.



   2.   The development fee shall be paid on each parcel of land prior
to the commencement of the work of any development thereon.



   B.   In the case of subdivisions that at the time of approval are
zoned for industrial uses, and of parcel maps, the following applies:



   1.   If planned drainage facilities are required within the limits
of, or are necessitated by such division or phase thereof, the drainage fees
that shall be paid prior to the approval of the final map thereof shall not
exceed the cost of such planned drainage facilities.



   2.   If planned drainage facilities are not required within the
limits of, or are not necessitated by such division, the drainage fees
required by this article may be deferred for previously undeveloped areas
only.



   3.   The drainage fees deferred under the provision of this
subsection shall be payable in the amounts determined by the provisions of
this article prior to receipt of a development entitlement for the lands
subject to such division.



   C.   Except in the case of single-family residential uses, the area
of an addition, replacement, reconstruction or the construction of separate
structures or other improvements on a previously developed parcel for which
the drainage fee or assessment has not been fully paid shall be deemed a
parcel of land for the purposes of this chapter and the drainage fee is
payable thereon when such area equals or exceeds one thousand (1,000) square
feet. When the area of such addition, replacement, reconstruction or other
improvement or the accumulation of such additions or other improvements made
after October 1, 1988, equals twenty-five (25) percent or more of the
development existing as of October 1, 1988, the drainage fee shall be payable
on the total area of the subject parcel as defined in Section 16.40.020 and
Section 16.40.060(F). Credits for fees or assessments previously paid shall
be granted in accordance with Section 16.40.070(C).



   D.   The city shall require:



   1.   The design, construction, and dedication of planned drainage
facilities located within or necessitated by a development or division; or



   2.   The combination of the payment of a partial drainage fee as
required herein and the design, construction and dedication of planned
drainage facilities when determined by the city to be necessary in
conjunction with such development or division.



   E.   Exceptions. The drainage fees are not payable for the
performance of the following items of work:



   1.   Except in the case of a division, any development work that
consists solely of the construction, erection, or installation of:



   a.   Fences, pole lines, underground conduits or pipelines, or
similar developments that, as determined by the engineer, do not materially
alter the natural surface of a parcel of land; or



   b.   Concrete curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway approaches, paving
or other street improvements within any street or alley.



   2.   Any development consisting solely of additions or alterations
to any single-family residential dwelling or its accessory structures or
other additional development on a developed single-family residential parcel.



   3.   Any reconstruction or replacement of a single-family residence
destroyed by fire or because of condemnation, provided that this exception
shall not apply in the event that:



   a.   The use of the parcel or any portion thereof at the time of
reconstruction or replacement is for other than single-family residential; or



   b.   Reconstruction or replacement does not occur within twelve (12)
months; or



   c.   The ownership of the parcel is changed following the occurrence
that requires reconstruction or replacement thereof.



   F.   Government Agency. Payment of the drainage fee upon division of
land divided by a governmental agency engaged in such activity may be
deferred upon request filed with the city by the governmental agency to the
time of development of any undeveloped lot or parcel created in said
division, subject to the conditions herein specified. A governmental agency,
for the purposes of this deferment, is defined as one that is created under
the provisions of either federal, state or local enabling legislation and
that is acting under a program in which payment of the drainage fee would not
be an eligible cost.



   1.   The deferment authorized herein shall be allowed only in the
event said governmental agency enters into a written agreement with the city
which shall provide:



   a.   That the fee shall otherwise be paid pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter;



   b.   That the agreement creates a valid lien upon such parcel to the
extent of the fee (such lien may be subordinated at the discretion of the
engineer, and the form and substance of the agreement, procedures, documents,
covenants, etc., necessary to place the agreement and lien into effect shall
all be determined by the engineer, subject to the approval of the city
attorney);



   c.   That said agreement shall provide that the owner of each lot or
parcel created as a result of said division shall agree to pay all court
costs and attorney fees and waives any and all defenses, legal or equitable,
other than liquidated monetary setoffs against the city, if an action at law
or foreclosure suit is brought to enforce payment of the fee or recovery of
the fee through the lien.



   2.   Said governmental agency will pay or provide for payment of the
drainage fee on any developed lot or parcel at the time of division except
that in the event of ownership by said governmental agency of said developed
parcel or parcels, payment of the drainage fee thereon shall be made at the
time of sale of said developed lot or parcel by the governmental agency.



   3.   Said governmental agency will give actual notice of the lien
described above to the purchaser of any lot or parcel created as a result of
such division, except that failure by said governmental agency to provide
actual notice to the purchaser shall not affect the lien upon said parcel or
portion thereof as sold or the liability by the owner thereof to pay any
drainage fee thereon as herein provided.



   G.   As to any portion of land included within a parcel map for
which the fee has not been deferred under subsection (B) of this section, the
fee obligation established by this chapter may be deferred where such
divisions of land are required by court order.



   1.   All owners who desire to defer fees under this subsection shall
enter into an agreement with the city that shall require the payment of such
deferred fee at the earliest of the following occurrences:



   a.   The sale or transfer of any such parcel or portion thereof;



   b.   The filing of a final map or parcel map on any portion of such
parcel;



   c.   The issuance of a building permit or special permit for any
development entitlement on or for any portion of such parcel.



   2.   Fees deferred under this subsection shall be paid at the rates
in effect when such fees become due and payable.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 9445)



16.40.040   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 16.40.030, the City
Council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 16.40.030.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section, the City Council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this chapter will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this chapter will not
materially affect the ability of the city to deliver its five-year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection A of this
section, the City Council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid;
provided, that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first;



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies;



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit. If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the fee payer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designee and the city attorney;



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred, on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee
by the point in time specified in such resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay such deferred fees by the
point in time specified in such resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which such party has a financial
interest.



   D.   Companies classified within the following Standard Industrial
Codes shall be able to pay their development impact fees over five years
without interest or administrative fee. The first installment of twenty (20)
percent shall be due upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in five
equal annual installments thereafter and shall be collected on the property
tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property tax roll shall
not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000–2099   Food processing



   2200–3999   Certain other manufacturers



   4200–4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500–4599   Air transportation



   4700–5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9818 § 4, 1998)



16.40.050   Development without payment of local drainage fee prohibited.



   No person shall construct, erect, or install, or cause or permit to be
constructed, erected, or installed, any development on any parcel of land on
which the drainage fee required by this article has not been paid; and no
building permit or other permit for any development shall be issued unless
the required drainage fee has been paid.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 9450)



16.40.060   Fee schedule—Computation of fee.



   A.   The council shall establish by resolution, a schedule of
per-gross-acre fees calculated to provide the sum of money necessary to pay
the estimated total costs, as set forth in the drainage plan, of the planned
drainage facilities. Such schedule shall be conditioned and based on the
following findings by the council:



   1.   That the planned drainage facilities for the drainage area are
in conformity with the drainage plan of the city;



   2.   That the development of property within the drainage area will
require construction or acquisition of the planned drainage facilities
described in the drainage plan and that the fees are fairly apportioned
within the drainage area on the basis of benefits conferred on property
developed or to be developed or on the need for planned drainage facilities
created by proposed or existing development of property within the drainage
area;



   3.   That drainage facilities planned with respect to the drainage
area that are in addition to any existing drainage facilities serving such
drainage area at the time of adoption of the drainage plan are necessary to
complete the planned drainage facilities for the drainage area.



   B.   The schedule of fees shall be those amounts as established by
Resolution No. 97-39 of the council and shall remain in effect until July 1,
1998. Effective July 1, 1998, and each succeeding July 1st thereafter, said
schedule of fees shall be adjusted in accordance with the following criteria:



   1.   On April 1st of each year the engineer shall review the current
Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the cities of
Los Angeles and San Francisco, CA. When the average of such indices differs
from the average of the indices for the preceding April 1st, the factor of
increase or decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees. Such factor
shall be computed by dividing the average ENRCCI for the current April 1st by
that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual drainage fee rates
may be multiplied by said factor to determine the adjusted schedule of fees.
The engineer shall present the new fee schedule for adoption by resolution of
council after at least one public hearing.



   2.   The engineer shall add to the schedule of fees the drainage fee
rates for new planned drainage areas established by the council concurrently
with the amendment of the drainage plan adding thereto such new planned
drainage areas.



   3.   If in the determination of the engineer the adjustment of the
schedule of fees produced by the procedure in subdivision 1 of this
subsection is not representative of the actual change in costs of the planned
drainage facilities, the engineer may, in lieu of the procedures set forth in
said paragraph, compute a new schedule of fees for adoption by resolution of
the council after at least one public hearing.



   4.   In the event of the adoption of a new schedule of fees by
resolution of the council, such new schedule shall become effective sixty
(60) days after the adoption thereof by the council. The adjustment of such
schedule provided in Subdivision 1 of this subsection shall begin the April
1st next occurring after adoption of the new schedule.



   C.   The rates per-gross-acre used to compute drainage fees levied
and collected pursuant to this article for parcels of land located in the
drainage area shall be those rates set forth for the drainage area in the
schedule of per-gross-acre fees established by resolution of the council as
set forth in this section. For parcels of land located, pursuant to the
zoning ordinance, in the respective land use districts identified in the
schedule of per-gross-acre fees, the per-gross-acre fee shall be the sum
identified with such land use district in such schedule.



   D.   In such cases wherein the parcel of land is located in a new
land use district for which a rate per-gross-acre has not been adopted by the
council, the engineer shall calculate and shall levy an interim fee using the
cost distribution formula for the land use district within the subject local
drainage area that in the engineer's opinion is the most similar to the new
district, but which is not less than the lowest per-acre rate identified in
the rate schedule. The council shall, as soon as practical, thereafter amend
the schedule of per-gross-acre fees identifying therein the new district and
the fees per gross acre associated therewith and any deviation from the
interim fees that shall have been paid shall be adjusted by a further payment
to the city or refund to the owner.



   E.   The drainage fee applicable to any parcel of land or division
shall be the product of the gross acreage of the parcel or division
multiplied by the rate or rates per gross acre applicable to the land use
district, within which the parcel or division is located as specified within
the fee schedule resolution adopted pursuant to this section.



   F.   When a development is proposed on only a portion of any parcel
of land, the engineer may designate on the approved plot plan the portion of
such real property on which the development is to occur as the area to be
developed. The payment of the drainage fee shall be limited to such
designated area subject to the following conditions:



   1.   Such designated area shall include all area to be the subject
of activity which materially alters the natural surface of the land or
restricts the imperviousness of the soil, including landscaping, paving and
other means of soil stabilization, and grading and filling.



   2.   Such designated area shall equal or exceed the minimum area
established for the applicable land use district identified in the zoning
ordinance.



   3.   The area of such parcel remaining undesignated shall equal or
exceed the minimum area established for the applicable land use district
identified in the zoning ordinance.



   G.   When any development subject to a conditional use permit or a
recorded development agreement would create a substantially greater or lesser
amount of change in the natural surface of the land than would be created by
the normal or usual development of land in a land use district, an
appropriate fee shall be calculated by using the rate or rates for the land
use district within the subject drainage area which is most similar in
character to the proposed development. Payment of such fee or the
construction of planned local drainage facilities, or a combination thereof,
shall be a condition of any permit which is required for construction or use
of such development.



   H.   When the drainage fee applicable to any parcel of land has been
paid pursuant to this article, or shall have been paid through assessment in
a specific assessment proceeding, and the use of such parcel of land is
changed to a use which, under the then-current fee schedule, requires a
higher drainage fee, then such parcel of land shall be subject to payment of
an additional fee that shall be the fee applicable to such parcel of land in
its changed use under the fee schedule in effect at the time the additional
fee is payable less the total of any credits allowed under Section
16.40.070.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9719 § 4, 1997)



16.40.070   Credits, reimbursements for fees and facilities previously
paid and installed—Conditions.



   A.   In the computation of the drainage fee payable because of the
development or division of any parcel of land, a credit shall be allowed for
planned drainage facilities installed with respect to such parcel. Such
credits for drainage facilities constructed and still in existence and use in
any street, alley or public easement and not constructed by special
assessment proceeding shall be allowed, subject to the following conditions
and limitations:



   1.   Facilities considered for such credits shall have been
constructed in conformance with the standards of the city in effect when such
facilities were constructed;



   2.   The engineer shall certify that such facilities are in
conformance with, or beneficial for use in connection with, the planned
drainage facilities installed or to be installed in the drainage area;



   3.   The credit allowed shall not exceed the cost of such
facilities, as determined by the engineer from actual cost records or by
applying estimates of construction costs prevailing at the time such
facilities were constructed; provided, that no credit shall be allowed
because of public easements, the dedication of which may have been required
by the city in conjunction with development or divisions as defined in this
chapter;



   4.   The facilities shall have been constructed and paid for with
respect to the parcel for which credit is claimed and are located in or will
serve the planned drainage area within which is located the parcel for which
credit is claimed;



   5.   Such credits shall be calculated based on the cost estimates
identified in the storm drain master plan, and adjusted annually in the same
manner as the schedule of per-gross-acre fees in Section 16.40.060;



   6.   The city shall have acquired ownership of the facilities
without cost;



   7.   When the facilities for which credit is claimed benefit more
than one parcel and only a portion of the total allowable credit is claimed,
the city may, in the absence of an agreement among the owners of the subject
parcels eligible for such credit, estimate the total cost of the facilities
at the time of construction and apportion the total credit allowable for such
facilities among the benefitting parcels in a manner that the city in its
sole discretion shall deem equitable;



   8.   Except in the case of public agencies, in the event the actual
cash expenditures, as determined by the engineer in Subsection (A)(3) of this
section, exceed the total drainage fee payable because of the development or
division of any parcel of land, the city shall contract with the developer or
divider to reimburse such excess credits. Such reimbursement shall be subject
to the following conditions and limitations:



   a.   Such reimbursements shall be paid to the developer or divider
from drainage fees received pursuant to subsequent development or division of
other parcels of land within the local drainage area served by the planned
drainage facilities for which such reimbursement is due,



   b.   In those drainage areas in which more than one reimbursement
contract is concurrently in existence, the order of reimbursement shall be
based upon the date of receipt by the city of the submittals set forth in
Subsection (A)(8)(g) of this section. Reimbursement shall not be paid
pursuant to a late reimbursement contract within a drainage area until any
previous reimbursement contract within said drainage area is fully reimbursed,



   c.   The payment of such reimbursements is to be made semi-annually,
in amounts determined by the engineer,



   d.   Should there not be sufficient subsequent drainage fees
available, or should the facilities required to provide the level of drainage
service prescribed by the drainage plan not be available, by a date fifteen
(15) years from the date of receipt by the city of the submittals set forth
in Subsection (A)(8)(g) of this section, the initial reimbursement period and
any remaining obligation of the city to reimburse such excess credit shall
expire; provided, however, that the expiration of the city's reimbursement
obligation shall be extended an additional five years in those cases in which
the developer or divider has been reimbursed at least seventy-five (75)
percent of the total excess credit during the initial reimbursement period,



   e.   The total reimbursement to be paid pursuant to this Subsection
(A) shall not exceed ninety-five (95) percent of the total excess credit; the
city shall retain five percent from each reimbursement as an administrative
records and services charge,



   f.   Nothing herein shall preclude the more frequent payment of
reimbursement or the partial payment of reimbursements when sufficient funds
are determined by the engineer to be available and all other conditions of
this Subsection (A) have been met,



   g.   The developer or divider shall submit to the city, within
ninety (90) days of acceptance by the city of those facilities for which
credit or excess credit is claimed, the reproducible as-built plans of said
facilities, the project accounting reflecting final costs of the eligible
items and any balance due of the final drainage fee determined pursuant to
this chapter. Credits and reimbursement of excess credits shall not be
granted pursuant to this section if the submissions required by Subsection
(A)(8)(g) are not made.



   B.   Credits for assessment previously levied for planned drainage
facilities by special assessment proceeding shall be allowed, subject to the
following conditions and limitations:



   1.   Such facilities shall have been constructed in conformance with
the standards of the city in effect when such facilities were constructed;



   2.   The engineer shall certify that such facilities are in
conformance with or beneficial for use in connection with the planned
facilities installed in the drainage area;



   3.   The credit allowed shall be equal to the amount of the
assessment and any supplemental assessment levied upon the parcel of land,
that was paid in cash or that became security for a bond or bonds issued in
the special assessment proceedings. If one assessment was levied for drainage
facilities and other improvements in the same proceeding, the engineer shall
determine, from the engineer's report



16.40.070



in the assessment proceeding, if available, otherwise on cost estimates
applied by the engineer, the proportion of the assessment attributable to
such facilities, and the amount so determined by him shall be the credit
allowed.



   C.   If the drainage fee was paid on all or a portion of the parcel
of land pursuant to this chapter and an additional local drainage fee is
payable under any provision of this chapter, a credit shall be allowed equal
to the amount previously paid.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
9460)



Chapter 16.44
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES



Sections:



16.44.010   Legislative findings.



16.44.020   Short title, authority and applicability.



16.44.030   Intents and purposes.



16.44.040   Rules of construction.



16.44.050   Definitions.



16.44.060   Imposition of transportation impact fee.



16.44.070   Fee schedule.



16.44.080   Computation of the amount of transportation impact fee.



16.44.090   Payment of fee.



16.44.100   Timing of fee payment.



16.44.110   Transportation impact fee trust fund established.



16.44.120   Use of funds.



16.44.130   Refund of fees paid.



16.44.140   Fee exemptions and reductions.



16.44.150   Reimbursements for private construction of planned
transportation facilities.



16.44.160   Exceptions.



16.44.170   Appeal process.



16.44.180   Penalty provisions.



16.44.190   Severability.



16.44.010   Legislative findings.



   The City Council of the city finds, determines, and declares that:



   A.   The city must expand its street system in order to maintain
acceptable levels of service if new development is to be accommodated without
reducing these levels of service to unacceptable levels as established in the
circulation element of the general plan of the city. This must be done in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   B.   The California Legislature through the enactment of California
statutes has authorized and encouraged cities to enact impact fees in order
to meet the impacts of new development;



   C.   The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods
of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of
capital facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be
done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   D.   Each of the land use categories shown in the schedule of fees
to be adopted pursuant to Section 16.44.070, will generate traffic
necessitating the acquisition of rights-of-way, street construction and
street improvements;



   E.   The fees established under the authority of Section 16.44.070
are derived from, are based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing
additional rights-of-way, street construction and street improvements
necessitated by the new land developments for which the fees are levied;



   F.   The city has commissioned the completion of the report titled
"Traffic Impact Fee Update Nexus Study City of Visalia," dated November 13,
2008.  Such report, as it may be revised from time to time, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of
new development on the need for and costs for additional rights-of-way,
street construction and street improvements in the city.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9465)



16.44.020   Short title, authority and applicability.



   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Visalia Transportation Impact Fee Ordinance."



   B.   The City Council of the city has the authority to adopt this
chapter pursuant to its Charter and pursuant to Article XI of Section 7 of
the Constitution of the state of California, and Government Code Sections
65300 et. seq., 66000 et. seq., and 66470 et. seq. of California statutes.



   C.   This chapter shall apply in the incorporated area of the city
to the extent permitted by Article XI of Section 7 of the Constitution of the
state of California.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior
code § 9470)



16.44.030   Intents and purposes.



   A.   This chapter is intended to assist in the implementation of the
circulation element of the Visalia General Plan.



   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and
development of land so as to assure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
streets in the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior
code § 9475)



16.44.040   Rules of construction.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so
as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare.



   B.   For the purpose of administration and enforcement of this
chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of
construction shall apply to the text of this chapter:



   1.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.



   2.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.



   3.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   4.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"maintained for," or "occupied for."



   5.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.



   6.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:



   a.   "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.



   b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.



   c.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.



   7.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific
example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of like kind or character.



   8.   "City engineer" means the city engineer or city officials
he/she may designate to carry out the administration of this chapter.



16.44.040



   9.   A street right-of-way used to define transportation impact fee
district boundaries may be considered within any district it bounds.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9480)



16.44.050   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Accepted by the city" means the acceptance by the city of newly
constructed public improvements as evidenced by the recording by the city of
a Notice of Completion with the county, or by the issuance of a final
inspection of an encroachment permit.



   "Arterial street" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
16.44.050 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   A "capital improvement" includes transportation planning, preliminary
engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, right-of-way
acquisition, engineering, permitting and construction of all the necessary
features for any street construction project including, but not limited to:



   1.   Construction of new through lanes;



   2.   Construction of new turn lanes;



   3.   Construction of new bridges or culverts;



   4.   Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new
street construction;



   5.   Purchase and installation of traffic signalization (including
new and upgraded signalization);



   6.   Construction of curbs, medians, and shoulders; and



   7.   Relocating utilities to accommodate new street construction.



   "Collector street" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
16.44.050 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Developer" means any person who undertakes a land development project
within the city.



   "Development permit" means a regulatory approval of a land development
project by the city, including but not limited to a building permit,
subdivision map, parcel map, conditional use permit or planned development
permit, as those terms are defined in the Municipal Code.



   "Expansion" of the capacity of a road applies to all street and
intersection capacity enhancements and includes but is not limited to
extensions, widening, intersection improvements, upgrading signalization, and
expansion of bridges or culverts.



   "Feepayer" means a developer who is required to pay the transportation
impact with the issuance of a building permit or permit for mobile home
installation.



   "Freeway" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 16.44.050
of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Land development project" means any land division, building,
construction, reconstruction or remodeling project that results in new
improvement to real property and requires the obtaining of development
permits from the city.



   "Land use categories" means the specific list of land uses shown in a
fee schedule developed under the authority of this chapter that generate
vehicle trips and were used to project future vehicle trips for the
calculation of the transportation impact fee.



   "Level of service" shall have the same meaning as set forth in the
Highway Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual (latest Edition, as amended).



   "Major arterial" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
16.44.050 of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Nexus study" means the report titled "Traffic Impact Fee Update Nexus
Study City of Visalia," dated November 13, 2008, and any amendment or
modification of such report that may be accepted by resolution of the City
Council in a manner consistent with the requirements (including the required
findings) contained in the Mitigation Fee Act (California Government Code
section 66000 et seq.).



   "Planned transportation facilities" means that portion of the
arterial/collector street system that is established in the adopted
circulation element of the general plan of the city and is included for
funding in the calculation of the transportation impact fee in the nexus
study.



   "Site-related improvements" means street and related improvements and
right-of-way dedications for direct access improvements to and/or within the
land development project in question. Site related improvements include, but
are not limited to the following: (1) street improvements consisting of, or
the equivalent of, a parking lane with curb and gutter along the
arterial/collector street frontages of the land development project; (2)
local streets leading to the land development project; driveways and streets
within the land development project; (4) acceleration and deceleration lanes,
and right and left rum lanes leading to those streets and driveways; (5)
traffic control measures for those streets and driveways; and (6) utility
relocations.



   "Supplemental improvements" means planned transportation facilities or
master planned facility improvements imposed upon a development project that
are neither: (1) located within the frontage area of the project being
developed; nor (2) site related improvements.



   "Street" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 16.44.050
of the Visalia Municipal Code.



   "Trip" means a single or one (1) direction vehicle movement with either
the origin or destination (exiting or entering) inside the study site.



   "Trip ends" means the total of all trips entering plus all trips
leaving a designated land use or building type over a period of time.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-01, 2013: Ord. 2008-14, 2008)



16.44.060   Imposition of transportation impact fee.



   A.   Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks
to commence a land development project within the city by applying for: a
building permit; an extension of a building permit issued prior to that date;
a permit for mobile home installation; or an extension of a permit for mobile
home installation issued prior to that date, to make an improvement to land
that will generate additional traffic is required to pay a transportation
impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter.



   B.   No new building permit or new permit for mobile home
installation for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to
Section 16.44.070 shall be issued unless and until the transportation impact
fee required has been paid.



   C.   No extension of a building permit or permit for mobile home
installation issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, for any
activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to Section 16.44.070
shall be granted unless and until the transportation impact fee required has
been  paid.  This section shall not apply if the applicant applying for an
extension of a building permit or permit for mobile home installation can
demonstrate that a good faith effort has been applied to begin construction
or that substantial completion has occurred in conformance with the approved
building permit or permit for mobile home installation.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9490)



16.44.070   Fee schedule.



   A.   The council shall establish by resolution, a schedule of
transportation impact fees calculated to provide the sum of money necessary
to fund the portion of the total cost of the planned transportation
facilities allocated to new development, as set forth in the nexus study. The
resolution adopting such schedule shall be approved following at least one
public hearing in conformity with the provisions of state law and this
chapter, shall be based on the nexus study, and shall include the following
findings by the council:



   1.   That the planned transportation facilities are in conformity
with the circulation element of the general plan of the city;



   2.   That the development of property will require construction or
acquisition of planned transportation facilities and that the fees are fairly
apportioned on the basis of benefits conferred on property developed or to be
developed or on the need for planned transportation facilities created by
proposed or existing development of property;



   3.   That transportation facilities are in addition to any existing
transportation facilities serving the city at the time of adoption of the
circulation element of the general plan are necessary to complete the planned
transportation facilities.



   B.   The schedule of fees adopted pursuant to subsection A above
shall remain in effect until revised pursuant to the following process and
criteria:



   1.   On April 1st of each year the city engineer shall review the
current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the
cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco, CA. When the average of such indices
differs from the average of the indices for the preceding April 1st, the
factor of increase or decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees. Such
factor shall be computed by dividing the average ENRCCl for the current April
1st by that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual
transportation impact fee rates may be multiplied by the factor to determine
the adjusted schedule of fees. The city engineer shall present the new fee
schedule for adoption by resolution of council after at least one public
hearing.  The city engineer shall also apply such factor to the schedule of
reimbursement unit rates as established pursuant to Section 16.44.150. 
Modifications of the fee rates and reimbursement unit rates as called for by
this division shall be considered programmed adjustments, provided that such
adjustments are addressed by the nexus study then in effect or the resolution
approving such nexus study, and therefore shall not require a new, amended or
revised nexus study.



   2.   In the event of a future amendment of the circulation element
that has the effect of adding or removing new planned transportation
facilities, the city engineer shall review the nexus study and if such review
concludes that the costs of the planned transportation facilities
attributable to new development is changed as a result of the addition or
removal, the city engineer shall modify, amend or revise the nexus study, as
may be appropriate.  The city engineer shall present such modification,
amendment or revision to the council together with a revised schedule of
transportation impact fees, for approval by resolution in a manner that is
consistent with this chapter.



   3.   If in the determination of the city engineer the adjustment of
the schedule of fees produced by the procedure in subdivision (1) of this
subsection is not representative of the actual change in costs of the planned
transportation facilities, the city engineer may, in lieu of the procedures
set forth in said paragraph, compute a new schedule of fees by initiating a
modification, amendment or revision of the nexus study, as may be
appropriate, and presenting such new schedule of fees together with such
modified, amended or revised nexus study for adoption by resolution of the
council after at least one public hearing.



   4.   In the event of the adoption of a new schedule of fees by
resolution of the council, such new schedule shall become effective sixty
(60) days after the adoption thereof by the council. The adjustment of such
schedule provided in subdivision 1. of this division shall begin the April
1st next occurring after adoption of the new schedule.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: Ord. 9719 § 2, 1997)



16.44.080   Computation of the amount of transportation impact fee.



   A.   The feepayer shall pay the amount of the transportation impact
fee as determined from the schedule of fees established pursuant to Section
16.44.070.



   1.   If a building permit is requested for a structure or structures
that will feature two or more different and separable uses, the fee shall be
determined by apportioning the space committed to the respective different
and separable uses and applying the appropriate land use category for each
such apportioned space. Where a building permit is requested for a structure
that will feature two or more distinguishable uses but such uses are not
separable, the city engineer shall determine which use is the predominant use
and shall apply the land use category appropriate for such predominant use to
the entire building area of the project.



   2.   If a building permit is requested for a restaurant or retail
use that includes outdoor space intended for permanent use in conjunction
with the indoor portion of the restaurant or retail use, then the outdoor
space will be included in overall building size as a restaurant or retail
space, as the case may be, in the determination of the fee.



   3.   If a shell building permit is requested for a planned retail,
office or industrial use tenant, then the fee will be determined at the
lowest fee rate for the applicable land use shown in the schedule of fees. If
necessary, additional fees will be determined at the time that a tenant
improvement permit is requested if the land use is higher than that used for
the shell building permit.



   4.   For applications for an extension of a building permit or an
extension of a permit for mobile home installation, the amount of the fee is
the difference between that fee then applicable and any amount already paid
pursuant to this chapter.



   5.   If the land use category for a development project that a
building permit is applied for is not clearly specified on the applicable fee
schedule, the city engineer shall use the fee applicable to the most nearly
comparable type of land use category on the fee schedule. The city engineer
shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the report titled
"Trip Generation" (latest edition) prepared by Institute of Transportation
Engineers. If the city engineer determines that there is no comparable type
of land use category on the applicable fee schedule, then the city engineer
shall determine the fee by:



   a.   Considering comparable traffic generation statistics for
similar types of land use categories contained in the report titled "Trip
Generation" (latest edition) prepared by Institute of Transportation
Engineers; or



   b.   If no appropriate land use category can be determined through
subparagraph a., allowing the feepayer to submit an independent trip
generation study prepared in accordance with the requirements of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers. The study shall be prepared and
presented by professionals qualified in their respective fields. The city
engineer shall consider the study, but is not required to accept the study as
he/she shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the
alternative, require an amended study for consideration. If an acceptable
independent trip generation study is not presented, the feepayer shall pay
transportation impact fees based upon the city engineer's determination in
subsection (3)(a) of this section. If an acceptable independent trip
generation study is presented, the city engineer shall determine the fee
level by applying the number of trips indicated in the independent trip
generation study to the fee rate calculation formula as contained in the
nexus study.



   6.   In the case of change of use, redevelopment or expansion or
modification of an existing use that requires the issuance of a building
permit or permit for mobile home installation, the transportation impact fee
shall be based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee for the new
use as compared to the previous use. The city engineer shall be guided in
this determination by traffic generation statistics contained in a report
titled "Trip Generation" (latest edition) prepared by Institute of
Transportation Engineers.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008:
prior code § 9500)



16.44.090   Payment of fee.



   The feepayer shall pay the transportation impact fee required by this
ordinance to the city engineer or his designee prior to the issuance of a
building permit or a permit for mobile home installation.  All funds
collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit
in the transportation impact fee fund as determined in Section 16.44.110 and
used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9505)



16.44.100   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 16.44.090, the City
Council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 16.44.090.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection (A) of this
section, the City Council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this chapter will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this chapter will not
materially affect the ability of the city to deliver its five-year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in A. of this section,
the City Council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid;
provided, that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first;



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies;



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit. If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the feepayer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designee and the city attorney;



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred, on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee
by the point in time specified in such resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay such deferred fees by the
point in time specified in such resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which such party has a financial
interest.



   D.   Companies classified within the following Standard Industrial
Codes shall be able to pay their development impact fees over five years
without interest or administrative fee. The first installment of twenty (20)
percent shall be due upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in five
equal annual installments thereafter and shall be collected on the property
tax roll. The collection of the balance due on the property tax roll shall
not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000–2099   Food processing



   2200–3999   Certain other manufacturers



   4200–4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500–4599   Air transportation



   4700–5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: Ord. 9818 § 5, 1998)



16.44.110   Transportation impact fee trust fund established.



   A.   There is established a separate transportation impact fee trust
fund.



   B.   Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance
with the provisions of Section 16.44.120.  (Ord. 2017-01  (part), 2017:
Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9510)



16.44.120   Use of funds.



   A.   Funds collected from transportation impact fees shall be used
for the purpose of capital improvements to and expansion of planned
transportation facilities as designated by the city and any other
transportation projects related to growth that may be determined from time to
time by the City Council.



   B.   No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance.



   C.   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued
for advance provision of planned transportation facilities for which
transportation impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay
debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the
facilities provided are of the type described in division A. of this section.



   D.   At least once each fiscal year, the city engineer shall present
to the City Council a proposed capital improvement program for planned
transportation facilities, assigning funds, including any accrued interest,
from the transportation impact fee to specific road improvement projects and
related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any
fiscal year shall be retained in the transportation impact fee fund until the
next fiscal year except as provided by the refund provisions of this chapter.



   E.   Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section
16.44.130.



   F.   The city shall be entitled to retain not more than five percent
of the funds collected as compensation for the expense of collecting the fee
and administering this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01  (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14,
2008; prior code § 9515)



16.44.130   Refund of fees paid.



   If a building permit or permit for mobile home installation expires
without commencement of construction, then the feepayer shall be entitled to
a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition of its
issuance; except, that the city shall retain five percent of the fee to
offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The feepayer must
submit an application for such refund to the city engineer within thirty (30)
days of the expiration of the permit.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9520)



16.44.140   Fee exemptions and reductions.



   A.   The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee:



   1.   Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no
additional units are created, where the use is not changed, and where no
additional vehicular trips will be produced over and above those produced by
the existing use.



   2.   The construction of accessory buildings or structures that will
not produce additional vehicular trips over and above those produced by the
principal building or use of the land.



   3.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building
or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use
provided that no additional trips will be produced over and above those
produced by the original use of the land.



   4.   The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other
such site when a transportation impact fee for such mobile home site has
previously been paid pursuant to this chapter or where a mobile home legally
existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of this chapter.



   5.   Any claim of exemption must be made in writing and agreed to by
the city prior to the issuance of the applicable building permit or permit
for mobile home installation. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.



   B.   Where a fee is otherwise payable pursuant to this chapter, a
feepayer may apply for a reduction of the fee to recognize an existing or
previous use on the subject real property.  A reduction for existing or
previous use shall be provided where an existing structure or structures with
clearly established uses will be demolished in conjunction with a land
development project, or a structure or structures have been demolished on the
subject property within twenty (20) years of a land development project and
where there is clear documentation of the previous existence and use.  No
reduction pursuant to this subsection shall result in a reduction of the fee
to less than zero.  No reduction pursuant to this subsection may be
transferable to other projects on other properties. The feepayer is
responsible for submitting all documentation required by the city for
consideration of an existing or previous use fee reduction.  Any request for
an existing or previous use reduction must be made in writing and the amount
determined by the city prior to the issuance of the applicable building
permit or permit for mobile home installation.  The amount of reduction
shall be determined by the city engineer and shall be based on the amount fee
that would be payable by the previous use with reference to the fee schedule
in existence at the time of the new building permit.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9525)



16.44.150   Reimbursements for private construction of planned
transportation facilities.



   A.   It is the intent of the city that, whenever practicable,
planned transportation facilities be constructed, and related right of way be
dedicated, by developers in conjunction with land development projects, and
that such construction and dedication be required as conditions of the
development permit related to such projects pursuant to and consistent with
the authority of various provisions the Municipal Code and statutes of the
State of California. It is also the intent of the city that a portion of the
cost for such construction and dedication of the planned transportation
facilities and related right of way be reimbursed by the city, and that such
reimbursements be among the assumptions made by the nexus study in
establishing the fee schedule to be adopted pursuant to this chapter.
Consistent with this intent, developers who are required to construct planned
transportation facilities and make right-of-way dedications are entitled to
reimbursement for all such facilities, except that a developer shall not be
reimbursed for the cost of site related improvements as defined in this
chapter or for the value of right of way associated with site related
improvements.



   B.   The city engineer is authorized to create and maintain a
reimbursement policy manual setting forth the manner in which this section
shall be implemented. Such reimbursement policy manual shall be consistent
with the provisions of this section and with the assumptions and
methodologies contained in the nexus study.



   C.   As may be more fully described in the reimbursement policy
manual, reimbursements for planned transportation facilities shall be made on
the basis of unit costs and right-of-way values as established by the
schedules of costs and land values as contained in the nexus study and that
serve as the basis for that study, as adjusted from time to time pursuant to
this chapter, and shall not be made based on actual construction or land
costs or market values.



   D.   No reimbursement shall be made except as provided in a written
reimbursement agreement between the city and the developer entered into prior
to commencement of construction of the subject planned transportation
facilities. Among other things, such agreements shall provide for the
following:



   1.   The reimbursement agreement shall set forth the agreed to unit
costs and right of way values.



   2.   The reimbursement agreement shall set forth the timing and
manner of reimbursement payments.



   3.   The reimbursement agreement shall distinguish planned
transportation improvements that are deemed to be supplemental improvements.



   4.   Reimbursement for all non-supplemental improvements shall be
made, to the greatest extent possible, in the form of credits against
transportation impact fees payable by the subject development, as estimated
at the time of entering into the reimbursement agreement. Credits shall not
be used to reimburse for supplemental improvements unless with the consent of
the developer.



   5.   Reimbursements shall be made in the form of cash payments only
to the extent that the total amount of reimbursement exceeds the total amount
of credits available to the subject development, or to the extent necessary
to reimburse for supplemental improvements. Cash reimbursement, if necessary,
shall be paid as funds are available in the Planned Transportation Fee Fund
as maintained by the city, and if at any time, more than one (1) developer is
owed cash reimbursement, payment shall be to those owed on a first-in-time
priority basis, based on the date of the Notice of Completion of the
improvements identified in the reimbursement agreement; provided, however,
that cash reimbursement obligations associated with supplemental improvements
shall be made within two (2) years from the Notice of Completion of said
improvements, and cash reimbursement obligations associated with
non-supplemental improvements shall be paid in full within ten (10) years
from the Notice of Completion of said improvements. Cash reimbursement rights
may be converted to fee credits, if available, at the option of the developer.



   6.   The reimbursement agreement shall require that the developer
apply for reimbursement pursuant to the agreement no later than four (4)
years after: (1) the construction of the public improvements, including
planned transportation facilities, for a land development project are
completed and accepted by the city or (2) the effective date of this
ordinance; whichever date is later. The developer shall waive the right of
reimbursement for construction costs payable under this section when the
reimbursement is not applied for within said four (4)-year limitation.



   E.   Reimbursement payments otherwise due to the developer will not
be made until all of the following requirements are met:



   1.   Construction of the public improvements, including planned
transportation facilities, for the land development project are completed and
accepted by the city; and



   2.   A reimbursement request is submitted to the city per the
requirements of the city's reimbursement policy manual; and



   3.   Thirty (30) days have passed since acceptance by the city to
ensure that no claims of nonpayment have been filed with the city by any
contractor or subcontractor; and



   4.   Any further requirements of the city's reimbursement policy
manual have been met.



   F.   No interest shall be paid by the city on any outstanding
reimbursement amount set forth in a reimbursement agreement, except that the
reimbursement agreement shall stipulate the city pay interest for
supplemental improvements equal to the Local Agency Investment Fund interest
rate at the time the reimbursement agreement is executed.



   G.   If the city enters into a reimbursement agreement authorized by
this section, the agreement shall provide that:



   1.   The general fund of the city is not liable for payment of any
obligations arising from the agreement;



   2.   The credit of the city is pledged for the payment of any
obligations arising from the agreement solely from dedicated transportation
funds;



   3.    The landowner shall not compel the exercise of the city taxing
power or the forfeiture of any of its property to satisfy any obligations
arising from the agreement; and



   4.   The obligation arising from the agreement is a debt of the
city, payable from income, receipts, or revenues from the transportation
impact fee trust fund and other dedicated transportation funds.



   H.   At a minimum, the city shall devote twenty-five percent (25%)
of the collected annual transportation impact fee revenue to satisfy
developer reimbursements.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2013-01, 2013:
Ord. 2008-14, 2008)



16.44.160   Exceptions.



   A.   The City Council may, from time to time, authorize exceptions
to the payment of the transportation impact fee required by this Chapter.



   B.   If the City Council determines to authorize exceptions pursuant
to subsection (A) of this section, the City Council shall adopt a resolution
to that effect which shall:



   1.   State the findings made to support the decision to authorize
exceptions to the payment of the transportation impact fee required by this
chapter;



   2.   Determine which land use categories (residential, commercial,
office or industrial) to which they will authorize exceptions to the payment
of the transportation impact fee required by Section 16.44.090;



   3.   Determine the percentage of the transportation impact fee for
each land use category to which they will authorize exceptions to the payment
of the transportation impact fee required by Section 16.44.090;



   4.   Make a budget appropriation in the general fund, or such other
discretionary fund, of a dollar amount equal to the estimated revenues that
would have been collected had the City Council determined not to authorize
exceptions to the payment of the transportation impact fee required by
Section 16.44.090;



   5.   Set a date upon which the resolution expires.  In any event,
the resolution shall expire at the end of the then current fiscal year.



   C.   Upon the issuance of a building permit for a land use category
that has been determined to be excepted from the payment of the
transportation impact fee pursuant to this section, the finance director
shall transfer from the general fund, or such other discretionary fund as
deemed appropriate by the City Council, to the transportation impact fee fund
an amount equal to the excepted portion of the transportation impact fee.



   D.   The City Council may, by the adoption of a resolution, amend
any exceptions or approvals granted pursuant to any resolution adopted
consistent with subsection (B) of this section.



   E.   It is the intent of this section to provide the City Council
with a tool to promote the economic development of the city, while at the
same time insuring sufficient revenue in the transportation impact fee fund
to fund the projects that have been identified as a result of growth and
development in the community. It is not the intent of this section to exempt
the feepayer from having to construct or pay for site-related improvements. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9530)



16.44.170   Appeal process.



   Determinations made by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter may
be appealed by filing a written request to the city manager within fourteen
(14) days of the city engineer's decision. The city manager will consider the
written appeal and issue a final decision.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2008-14, 2008)



16.44.180    Penalty provisions.



   A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and upon conviction, the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any
criminal prosecution the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2008-14, 2008: prior code § 9535)



16.44.190   Severability.



   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-14, 2008:
prior code § 9540)



Chapter 16.46
PUBLIC SAFETY IMPACT FEES



Sections:



16.46.010   Intent and purposes.



16.46.020   Definitions.



16.46.030   Fees and application.



16.46.040   Fees schedule and computation of fee.



16.46.050   Imposition and timing of fees.



16.46.060   Disposition and use of fees.



16.46.070   Refunds.



16.46.080   Credits.



16.46.090   Protest.



16.46.100   Exemptions.



16.46.010   Intent and purposes.



   This chapter is intended to assist in the implementation of the
policies of the general plan by providing for adequate public facilities to
support orderly development. Further, the purpose of this chapter is to
regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development
bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
provide for public facilities that serve such development.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Capital improvement program" means the long-range schedule of proposed
projects with their estimated costs and sources of funds over a five (5) year
period, adopted in the 2000-2002 year bi-annual budget.



   "Fire protection and police facilities" means equipment and facilities
needed to maintain adequate levels of service while accommodating the needs
of future development, as identified in the Public Safety Impact Fee Study
conducted by DMG-MAXIMUS dated April 26, 2001, and subsequent Capital
Improvement Program.



   "Gross acreage" means the area of a parcel of land, or the area of a
proposed division, including those portions designated for streets and alleys
and including those portions of all abutting streets and alleys measured to
the center lines thereof or to a line parallel with and thirty (30) feet from
the property line, whichever shall be the lesser. In the case of a
single-family residential use occupying a corner parcel, the area of the
street abutting the shortest side of such parcel, or one side in the case of
a square parcel, shall not be included.



   "Impact fee" means a monetary exaction imposed by the city pursuant to
this chapter as a condition of or in conjunction with approval of a
development project for the purpose of defraying all or some of the city's
cost or repaying costs previously expended from other city funds for capital
improvements.



   "Impose" means to determine that a particular development project is
subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development
approval.



   "New development" or "development project" means any new building,
structure or improvement of any parcels of land, upon which no like building,
structure or improvement previously existed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.030   Fees and application.



   A.   This chapter establishes development impact fees that are
imposed as a condition of approval upon all new development projects for
which a building permit is issued on or after the effective date of this
chapter. Those impact fees are hereby established for the following public
utilities.



   1.   Fire protection facilities;



   2.   Police facilities.



   B.   These impact fees are established in order to pay for the
capital costs of fire protection and police facilities reasonably related to
the needs of new development in the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.040   Fees schedule and computation of fee.



   A.   The City Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of
per gross acre fee, to be imposed on new development, calculated to provide
the sum of money necessary to pay the estimated total capital costs of fire
protection and police facilities, as identified in the April 26, 2001, fee
study approved by council, to serve new development within the urban growth
boundary. The amount of the fee shall be determined by resolution adopted by
the City Council and shall be based on the capital cost per acre by general
plan land use designation and shall include the cost of the study amortized
over a five (5) year period. Following adoption of a fee schedule or a
subsequent revised fee schedule, such fee shall become effective sixty (60)
days after the adoption thereof by the City Council.



   B.   Annual review of the fee schedule will be made in the following
manner. Each April of each year the chief financial officer shall review the
current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the
cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco, California. When the average of such
indices differs from the average of the indices for the preceding April 1st,
the factor of increase or decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees.
Such factor shall be computed by dividing the average ENRCCI for the current
April 1st by that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual fire
protection impact fee and police facilities impact fee rates may be
multiplied by said factor to determine the adjusted schedule of fees. The
chief financial officer shall present the new fee schedule for adoption by
resolution of council after at least one public hearing.



   C.   At least once every five (5) years, the council shall review
the basis for the impact fees to determine whether the fees are still
reasonably related to the needs of new development. If it is necessary to
update the previously approved fee study to do so, council may amortize the
cost of doing so over the following five (5) year period and include such
cost as an element of the impact fee.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.050   Imposition and timing of fees.



   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, and any amendment to this
chapter, the city may impose impact fees as a condition of approval of all
new development projects.



   B.   After an individualized determination that each fee has been
calculated as provided in this chapter, the impact fees shall be imposed
prior to any development permit for new development.



   C.   The development impact fee shall be collected at the time and
as a condition for issuance of a building permit, except as otherwise
provided in Government Code Section 66007 or as provided herein.



   D.   The payment of fire protection impact fees and police
facilities impact fees may be deferred until final inspection. In no case
shall a certificate of occupancy be issued without the payment of the above
referenced impact fee.



   E.   Companies classified within the following standard industrial
codes shall be able to pay the fire protection impact fees and police
facilities impact fees over a period of five (5) years without interest or
administrative fee. The first installment of twenty (20) percent shall be due
upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in five (5) equal annual
installments thereafter and will be collected on the property tax roll. The
collection of the balance on the property tax roll shall not preclude the
earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000–2099   Food processing



   2200–3999   Certain other manufacturers



   4200–4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500–4599   Air transportation



   4700–5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



   F.   A penalty equal to the amount of one hundred (100) percent of
the amount of the fees deferred shall be imposed on any party who fails to
pay such deferred fees by the point of time the fee is due. Further, said
party will have forfeited the right to defer such fees on parcels in which
said party has a financial interest.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.060   Disposition and use of fees.



   The chief financial officer shall establish a separate account for each
type of facility listed in Section 16.46.020A. All impact fees collected by
the city shall be deposited in the account established for the specific type
of facility for which the fee is collected. Any interest earned on funds
deposited in a fund or account shall be deposited in that fund or account.
Funds deposited in those accounts shall be used only to pay for facilities
resulting from new development within the urban growth boundary, as
identified in the resolution adopted by City Council setting the rate of the
fee.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.070   Refunds.



   If impact fees collected by the city have not been expended or
designated for the intended purpose within five (5) years following their
collection, the city shall either refund those fees as provided in Government
Code Section 66001, or make the findings as required by said section to
retain the fees.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.080   Credits.



   A.   A property owner who dedicates land or otherwise contributes
funds for the capital costs of fire protection and police facilities
identified herein may be eligible for a credit for such contribution against
the impact fee otherwise due.



   B.   The chief financial officer shall determine: (1) the value of
the developer contribution; (2) whether the contribution meets capital
improvement needs for which the particular impact fee has been imposed; and
(3) whether the contribution will substitute or otherwise reduce the need for
capital improvements anticipated to be provided with impact fee funds. In no
event, however, shall the credit exceed the amount of the otherwise
applicable impact fee.



   C.   Any application for credit must be submitted on forms provided
by the city before development project approval. The application shall
contain a declaration under oath of those facts which qualify the property
owner for the credit, accompanied by the relevant documentary evidence. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



16.46.090   Protest.



   Any party subject to the fees established by this chapter may protest
the imposition of those fees by meeting all of the following requirements:



   A.   Tendering any required payment in full or providing
satisfactory evidence of arrangements to ensure performance of the conditions
necessary to meet the requirements of the imposition of the fee.



   B.   Serving written notice of protest on the City Council which
notice shall contain all of the following information:



   1.   A statement that the required payment is tendered under protest.



   2.   A statement informing the City Council of the factual elements
of the dispute and the legal theory forming the basis for the protest.



   C.   Serving the written notice of protest no later than ninety (90)
days after the date of the imposition of the fee.



   The City Council shall consider that protest at a hearing to be held
within sixty (60) days after the filing of the protest. The decision of the
City Council shall be final.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2
(part), 2001)



16.46.100   Exemptions.



   The fees imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   A.   Remodeling or alteration of an existing dwelling or building.



   B.   Additions to an existing dwelling or building that does not
cause the site upon which the dwelling or building is situated to be
expanded.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-11 § 2 (part), 2001)



Chapter 16.48
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MITIGATION



Sections:



16.48.010   Legislative findings.



16.48.020   Purpose.



16.48.030   Short title, authority and applicability.



16.48.040   Rules of construction.



16.48.050   Definitions.



16.48.060   Imposition of environmental impact mitigation—School
overcrowding—Fee.



16.48.070   Fee schedule.



16.48.080   Computation of the amount of environmental impact
mitigation—School     overcrowding—Fee.



16.48.090   Payment of fee.



16.48.100   Timing of fee payment.



16.48.110   Use of funds.



16.48.120   Refund of fees paid.



16.48.130   Exemption and credits.



16.48.140   Penalty provisions.



16.48.150   Sunset clause.



16.48.160   Severability.



16.48.010   Legislative findings.



   The City Council of the city finds, determines and declares that:



   A.   Policy PSCU-P-34 of the General Plan requires the city work
with the Visalia Unified School District to coordinate land use and
development with school location and site design to ensure that adequate
facilities are available and integrated with neighborhoods;



   B.   The school district has presented information to the city
establishing that existing school facilities are overcrowded and that further
growth and development in the city will have a significant adverse impact o
the capacity of the school system;



   C.   The school district has presented information to the city that
the fee, charge, dedication or other requirement the district is authorized
to levy against a development project pursuant to Government Code Sections
53080 and 65995 is insufficient to adequately fund the construction of new
school facilities to meet the needs of growth in the community;



   D.   The school district has presented information to the city that
it does not have the financial or other resources available to fund new
school facilities;



   E.   While it is also the State of California's responsibility to
fund the construction of new school facilities to meet the needs of growth,
the state has not provided the financial or other resources necessary to meet
the growing demand for new school facilities;



   F.   Pursuant to Education Code Section 17718.5(a) the State Board
of Education is to encourage school districts to utilize alternative methods
to fund school facilities;



   G.   Education Code Section 17717.7 encourages the use of
alternative funding sources by creating a six-tiered priority list for
qualifying for state funding that effectively encourages school districts to
request only a maximum of fifty (50) percent of total construction costs;



   H.   The school district must expand its classroom facilities in
order to meet the needs of a growing community without decreasing the current
level of education in order to promote and protect the public health, safety
and welfare.



   I.   The imposition of an environmental impact mitigation fee is a
preferred method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share
of the cost of capital facilities necessary to accommodate the student
population generated by such development and thereby promotes and protect the
public health, safety and welfare.



   J.   The fees established by Section 16.48.070 are derived from, are
based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional school
facilities necessitated by new development for which the fees are levied.



   K.   The report entitled "Environmental Impact Mitigation – School
Overcrowding – Fee Justification Report", dated May 18, 1992, sets forth a
reasonable methodology and analysis for determination of the impact on new
development on the need for and cost of additional school facilities within
the school district;



   L.   The adoption of this chapter is consistent with the General
Plan of the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.020   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to assess environmental impact
mitigation fees against all new residential construction, and all remodels
adding additional area to existing residential buildings, all consistent with
definitions found in state law, to mitigate the impacts of said construction
on the ability of the Visalia Unified School District to house new students
resulting from new development in the city. Furthermore:



   A.   This chapter is intended to assist in the implementation of the
land use element of the General Plan; and



   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and
development of land so as to assure that new development bears a
proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide
school facilities in the Visalia Unified School District.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



16.48.030   Short title, authority and applicability.



   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Visalia Environmental Impact Mitigation – School Overcrowding – Fee
Ordinance."



   B.   The City Council of the city has the authority to adopt this
chapter pursuant to Article XI of Section 7 of the Constitution of the state
of California, and pursuant to Government Code Sections 65300 et seq., 66000
et seq., and 66470 et. seq. and Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.
of California Statutes, and its Charter.



   C.   This chapter shall apply in the incorporated area of the city
to the extent permitted by Article XI of Section 7 of the Constitution of the
state of California.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.040   Rules of construction.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so
as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare.



   B.   For the purpose of administration and enforcement of this
chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of
construction shall apply to the text of this chapter:



   1.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.



   2.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.



   3.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the single, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   4.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"maintained for," or "occupied for."



   5.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.



   6.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the con-junction
shall be interpreted as follows:



   a.   "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.



   b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.



   c.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.



   7.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific
example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of little kind or character.



   8.   "City engineer" means the city engineer or city officials
he/she may designate to carry out the administration of this chapter.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.050   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Assessable space" means the same as in Government Code Section
65995(b)(1).



   "Building permit" means an official document or certificate issued by
the city authorizing the construction of any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.



   "City" means the city of Visalia, a Charter Law city.



   "Development permit" means a regulatory approval by the city.



   "District" means the Visalia Unified School District.



   "Feepayer" means a person commencing a land development activity that
requires the issuance of a building permit or permit for mobile home
installation.



   "School development impact fee" means a fee, charge, dedication or
other requirement the district is authorized to levy against a development
project pursuant to Government Code Section 53080 and as said fee may be
adjusted from time-to-time by the state Allocation Board pursuant to
Government Code Section 65995(b)(2).  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.060   Imposition of environmental impact mitigation—School
overcrowding—Fee.



   A.   Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, seeks
to develop land within the city by applying for:  a building permit; an
extension of a building permit issued prior to that date; a permit for
manufactured home installations; or an extension of a permit for manufactured
home installation issued prior to that date, is required to pay an
environmental impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fee in the manner
set forth in this chapter.



   B.   No new building permit or new permit for manufactured home
installation for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to
Section 16.48.060(A) shall be issued unless and until the environmental
impact mitigation – school over-crowding – fee required has been paid.



   C.   No extension of a building permit or permit for manufactured
home installation issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, for any
activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to Section 16.48.060(A)
shall be granted unless and until the environmental impact mitigation –
school overcrowding – fee required has been paid. This subsection shall not
apply if the applicant applying for an extension of a building permit or
permit for manufactured home installation can demonstrate that a good faith
effort has been applied to begin construction or that substantial completion
has occurred in conformance with the approved building permit or permit for
manufactured home installation.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.070   Fee schedule.



   A.   The council shall establish by resolution, a schedule of
environmental impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fees calculated
to provide the sum of money necessary to pay for the share of the new
facilities estimated total construction cost identified to be funded with
environmental impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fees, as set
forth in the report entitled "Environmental Impact Mitigation – School
Overcrowding – Fee Justification Report". Such schedule shall be
conditional and based on the following findings by the council:



   1.   The planned school facilities are in conformity with the land
use element of the general plan of the city;



   2.   The development of property will require construction or
acquisition of additional school facilities and that the fees are fairly
apportioned on the basis of benefit conferred on property developed or to be
developed or on the need for planned school facilities created by proposed or
existing development of property;



   3.   That school facilities planned, including the conversion of
additional elementary schools to year-round education, are in addition to any
existing school facilities serving the district at the time of adoption of
the land use element and are necessary to complete the plan for school
facilities.



   B.   The schedule of fees shall be those amounts in effect on July
1, 1995 as established by Resolution No. 92-76 of the council and as adjusted
pursuant to ordinance provisions adopted prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section and shall remain in effect until July 1,
1997. Effective July 1, 1997, and each succeeding July 1st thereafter, the
schedule of fees shall be adjusted in accordance with the following criteria:



   1.   On April 1st of each year the city engineer shall review the
current National Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI).
When such index differs from the index for the preceding April 1st, the
factor of increase or decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees. Such
factor shall be computed by dividing the ENRCCI for the current April 1st by
that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual environmental
impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fees may be multiplied by said
factor to determine the adjusted schedule of fees. The engineer shall present
the new fee schedule for adoption by resolution of council after at least one
public hearing. The revised fees shall become effective on the July 1st
following except in no case shall the revised fees become effective until
sixty (60) days following the publication of the revised fees.



   2.   If in the determination of the city engineer the adjustments of
the schedule of fees produced by the procedure in subdivision 1 of this
subsection is not representative of the actual change in costs of the planned
school facilities, the city engineer may, in lieu of the procedures set forth
in said subdivision, compute a new schedule of fees for adoption by
resolution of the council after at least one public hearing. In addition, the
district may request that the City Council review the fees to ensure that
they are representative of the actual change in costs of the planned school
facilities.



   3.   In the event of the adoption of a new schedule of fees by
resolution of the council, such new schedule shall become effective sixty
(60) days after the adoption thereof by the council. The adjustment of such
schedule provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall begin the April
1st next occurring after adoption of the new schedule.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9610 § 8, 1996)



16.48.080   Computation of the amount of environmental impact
mitigation—School overcrowding —Fee.



   A.   The environmental impact mitigation—school overcrowding—fee
shall be equal to the difference between the fee established by the schedule
of fees adopted or revised pursuant to Section 16.48.070 and the school
development impact fee already assessed and collected by the district but in
no case shall this difference be considered a credit to the feepayer.



   B.   Government Code Section 6599(b)(3) requires the State
Allocation Board to review, at regular intervals, the school development
impact fees. If within one hundred eighty (180) days of any action by the
State Allocation Board to modify the school development impact fee either
upward or downward, the district does not adjust the school development
impact fee already assessed and collected by the district to reflect the
action of the State Allocation Board, the city shall use the amount
authorized by the State Allocation Board in its calculations to determine the
amount of the environmental impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fee.



   C.   For new residential construction the fee paid pursuant to this
chapter shall be equal to the product of the environmental impact mitigation
– school overcrowding –fee identified in subsection (A) of this section
and the assessable space for the building under consideration. For
residential remodel construction the criteria imposed by Government Code
Section 53080(a)(1) shall apply. For senior citizen housing, a residential
care facility, or a multilevel facility for the elderly, criteria imposed by
Government Code Section 65995.1 shall apply.



   D.   This chapter shall not apply to building permits issued for
commercial, office or industrial projects.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.090   Payment of fee.



   A.   The feepayer shall pay the environmental impact mitigation –
school overcrowding – fee required by this chapter prior to the issuance of
a building permit or a permit for mobile home installation. This fee paid
shall be in addition to and collected in the same manner as the school
development impact fee already assessed and collected by the district.



   B.   All funds collected shall be properly identified and used
solely for the purposes specified in Section 16.48.110.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



16.48.100   Timing of fee payment.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 16.48.090, the City
Council may, by resolution, authorize the payment of the fee at a time other
than that identified in Section 16.48.090.



   B.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection (A) of this
section the City Council shall make the following findings:



   1.   That the state of the economy in the city is such that the
deferment of the fee required by this chapter will stimulate the economy and
enhance the provision of jobs; and



   2.   That the deferment of the fee required by this chapter will not
materially affect the ability of the city to deliver its five-year capital
improvement program.



   C.   In adopting the resolution identified in subsection (A) of this
section, the City Council shall:



   1.   Identify the point in time at which the fee shall be paid;
provided, that in no event shall the deferral be extended beyond the time of
the final inspection or issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first;



   2.   Identify to which major land use category (i.e., residential,
commercial, office and/or industrial) the resolution applies;



   3.   Identify whether or not a contract shall be entered into by and
between the property owner, or lessee if the lessee's interest appears of
record, and the city prior to the issuance of the building permit. If a
contract is required to be executed, it shall be processed and recorded in
accordance with Government Code Section 66007(c). In lieu of entering into a
contract, if one is required, the feepayer may provide such other form of
surety instrument guaranteeing payment of the fee as may be acceptable to the
city engineer or his/her designees and the city attorney;



   4.   Impose a penalty, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the
amount of the fees deferred on any party who fails to pay the deferred fee by
the point in time specified in said resolution; and



   5.   Provide that a party who fails to pay said deferred fees by the
point in time specified in said resolution shall further forfeit the future
right to defer such fees on parcels in which said party has a financial
interest.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.110   Use of funds.



   A.   Funds collected from environmental impact mitigation – school
overcrowding – fees shall be used to fund or partially fund the
construction or reconstruction of school facilities to meet the needs of new
residential development in the district to include residential infill
projects and residential remodel projects that meet the criteria of Section
16.48.080(B). The use of these fees shall be in accordance with Government
Code Section 53080 et seq. and Government Code Section 65995 et seq.



   B.   Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Government
Code Section 53080.3. Refunds shall be processed in accordance with Section
16.48.120.



   C.   The city may retain a portion of the fee per building permit
issued for which the fee is paid as compensation for the expense of
collecting the fee and administering this chapter consistent with Government
Code Section 53080(a)(5). The City Council shall establish this amount by
resolution.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.120   Refund of fees paid.



   A.   If a building permit or permit for manufactured home
installation expires without commencement of construction, then the feepayer
shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the fee paid plus a
condition of its issuance; except, that the city and district shall retain
three percent of the fee, to be shared equally, to offset a portion of the
costs of collection and refund. The feepayer must submit an application for
such refund to the city engineer within thirty (30) days of the expiration of
the permit. Within ten working days of receipt of an application for refund
the city engineer shall notify the district in writing of such refund request
and the status of the building permit. The district shall issue a refund
within twenty (20) working days or issue written findings as to why the
refund shall not be made.



   B.   Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar
quarter immediately following five years from the date the fee was paid
shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such
landowner with any interest incurred thereon; provided, that the landowner
submits an application for a refund to the city engineer within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the expiration of the six-year period. Within ten
working days of receipt of an application for refund the city engineer shall
notify the district in writing of such refund request. The district shall
issue a refund within twenty (20) working days or issue written findings as
to why the refund shall not be made.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.130   Exemption and credits.



   A.   The following shall be exempted from payment of the
environmental impact mitigation – school overcrowding – fee. Any claim of
exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building
permit or permit for mobile home installation. Any claim not so made shall be
deemed waived.



   1.   The reconstruction of any residential structure that is damaged
or destroyed as a result of a disaster pursuant to Government Code Section
53080.6;



   2.   An applicant for a development permit who has prepared and
submitted a mitigation plan identifying how he/she plans to provide for the
mitigation of the impacts the proposed project may have on the facilities of
the district; provided that the district presents the city with a written
statement signed by its superintendent, or his/her designee, indicating that
the district accepts the mitigation plan. The phrase "mitigation plan" as
used in this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, financing or
construction measures that provides funds or structures (through purchase,
sale, or lease-back) for permanent school district facilities or any
modification to the proposed project that reduces or eliminates the impact on
the district.



   B.   The District may grant a credit for land and facilities
dedicated to the district consistent with the policies of the City's General
Plan. The responsibility for negotiating such a credit shall rest with the
district and the feepayer and any such credit granted shall not be considered
by the city unless and until a written statement signed by the
superintendent, or his/her designee, of the district indicating that the
district grants the credit. The responsibility for managing the accounting of
such credits shall rest with the district.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.140   Penalty provisions.



   A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and upon conviction the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any
criminal prosecution the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.150   Sunset clause.



   This chapter shall terminate one hundred eighty (180) days following
any action taken by the state of California to either eliminate the
provisions of Government Code Section 53080 et seq., or the elimination of
the caps on school development fees imposed by Government Code Section 65995
et seq.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



16.48.160   Severability.



   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



Chapter 16.50
GENERAL FACILITIES IMPACT FEES



Sections:



16.50.010   Intent and purposes.



16.50.020   Definitions.



16.50.030   Fees and application.



16.50.040   Fees schedule and computation of fee.



16.50.050   Imposition and timing of fees.



16.50.060   Disposition and use of fees.



16.50.070   Refunds.



16.50.080   Credits.



16.50.090   Protest.



16.50.100   Exemptions.



16.50.010   Intent and purposes.



   This chapter is intended to assist in the implementation of the
policies of the General Plan by providing for adequate general government
public facilities (excluding public safety facilities for which a separate
fee has been imposed per VMC Chapter 16.46) to support orderly development. 
Further, the purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and development
of land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of
the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide for public facilities
that serve such development.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04
(part), 2005)



16.50.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "General Government Facilities" means Civic Center and related parking
structure, Library Facilities, as well as Public Works Corporation Yard
Expansion Facilities identified in the Impact Fee Study conducted by MAXIMUS
dated October 8, 2004.



   "Gross acreage" means the area of a parcel of land, or the area of a
proposed division, including those portions designated for streets and alleys
and including those portions of all abutting streets and alley measured to
the center lines thereof or to a line parallel with and thirty (30) feet from
the property line, whichever shall be the lesser.  In the



case of a single-family residential use occupying a corner parcel, the area
of the street abutting the



shortest side of such parcel, or one side in the case of a square parcel,
shall not be included.



   "Impact fee" means a monetary exaction imposed by the city pursuant to
this chapter as a condition of or in conjunction with approval of a
development project for the purpose of defraying all or some of the city's
cost or repaying costs previously expended from other city funds for capital
improvements.



   "Impose" means to determine that a particular development project is
subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development
approval.



   "New development" or "development project" means any new building,
structure or improvement of any parcels of land, upon which no like building,
structure or improvement previously existed.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.030   Fees and application.



   A.   This chapter establishes development impact fees that are
imposed as a condition of approval upon all new development projects for
which a building permit is issued on or after the effective date of this
chapter.  Those impact fees are hereby established for the following public
facilities:



   1.   Civic Center and related parking structure;



   2.   Library Facilities; and



   3.   Public Works Corporation Yard Expansion.



   B.   These impact fees are established in order to pay for the
capital costs of General Governmental Facilities reasonably related to the
needs of new development in the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.040   Fees schedule and computation of fee.



   A.   The City Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of
fees to be imposed on new development, calculated to provide the sum of money
necessary to pay the estimated total capital costs of the General
Governmental Facilities, as identified in and in the manner prescribed by the
October 8, 2004 fee study approved by council, to serve new development
within the urban growth boundary.  Subsequent revised fee schedules shall
become effective sixty (60) days after the adoption thereof following a
Public Hearing before the City Council.



   B.   Annual review of the fee schedule initially adopted by
ordinance will be made in the following manner.  Each April of each year the
chief financial officer shall review the current Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the cities of Los Angeles and San
Francisco, California.  When the average of such indices differs from the
average of the indices for the preceding April 1st, the factor of increase or
decrease shall be applied to the schedule of fees.  Such factor shall be
computed by dividing the average ENRCCI for the current April 1st by that
pertaining to the previous April 1st. The individual General Governmental
Facilities impact fee rates may be multiplied by said factor to determine the
adjusted schedule of fees.  The chief financial officer shall present the
new fee schedule for adoption by resolution of council after at least one
public hearing.



   C.   If in the determination of the chief financial officer the
adjustment of the schedule of fees produced by the procedure in Subdivision
(B) above of this section is not representative of the actual change in costs
of the planned General Governmental Facilities, the chief financial officer
may, in lieu of such procedure compute a new schedule of fees calculated to
provide the sum of money necessary to pay the capital costs of the General
Governmental Facilities.



   D.   At least once every five (5) years, the council shall review
the basis for the impact fees to determine whether the fees are still
reasonably related to the needs of new development.  If it is necessary to
update the previously approved fee study to do so, council may amortize the
cost of doing so over the following five (5) year period and include such
cost as an element of the impact fee.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.050   Imposition and timing of fees.



   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, and any amendment to this
chapter, the city may impose impact fees as a condition of approval of all
new development projects.



   B.   After an individualized determination that each fee has been
calculated as provided in this



chapter, the impact fees shall be imposed prior to any development permit for
new development.



   C.   The development impact fee shall be collected at the time and
as a condition for issuance of a building permit, except as otherwise
provided in Government Code Section 66007 or as provided herein.



   D.   The payment of the impact fees may be deferred until final
inspection.  In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be issued without
the payment of the above referenced impact fee.



   E.   Companies classified within the following standard industrial
codes shall be able to pay the impact fees over a period of five (5) years
without interest or administrative fee.  The first installment of twenty
(20) percent shall be due upon occupancy and the balance shall be paid in
five (5) equal annual installments thereafter and will be collected on the
property tax roll.  The collection of the balance on the property tax roll
shall not preclude the earlier payment of any outstanding balance.



   2000–2099   Food Processing



   2200–3999   Certain other manufactures



   4200–4299   Trucking and warehousing



   4500–4599   Air transportation



   4700–5199   Transportation services and warehouse trade



   F.   A penalty equal to the amount of one hundred (100) percent of
the amount of the fees deferred shall be imposed on any party who fails to
pay such deferred fees by the point of time the fee is due.  Further, said
party will have forfeited the right to defer such fees on parcels in which
said party has a financial interest.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.060   Disposition and use of fees.



   The chief financial officer shall establish a separate account for each
type of facility listed in Section 16.50.030.  All impact fees collected by
the city shall be deposited in the account established for the specific type
of facility for which the fee is collected.  Any interest earned on funds
deposited in a fund or account shall be deposited in that fund or account. 
Funds deposited in those accounts shall be used only to pay for facilities
resulting from new development within the urban growth boundary, as
identified in the resolution adopted by City Council setting the rate of the
fee.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.070   Refunds.



   If impact fees collected by the city have not been expended or
designated for the intended purpose within five (5) years following their
collection, the city shall either refund those fees as provided in Government
Code Section 66001, or make the findings as required by said section to
retain the fees.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.080   Credits.



   A.   A property owner who dedicates land or otherwise contributes
funds for the capital costs of the facilities identified herein may be
eligible for a credit for such contribution against the impact fee otherwise
due.



   B.   The chief financial officer shall determine: (1) the value of
the developer contribution; (2) whether the contribution meets capital
improvement needs for which the particular impact fee has been imposed; and
(3) whether the contribution will substitute or otherwise reduce the need for
capital improvements anticipated to be provided with impact fee funds.  In
no event, however, shall the credit exceed the amount of the otherwise
applicable impact fee.



   C.   Any application for credit must be submitted on forms provided
by the city before development project approval.  The application shall
contain a declaration under oath of those facts that qualify the property
owner for the credit, accompanied by the relevant documentary evidence. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.090   Protest.



   Any party subject to the fees established by this chapter may protest
the imposition of those fees by complying with the protest provisions in the
Mitigation Fee Act (Gov. Code § 66000 et seq.) in effect at the time of the
protest.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



16.50.100   Exemptions.



   The fees imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   A.   Remodeling or alteration of an existing dwelling or building.



   B.   Additions to an existing dwelling or building that does not
cause the site upon which the dwelling or building is situated to be
expanded.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-04 (part), 2005)



Chapter 16.52
AREA OF BENEFIT



Sections:



16.52.010   Purpose and authority.



16.52.020   Findings required.



16.52.030   General.



16.52.040   Interest provision.



16.52.050   Separate funds.



16.52.060   Life of area of benefit.



16.52.070   Surplus distribution.



16.52.080   Credits.



16.52.090   Payment of fees required.



16.52.100   Exemptions.



16.52.110   Reimbursements.



16.52.120   Notice of hearing.



16.52.130   Hearing.



16.52.010   Purpose and authority.



   The purpose of this chapter is to make provision for assessing and
collecting fees as a condition of approval of a map, condition of development
approval, or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of
defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing the public
improvements pursuant to the city's authority to make and enforce all
ordinances and regulations with respect to municipal affairs under the
California Constitution, Article 11, Section 5 and Visalia Municipal Charter,
Article III, Sections 1 and 2.



   This chapter shall be the exclusive procedure for the establishment and
operation of areas of benefit in the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.020   Findings required.



   No area of benefit shall be established hereunder unless the City
Council finds that the construction of the public facilities or improvements
provided for by the area of benefit fees is required for subsequent
subdivisions and developments, and that the fees are fairly apportioned
within the area on either the basis of benefits conferred on property
proposed for development or subdivision, or on the need for such facilities
created by the proposed development and development of other property within
the area.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.030   General.



   A.   The City Council may by resolution adopt an area of benefit for
the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of public
improvements. An area of benefit may be used for the following purposes:



   1.   To reimburse a subdivider or developer who installs public or
public utility improvements that benefit property outside the subdivision or
development.



   2.   To reimburse the city or county that constructs public or
public utility improvements that benefit property.



   3.   To establish a fund for the future construction of a needed
public or public utility improvement.



   B.   Public or public utility improvements for which area of
benefits can be established are as follows:



   1.   curb, gutter and sidewalk



   2.   street structural sections



   3.   tree wells and sprinkler systems



   4.   fences



   5.   street lighting



   6.   street signs



   7.   traffic signals



   8.   storm drainage facilities



   9.   sanitary sewer facilities



   10.   water facilities



   11.   fire hydrants



   12.   storm drain and sanitary sewer pump stations



   13.   railroad crossings



   14.   bridges, culverts and major thoroughfares



   15.   fire stations



   16.   police substations



   C.   By resolution, the City Council shall establish the boundaries
of the area of benefit, the estimated or actual cost, a fair method of
allocation of costs, fee apportionment, and the applicable fee to be paid.
The cost shall include design, construction, inspection, acquisition of land
or easements, contingencies, and incidental expenses.



   D.   The area of benefit fees shall include a city administrative
charge of ten percent of the total cost.



   Where used in this chapter, the phrase "subdivider or developer" shall
also mean "city or county" as used in Subsection A above.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.040   Interest provision.



   A.   Interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance of the area of
benefit fee and the area of benefit fee shall be adjusted accordingly. The
interest rate shall be equal to the local agency invest fund (LAIF) rate in
effect at the time the resolution approving the area of benefit fee is
adopted and shall be so indicated in the resolution. The interest shall begin
to accrue from the time the notice of completion is filed with the county
recorder for the improvements covered by the area of benefit fee. The amount
of the accumulated interest shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the
principal amount of the area of benefit fee.



   B.   The revised area of benefit fee shall equal the adjusted cost
plus a city administrative fee of ten percent of the adjusted cost.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.050   Separate funds.



   A.   Area of benefit fees less the ten percent city administrative
charge shall be deposited in separate funds. Moneys in such funds shall be
expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the
public improvements serving the area to be benefited.



   B.   The funds shall also accrue interest.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.060   Life of area of benefit.



   Fees collected twenty (20) years after the date the area of benefit is
formed shall be retained by the city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710
§ 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.070   Surplus distribution.



   A.   After completion of the public improvements and payment of all
claims from any area of benefit, the City Council may determine by resolution
the amount of the surplus, if any, remaining in any of those funds.



   B.   There shall be transferred to the general fund any remaining
portion of the surplus that has not been paid to or claimed by the persons
entitled thereto within two years from the date of either the completion of
the improvements, or the adoption by the resolution declaring a surplus,
whichever is later to occur.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1
(part), 1997)



16.52.080   Credits.



   A.   Where the city has established an area of benefit for the
future construction of a needed public improvement, a subdivision or
development will be credited for any portion of the improvement installed by
the subdivider or developer.



   B.   Whenever the area of benefit fees exceed the credits, the
subdivider or developer shall pay to the city the balance. Whenever the
credits exceed the area of benefit fees, the city will reimburse the
subdivider or developer from subsequent payments.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.090   Payment of fees required.



   A.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit or the filing of any
final or parcel map, the subdivider or developer shall pay all area of
benefit fees.



   B.   The fees shall be paid for the entire area included within the
map, including developed parcels.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 §
1 (part), 1997)



16.52.100   Exemptions.



   Payment of the area of benefit fees shall not be required for:



   A.   The following accessory buildings and structures: Private
garages, children's playhouse, radio and television receiving antennas,
windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings that
are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings.



   B.   The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or
the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or
both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, the total value, as
determined by the building division of the community development department,
of all such alteration, enlargement or construction does not exceed, in the
aggregate, twenty-five (25) percent of the current market value, as
determined by the building division of all existing buildings on such lot or
parcel of land, and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such
as to change its classification or occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the
Uniform Building Code.



   Additional exemption(s) from the payment of the area of benefit fee may
be obtained so long as the total accumulated value of all such alterations,
enlargements or construction does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the
then current market value, as determined above, of all existing buildings on
such lot or parcel of land at the time the first such exemption is
obtained.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.110   Reimbursements.



   A subdivider or developer who installs public improvements that benefit
property outside the subdivision or development is eligible for
reimbursement. An area of benefit will be established to reimburse the
subdivider or developer a proportionate share of the cost. The subdivider or
developer will be reimbursed from area of benefit payments from future
subdivisions and development. The amount of reimbursement shall equal the
area of benefit payments less the ten (10) percent city administrative charge.



   Reimbursements shall be payable to heirs, successors and assigns of the
subdivider or developer. Payment to more than one individual, corporation, or
partnership must be approved by the finance director.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.120   Notice of hearing.



   Prior to the adoption of a resolution creating an area of benefit under
this chapter the city shall:



   A.   At least ten (10) days prior to the date and time set for the
hearing before the City Council, give a notice by first class mail, to the
addresses as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of Tulare County,
to the owners of all property proposed for inclusion in the area of benefit.



   B.   Publish in a newspaper pursuant to Government Code Section
6062a, as the same may be amended from time to time, notice of the date, time
and location set for such hearing.



   C.   Include in such notice to property owners as required under
subsection A or B above a statement of the nature of the improvement to be
constructed under the area of benefit, the actual or estimated costs of the
project and the proposed boundaries of the area of the benefit.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



16.52.130   Hearing.



   The hearing on such proposed areas of benefit shall take place before
the City Council, at which time all interested parties shall be heard. The
Council shall establish the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs,
whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the
area of benefit and fee apportionment.



   Following establishment of an area of benefit pursuant to this part,
the city shall cause said resolution to be recorded with the Tulare County
Recorder, that shall then bind and run with the land included therein. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9710 § 1 (part), 1997)



Chapter 16.54 GROUNDWATER OVERDRAFT MITIGATION



Sections:



16.54.010   Legislative findings.



16.54.020   Purpose.



16.54.030   Short title, authority and applicability.



16.54.040   Rules of construction.



16.54.050   Imposition of groundwater mitigation fee on new development.



16.54.060   Imposition of groundwater impact fee on providers of municipal
water supplies, that include all residential, commercial and industrial water
suppliers.



16.54.070   Computation of the amount of the fee.



16.54.080   Use of funds.



16.54.090   Refund of fees paid.



16.54.100   Modification of the fee.



16.54.110   Penalty.



16.54.120   Severability.



16.54.010   Legislative findings.



   The City Council finds, determines and declares that:



   A.   Local water resources are among the most precious resources of
the city and surrounding area.



   B.   Management of the water resources serving the residents of the
city is critical to the long-term health, welfare and safety of the citizens
of the city.



   C.   The city's primary water supply is from underground water
resources, which are being depleted by groundwater extraction in excess of
groundwater replenishment ("groundwater overdraft").



   D.   Conversion of land from agricultural to urban uses increases
the local groundwater overdraft and has the potential to seriously deplete
available groundwater resources over time.



   E.   Provision of municipal water supplies by private water
companies and utilities contributes substantially to the continuing
groundwater overdraft.



   F.   The impact of existing and proposed development on groundwater
overdraft has been determined through a technical study prepared for the city
by the consulting engineering firm of Provost & Pritchard, which study has
been reviewed and considered by the City Council prior to adoption of this
chapter.  The technical analysis provides the basis for the fees established
by this chapter.



   G.   California Constitution, Article XI, Section 7, California
Public Utilities Code Sections 6203 and 6294, Article III and XIV of the City
Charter and objective 2.4 and policies 2.4.1 and 2.4.2 of the city's General
Plan authorize the city to enact this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.020   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to assess impact fees upon new
development and a volumetric fee upon existing urban water supplies to fund
programs to mitigate the impact of such new development and existing water
extractions upon conditions of groundwater overdraft.  Specifically, this
chapter is intended to fund activities and projects to mitigate impacts to
conditions of groundwater overdraft.  Such activities will include, but not
be limited to, the following:



   A.   Acquisition of surface water rights and surface water supplies.



   B.   Development of groundwater recharge facilities.



   C.   Reconfiguration of stormwater facilities designed to retain as
much stormwater as possible within and near the city.



   D.   Enhancement of cooperative programs with local water management
agencies and companies.



   E.   Development of more efficient water delivery systems.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.030   Short title, authority and applicability.



   A.   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of
Visalia Water Resource Management and Groundwater Overdraft Mitigation Fee
Ordinance."



   B.   The City Council has the authority to adopt this chapter
pursuant California Constitution, Article XI, Section 7, California Public
Utilities Code Sections 6203 and 6294, Article III and XIV of the City
Charter and objective 2.4 and policies 2.4.1 and 2.4.2 of the city's General
Plan.



   C.   This chapter shall apply in the incorporated area of the city
to the extent permitted by Article XI of Section 7 of the Constitution of the
State of California.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part),
2005: prior code § 9554)



16.54.040   Rules of construction.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so
as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare.



   B.   For the purpose of administration and enforcement of this
chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of
construction shall apply to the text of this chapter:



   1.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or
illustrative table, the text shall control.



   2.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the
word "may" is permissive.



   3.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the single, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   4.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.



   5.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:



   a.   "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.



   b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.



   c.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.



   6.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific
example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or
circumstances of little kind or character.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.050   Imposition of groundwater mitigation fee on new development.



   A.   Any person seeking to annex, subdivide or otherwise procure
entitlement to develop property within the city, shall be required to pay the
fee specified below.



   1.   The initial fee shall be $950 per acre of land to be developed.



   2.   The obligation to pay the fee shall be made a condition of
annexation or approval of a tentative subdivision map or other entitlement
for development.



   3.   The fee required by this chapter shall be paid as a condition
of final map approval or other final discretionary development approval. 
The fee paid shall be in addition to all other impact fees paid prior to
issuance of a building permit.



   B.   In lieu of payment of the fee specified in A. above, and with
concurrence of the city, any person seeking to annex, subdivide or otherwise
procure entitlement to develop property within the city may dedicate water
rights to the city.  The city, in its sole discretion, shall determine
whether such dedication equals in value the amount of the fee otherwise
applicable pursuant to A. above.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09
§ 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.060   Imposition of groundwater impact fee on providers of municipal
water supplies, which include all residential, commercial and industrial
water suppliers.



   A.   Effective January 1, 2006, all municipal water suppliers
providing water service in the city shall pay a groundwater impact mitigation
fee of fourteen (14) dollars  per acre foot of water pumped to provide such
service.



   B.   The fee shall be paid within sixty (60) days of the end of each
month.  The payment shall be accompanied by a report of the volume of water
pumped from each well utilized to provide water service within the city. 
Fees not paid within thirty (30) days shall be subject to late fees and
interest consistent with the city's standard practice.



   C.   All municipal water suppliers shall maintain records of all
pumping for the purpose of supplying water within the city.  Such records
shall identify the volume of water pumped from each well utilized to provide
water service within the city.  Such records shall be subject to inspection
by the city during normal business hours after providing five working days
notice of intent to inspect such records.



   D.   In lieu of payment of the fee specified in Subsection A. above,
and with concurrence of the city, a municipal water supplier may dedicate
water rights to the city.  The city, in its sole discretion, shall determine
whether such dedication equals in value the amount of the fee otherwise
applicable pursuant to Subsection A. above.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.070   Computation of the amount of the fee.



   The fees established by Sections 16.54.050 and 16.54.060 were
determined by evaluating the impact of development on existing conditions of
groundwater overdraft and calculating the cost of the water and facilities
necessary to mitigate such impact. A technical study was prepared by a
qualified consulting engineering company of all of the data available to make
such determination.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part),
2005)



16.54.080   Use of funds.



   All funds collected shall be used exclusively for the purposes
specified in Section 16.54.020.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 §
2 (part), 2005)



16.54.090   Refund of fees paid.



   If a building permit or permit for manufactured home installation
expires without commencement of construction, then the feepayer shall be
entitled to a refund, without interest, of the fee paid plus a condition of
its issuance; except, that the city shall retain three (3) percent of the fee
to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The feepayer must
submit an application for such refund to the city within 30 days of the
expiration of the permit. Within twenty (20) working days of receipt of an
application for refund the city shall issue a refund or issue written
findings as to why the refund shall not be made.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.100   Modification of the fee.



   The City Council may modify the fees established in Sections 16.54.050
and 16.54.060 annually by resolution if the assumptions utilized in
calculating the fees have changed.  The modifications adopted by resolution
will not be based on a change in the method of calculating the fees.  Absent
action by the City Council to modify the fees by resolution, each April of
each year the chief financial officer shall review the current Engineering
News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the cities of Los Angeles
and San Francisco, California.  When the average of such indices differs
from the average of the indices for the preceding April first, the factor of
increase or decrease shall be applied to the fees established in Sections
16.54.050 and 16.54.060.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2
(part), 2005)



16.54.110   Penalty.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
misdemeanors are prosecuted and upon conviction the violator shall be
punishable according to law; however, in addition to or in lieu of any
criminal prosecution the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2005-09 § 2 (part), 2005)



16.54.120   Severability.



   If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2005-09 § 2
(part), 2005)



Title 17
ZONING



Chapters:



17.02   General Provisions



17.04   Definitions



17.06   Zone Classifications



17.08   Agricultural Zone



17.10   Open Space Zone



17.12   Single-Family Residential Zone



17.14   [Reserved]



17.16   Multi-Family Residential Zones



17.18   Commercial Zones



17.19   Mixed Use Zones



17.20   Office Zones



17.22   Industrial Zones



17.24   Business Research Park Zone



17.25   Commercial, Mixed Use, Office, and Industrial Zones Use Matrix



17.26   Planned Development



17.28   Site Plan Review Permit



17.30   Development Standards



17.32   Special Provisions



17.34   Off-Street Parking and Loading Facilities



17.36   Fences, Walls and Hedges



17.38   Conditional Use Permits



17.40   Nonconforming Uses and Structures



17.42   Variances and Exceptions



17.44   Zoning Amendments



17.46   Administration and Enforcement



17.48   Signs



17.50   Airport Zoning



17.52   Quasi-Public Zone



17.54   General Plan Amendments



17.56   Historic Preservation District



17.58   Downtown Retail District



17.60   Development Agreements



17.62   Adult-Oriented Businesses



17.63   Micro-Brewery/Micro-Winery Overlay District



17.64   Mobile Food Vending



Chapter 17.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



Article 1. General Provisions



17.02.010   Adoption.



17.02.020   Purpose.



17.02.030   Components.



17.02.040   Application and interpretation.



17.02.050   Ambiguity.



17.02.060   Permitted uses only.



17.02.070   Height limits.



17.02.080   Open space—Encroachment.



17.02.090   Open space—Other buildings.



17.02.100   Addition of permitted/conditional uses.



17.02.110   Similar uses permitted or conditional.



17.02.120   Use of nonconforming site.



17.02.130   Yard requirements—Measurement.



17.02.140   Coverage—Measurement.



17.02.145   Appeal to city council.



Article 2. Administrative Adjustments



17.02.150   Purpose.



17.02.160   Scope of authority.



17.02.170   Adjustment criteria.



17.02.180   Report to planning commission.



Article 1. General Provisions



17.02.010   Adoption.



   There is adopted, as provided herein, a zoning ordinance for the city
of Visalia, state of California, said ordinance being a precise and detailed
plan for the use of land of said city.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7200)



17.02.020   Purpose.



   This title is enacted to preserve and promote the public health, safety
and welfare of the city, and of the public generally and to facilitate growth
and expansion of the municipality in a precise and orderly manner. More
specifically, the zoning ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the
following objectives:



   A.   Foster a workable relationship among land uses;



   B.   Promote the stability of existing land uses that conform to the
district in which they occur;



   C.   Ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for
purposes that are appropriate and most beneficial for the city;



   D.   Prevent excessive population densities;



   E.   Avoid a concentration of structures adjoining each other or
juxtaposed too closely together in close proximity to each other;



   F.   Promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system;



   G.   Require adequate off-street parking and truck loading
facilities;



   H.   Facilitate the appropriate location of community facilities and
institutions;



   I.   Coordinate land use policies and regulations of the city in
order to facilitate the transition of land areas from county to municipal
jurisdiction and to protect agricultural producers in areas planned for urban
expansion;



   J.   Implement the goals, policies and map of the general plan. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7201)



17.02.030   Components.



   This title shall consist of a zoning map and it will determine
districts, control land uses, restrain population densities, specify uses and
locations of structures, designate appropriate landscaping of certain
structural uses, determine areas and dimensions of sites, provide for
off-street parking and loading facilities, and prescribe other regulations in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7202)



17.02.040   Application and interpretation.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title
shall be held to be minimum requirements. This title shall apply to all
property whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations or
organizations; by the United States of America or any of its agencies; by the
state of California or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any
city or county, including the city or any of its agencies; or by any
authority or district organized under the laws of the state of California,
all subject to the following exceptions:



   A.   Public streets and alleys;



   B.   Underground utility lines and facilities;



   C.   Underground communications lines;



   D.   Overhead communications lines;



   E.   Overhead electric distribution lines, not including
transmission and distribution substations;



   F.   Railroad rights-of-way;



   G.   Transmission lines.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:  prior code
§ 7203)



17.02.050   Ambiguity.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to other provisions of
this title, if ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of
a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, or with respect
to height, yard requirements, area requirements or zone boundaries, as set
forth herein and as they may pertain to unforeseen circumstances, including
technological changes in processing of materials, it shall be the duty of the
planning commission to ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution, set
forth its findings and interpretations, and thereafter such interpretations
shall govern unless appealed to the city council pursuant to section
17.02.145.  Upon review, such interpretation may be approved, disapproved or
modified by the city council.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2010-02 §
2, 2010: Ord. 2006-18 § 4, 2007: prior code § 7204)



17.02.060   Permitted uses only.



   No structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or enlarged, nor
shall any site or structure be used, designated or intended for use other
than the uses hereinafter listed as permitted or conditional in the zone in
which such structure, land or premises is located.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7205)



17.02.070   Height limits.



   No structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zones in which such
structure is located.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7206)



17.02.080   Open space—Encroachment.



   No structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing structure be
altered, enlarged, rebuilt or moved into any zone, nor shall any open space
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the
yard, site area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for
the zone in which such structure or open space is located.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7207)



17.02.090   Open space—Other buildings.



   No yard or other open space provided about any structure for the
purpose of complying with provisions of this title shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other structure, and no yard or other
open space on one site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for a structure on any other site.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:  prior code
§ 7208)



17.02.100   Addition of permitted/conditional uses.



   A.   Upon application or on its own initiative, the city planning
commission may add to the list of permitted or conditional uses, if the
commission makes the following findings:



   1.   That any addition to the list of permitted or conditional uses
will be in accordance with the purposes of the zone in which the use is
proposed;



   2.   That the use will be an appropriate addition to the list of
permitted or conditional uses because the use has the same basic
characteristics as the uses permitted in the zone;



   3.   That the use will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare;



   4.   That the use will not adversely affect the character of zone in
which it is to be permitted;



   5.   That the use will not create more odor, dust, dirt, smoke,
noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or be more objectionable
than the uses permitted in the zone;



   6.   That the use will not create any greater hazard of fire or
explosion than the hazards normally associated with the uses permitted in the
zone;



   7.   That the use is within conformance with the purpose, intent and
policies of the general plan.



   B.   Additions may be made to the list of permitted or conditional
uses by resolution of the planning commission, subject to ratification by the
city council. The planning commission and city council may, at their
discretion, hold a public hearing on a proposed addition.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7209)



17.02.110   Similar uses permitted or conditional.



   A.   When a use is not specifically listed in the zoning ordinance
and does not appear to be covered by a general category, the city planner may
make the finding that the use is permitted or allowed subject to the granting
of a conditional use permit if the use is similar in nature and intensity to
other uses listed.



   B.   It is further recognized that every conceivable use cannot be
identified in this title, and anticipating that new uses will evolve over
time, this establishes the city planner's authority to compare a proposed use
and measure it against those listed in this title that are similar in nature
and intensity in order to make a determination that the use is "similar" and
may be permitted or allowed subject to the granting of a conditional use
permit.



   C.   In determining "similarity" the city planner shall make all of
the following findings:



   1.   The proposed use shall meet the intent of and be consistent
with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan;



   2.   The proposed use shall meet the stated purpose and general
intent of the zone in which the use is proposed to be located;



   3.   The proposed use shall not adversely impact the public health,
safety and general welfare of the city's residents; and



   4.   The proposed use shall share characteristics common with, and
not be of greater intensity, density or generate more environmental impact,
than those uses listed in the land use zone in which it is to be located. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code §
7209.1)



17.02.120   Use of nonconforming site.



   Except as otherwise provided in this title a site having an area,
frontage, width or depth less than the minimum prescribed for the zone in
which the site is located, as depicted on a duly approved and recorded
subdivision map, or a site for which a deed or valid contract of sale was
recorded prior to the adoption of this title, and that had a legal area,
frontage, width and depth at the time that the subdivision map, deed or
contract of sale was recorded, such sites may be used for any permitted use,
but shall be subject to all other regulations for the zone in which the site
is located.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7210)



17.02.130   Yard requirements—Measurement.



   A.   Required yards shall be measured as the minimum horizontal
distance from the property line of the site or street line to a line parallel
on the site; provided, that where a precise street plan has been adopted by
the city council, required yards shall be measured from the plan line, and no
provision of this title shall be construed to permit a structure or use to
extend beyond such line; and provided further, that where a site abuts on a
street having only a portion of its required width dedicated or reserved for
street purposes, required yards shall be measured from a line drawn on the
boundary of the additional width required for street purposes abutting the
site.



   B.   On a site that is not rectangular or approximately rectangular
in shape, required yards shall be measured in the manner prescribed by the
city planner in accordance with adopted codes and ordinances.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30, 1996: prior code § 7211)



17.02.140   Coverage—Measurement.



   Percentage of a site area covered by structures shall be measured by
dividing the number of square feet of horizontal area covered by structures,
open or enclosed, by the total horizontal area within the property line of
the site.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7212)



17.02.145   Appeal to city council.



   Where the planning commission is authorized to make any decision
pursuant to the provisions of Title 17 of the Visalia Municipal Code and that
decision is to be subject to appeal to the city council, the following
procedure shall apply.



   A.   The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may,
upon payment of an appeal fee as may be established by resolution of the
Council, appeal any decision, determination or requirement of the planning
commission by filing a notice thereof in writing with the city clerk, setting
forth in detail the action and the grounds upon which the appeal is based
within ten (10) days after the action that is the subject of the appeal. Such
notice shall state specifically where it is claimed there was an error or
abuse of discretion by the planning commission.



   B.   Upon the filing of an appeal, the city council shall set the
matter for hearing. Such hearings shall be held within thirty (30) days after
the date of filing the appeal or receipt of council member requests. The city
clerk shall give notice of the hearing according to the procedure required
for the initial action by the Planning Commission, except that the timing of
such notice shall be not less than 10 days before the hearing.



   C.   In holding the hearing on the matter, the Council may receive
any and all information pertinent to the matter, regardless of whether such
information was first presented to the planning commission.  In the case of
decisions by the planning commission that followed a public hearing, the city
council shall hold a new public hearing on the matter.  Upon the close of
the hearing, the Council shall vote to either confirm the decision of the
planning commission, overturn the decision, or confirm the decision with
modifications, and the Council may continue the item to the next meeting if
necessary to direct staff to prepare a conforming resolution with findings,
which shall be considered by the Council at the next scheduled Council
meeting.  In the case of a tie vote, the planning commission decision shall
stand, and shall be considered final as of the date of the Council vote. 
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-18 § 3, 2007)



Article 2. Administrative Adjustments



17.02.150   Purpose.



   The purpose of an administrative adjustment is to provide action on
projects that are routine in nature but may require an interpretation of
established policies and standards set forth in the zoning ordinance. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7213.1)



17.02.160   Scope of authority.



   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.42, the city
planner or his/her designee shall have the authority to grant administrative
adjustments to development standards contained within this title.



   B.   Upon written request, the city planner may approve,
conditionally approve or deny without notice minor adjustments to the
following development standards; building and landscaping setbacks, site
area, lot width, building height, parking.



   C.   Any administrative adjustment shall be limited to no more than
twenty percent of a required development standard. In making the adjustment,
the city planner shall make a finding that the adjustment is consistent with
the criteria listed in Section 17.02.170. With respect to adjustments to
building setbacks and building height, the adjustment shall also be approved
by the fire chief and  chief building official or his/her designee prior to
granting said administrative adjustment. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2011-09 §§ 3, 4, 2011: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7213.2)



17.02.170   Adjustment criteria.



   The city planner shall record the decision in writing and shall recite
therein the basis for same.  The city planner may approve and/or modify an
application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all the
following criteria are met:



   A.   That there are special circumstances applicable to the
property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings,
creating a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship;



   B.   That granting of the administrative adjustment is necessary to
provide consistency with properties in the same vicinity and land use
designation or development standards  within which the administrative
adjustment is sought;



   C.   That granting the administrative adjustment will not be
materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious
to the property or improvements in such vicinity and land use designation or
development standards in which the property is located;



   D.   That granting the administrative adjustment will not be
inconsistent with the goals and policies of the general plan. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30, 1996: prior code § 7213.3)



17.02.180   Report to planning commission.



   No later than January 31st, the city planner shall report to the
planning commission a summary of the administrative adjustment applications
that have been processed and approved during the proceeding calendar year.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code §
7213.4)



Chapter 17.04
DEFINITIONS



Sections:



17.04.010   General.



17.04.020   Commissions and officials.



17.04.030   Definitions.



17.04.010   General.



   Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall
be used in the interpretation and construction of this title, and words used
in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include
the word "structure" and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7218)



17.04.020   Commissions and officials.



   The words "city planning commission" and "commission" mean the planning
commission duly appointed by the city council. The words "city planner" mean
the city planner of the city and any succeeding position title whose function
is primarily the same. The words "city engineer" mean the city engineer of
the city and any succeeding position title whose function is primarily the
same. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code §
7219)



17.04.030   Definitions.



   The definitions set forth in this chapter shall apply to this title.



   "Affordable housing" means, under state and federal statutes, housing
that costs no more than thirty (30) percent of gross household income.
Housing costs include rent or mortgage payments, utilities, taxes, insurance,
homeowner association fees, and other related costs.



   "Alley" means a public way reserved as a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting property that is twenty-four (24) feet in width or less.



   "Alter" means to do work that does not result in enlarging a building
but that will prolong the life of the structure.



   "Auction House" means an establishment where the real or personal
property of others is sold by a broker or auctioneer to persons who attend
scheduled sales or events.



   "Bail Bonds" means a facility that provides bail bonds, documents that
ensure to the court system that a person facing charges, and who typically is
in jail, will appear for future court appointments if released.



   "Boarding/Rooming house" means a dwelling in which lodging and meals
are provided for compensation for more than three but not more than fifteen
(15) persons not including members of the principal occupant's immediate
family. Nursing homes as defined in this section are specifically not
included.



   "Block" means the properties abutting on one side of street and lying
between intersections or between an intersection and the end of a street.



   "Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels or
property.



   "Check Cashing Facility" means a person or business that for
compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks,
payday advances, warrants, drafts, money orders or other commercial paper
serving the same purpose. "Check cashing facility" does not include a State
or Federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union or industrial
loan company. "Check cashing facility" does not include a retail seller
engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including
consumables, to retail buyers that cash checks or issue money order for
minimum flat fee as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or
business.



   "Communications equipment building" means building housing electrical
and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public communications
business with or without personnel. This definition does not apply to
wireless telecommunication facilities and ancillary structures, and
associated buildings, equipment, poles, towers, and lattice structures.



   "Convalescent Home." See nursing home.



   "Craft distillery" means an establishment that produces distilled
spirits in quantities totaling less than 100,000 gallons per year that are
served on site and/or sold for off-site consumption.  Service and sale of
distilled spirits must be in conjunction with the regulations of the Alcohol
Beverage Control (ABC) and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF).
Service of brewed beverages may be conducted with or without the service of
food.  Micro-distillery, boutique-style distillery, and artisan distillery
are included in this definition.



   "Dwelling" means a structure or portion thereof designed for or
occupied for residential purposes excluding automobiles, trailers, hotels,
motels, labor camps, tents, railroad cars, converted transit vehicles or any
type of temporary structure.



   "Dwelling, multi-family" means a structure containing more than one
dwelling unit, designed for occupancy or occupied by more than one family.



   "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms with cooking facilities
designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.



   "Dwelling unit, accessory" means an attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one
or more persons.  It shall include permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as the
single-family dwelling situated.



   "Emergency shelter" means a facility that provides shelter to homeless
families and/or homeless individuals on a limited short-term basis.



   "Family" means:



   1.   Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption
[U.S. Bureau of the Census]; or



   2.   An individual or a group of persons living together who
constitute a bona fide single-family housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit,
not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons
occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution of any kind [California].



   "Farm employee housing" means living quarters, including dwellings with
sleeping accommodations and dining facilities, maintained for occupancy by
persons employed principally in farming and related pursuits on land owned,
leased or rented by the owner, lessee, or tenant of the site on which the
farm employee housing is located; excepting a labor camp or trailer park.



   "Farmer's market" means two or more farm-producers that sell their own
agricultural products directly to the general public at a fixed location,
which includes fruits and vegetables, meat, fish, poultry, dairy products,
and grains.



   "Fast food restaurant" means an establishment that offers quick food
service for consumption on or off the premises. Orders are not generally
taken at the customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable
wrapping or containers.



   "Fast food restaurant with drive-through" means an establishment that
offers/delivers prepared food and/or beverages to customers in motor
vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also serves prepared food and/or
beverages for consumption either on or off the premises.



   "Floor area, gross" means the total horizontal area in square feet of
the several floors of a structure, including interior balconies, mezzanines,
carports, and basements, but not including the area of the inner courts.



   "Frontage, primary" means that portion of a parcel that is adjacent to
the public right-of-way. For a corner lot, the frontage with the smallest
dimension shall be considered as the primary frontage.  There shall be only
one primary frontage per parcel.



   "Frontage, secondary" means on a corner lot, that portion of a parcel
that is adjacent to a public right-of-way that is not the primary frontage.



   "Garage" or "carport" means an accessory structure or a portion of a
main structure, having a permanent roof, and designed for the storage of
motor vehicles.



   "Garage, front-loading" means a garage or carport whose entry
door/opening is facing the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located.



   "Garage, repair" means a structure or a part thereof where motor
vehicles are repaired or painted.



   "Garage, side-loading" means a garage or carport whose entry
door/opening is facing a side lot line of the lot upon which it is located.



   "Garage, storage" means a structure or part thereof used for the
storage, parking or servicing of motor vehicles, but not for the repair
thereof.



   "Gasoline service" means an operation that dispenses gasoline and motor
fuel in conjunction with a companion permitted use or a self-service
operation.



   "Guest house" means living quarters within an accessory structure for
use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises having no cooking
facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



   "Home occupation" means any conduct of pecuniary gain by an art or
profession; the offering of a service or conduct of a business, or handicraft
manufacture of products within or from a dwelling in a residential zone that
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for a
dwelling purpose and that does not change the character of the residential
use.



   "Hotel" or "motel" means a structure or portion thereof or a group of
attached or detached structures containing individual guest rooms, suites,
and/or meeting rooms (not to exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500)
square feet in area), for the accommodation of transient occupants, provided
that not more than fifty (50) percent of the guest units have kitchen
facilities.



   "Hospital, general" means a facility staffed and equipped to provide
various types of intensified hospital care including, but not limited to,
short- term care in acute medical, surgical and obstetrical services.



   "Hospital, specialized" means a hospital, sanitarium, rest, nursing, or
convalescent hospital care including, but not limited to, short-term care in
acute psychiatric, drug addiction, or alcoholism cases or other specific
illnesses.



   "Household hazardous waste collection center" means city and county
operated household hazardous waste collection center, a facility operated by
the city and county for the collection, sorting, packing, storage and
shipment of small quantities (less than five gallons or fifty (50) pounds per
delivery) of hazardous wastes generated in the home. Such a facility would be
operated with a state approved operating plan and would require approval of
the city fire marshal. The facility would serve to implement the household
hazardous waste recommendations of the approved Tulare County hazardous waste
management plan. Such a facility would occupy an area of not more than five
hundred (500) square feet, and would not use power driven processing
equipment. The facility must be located over five hundred (500) feet from
existing residential uses. Waste materials collected would include, but not
be limited to: pesticides, cleaners and polishes, oil-based paints, hobby
supplies and other household items considered hazardous as a result of
flammability, corrosiveness, toxicity or reactivity. Items such as used motor
oil and lead-acid batteries would be collected for recycling.



   "Household pets" means animals or birds ordinarily permitted in a
dwelling and kept only for the company or pleasure provided to the occupants.
Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep, other equine,
bovine, ovine or ruminant animals, pigs, predatory wild animals, chickens,
ducks, geese, turkeys, pigeons (except as provided in Section 17.32), game
birds, fowl that normally constitute an agricultural use, poisonous reptiles,
and bees. Rodents and rabbits shall not exceed four per property.



   "Junk yard" means a site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded
or salvaged materials are bought, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment
yards, used lumber yards and the like; excepting a site on which such uses
are conducted within a completely enclosed structure and excepting vehicle
wrecking yards as defined in this section. An establishment for the sale,
purchase or storage of used cars or salvaged machinery in operable condition
and the processing of used or salvaged materials as part of a manufacturing
operation shall not be deemed a junk yard.



   "Labor camp" means living quarters including dwellings, tents,
bunkhouses, railroad maintenance cars, trailer coaches, or other housing
accommodations, maintained in connection with any work or place where work is
being performed and the site on which they are located, and/or a site set
aside providing for camping of five or more employees by a labor contractor;
excepting farm employee housing as defined in this section.



   "Liquor store" means a retail establishment designed and operated for
the primary purpose of selling alcohol. Food stores and convenience markets
for which sales of food comprise the majority of gross sales, but also sell
alcohol, shall not be considered as a "liquor store."



   "Live Entertainment" means the performance by one (1) or more of any of
the following performed live with amplified sound by one (1) or more persons,
whether or not done for compensation and whether or not admission is charged:
(I) musical act, including karaoke; (ii) theatrical act, including a play,
revue, or stand-up comedy;(iii) dance;(iv) magic act;(v) disc jockey; or (vi)
similar activity.



   "Lodge" or "club" means an association of persons, whether incorporated
or unincorporated, for some common purpose, but not including groups
organized to render service carried on as a business.



   "Lot, corner" means a site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines
that have an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees.



   "Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot.



   "Lot, key" means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot
whether or not separated by an alley.



   "Lot, reversed corner" means a corner lot whose side street line is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.



   "Lot, through" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.



   "Lot line, front" means a line separating an interior lot from a
street, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot
from a street.



   "Lot line, rear" means the line opposite the front lot line.



   "Lot line, side" means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line
that intersects a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot
from a street is called a side street lot line.



   "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and
rear lot lines.



   "Market-rate housing" means housing that is available on the open
market without any subsidy. The price for housing is determined by the market
forces of supply and demand and varies by location.



   "Massage Therapy Establishment" means an establishment offering
massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar
treatment or manipulation of the human body by a Certified Massage Therapist.



   "Material" means any item that serves as crude or raw matter to be used
or developed in conjunction with business or use.



   "Medical buildings" means clinics or offices for doctors, dentists,
oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, or similar practitioners
of the healing arts; including accessory laboratories and a prescription
pharmacy, but not including offices for veterinarians.



   "Mobile home" means a structure exceeding eight feet in width and forty
(40) feet in length, having a chassis and designed to be movable, with
kitchen, bathroom, and living facilities, designed for use as a single-family
dwelling unit when connected to appropriate utility lines, and has no
foundation other than wheels or temporary stabilizing units.



   "Mobile home park" means any parcel, or contiguous parcels of land
under single ownership designed or intended to be used to accommodate mobile
homes on permanent or semi-permanent bases regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for such accommodations.



   "Mobile home site" means any portion of a mobile home park designated
for the occupancy of one mobile home and approved on-site structures in
connection with such occupancy.



   "Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van,
licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles that is used for the collection
of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes
or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the
collection of recyclable materials.



   "Nursery school" means the use of a site or portion of a site for
organized programs devoted to the education or day care of ten or more
pre-elementary school age children other than those resident on the site.



   "Nursing home" means a structure operating as a lodging house in which
nursing, dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescent,
invalids or aged persons not including persons suffering from contagious or
mental diseases, alcoholism or drug addiction, and in which surgery is not
performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals
and sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home shall be deemed a
nursing home.



   "Office" means a room or building where a particular kind of business
or service for others is transacted but not including infrequent or
occasional services rendered from a home.



   "Office, main" means the principal location of a business where
correspondence is directed, primary and current records are retained, and
where the majority of the business is transacted.



   "Office, temporary" means the secondary location of a business,
separate and subordinate to a main office, the use of which is incidental to
the main office and limited to short and specific periods of time.



   "Patient" means any person who is under medical observation, care or
treatment and shall include the following:



   "Patient, ambulatory" means a person who is capable of demonstrating
the physical ability and mental competence to leave the facility without the
assistance of any person in case of an emergency.



   "Patient, chronic or long-term" means a person with a prolonged
illness, injury or disease including mental illness or mental or behavior
disorder or other competent or incompetent person requiring an extended
period of medical care and treatment.



   "Patient, mentally retarded" means a person with a mental impairment
who requires nursing care, protective supervision, training, or other
services.



   "Patient, short-term" means a person who is under medical observation,
care or treatment of a short period of time and generally considered to be
ambulatory.



   "Planned neighborhood commercial center" means a facility to provide
for convenience shopping in the residential neighborhoods planned and
controlled to the extent that any such areas will provide the vital services
to the neighborhood in which it is located.



   "Porte Cochere" means a roofed structure extending from the entrance of
a building over an adjacent driveway to shelter those entering or exiting a
vehicle, or a passageway through a structure designed to let vehicles pass
from the street to an interior courtyard.



   "Public utility service yard" means an area for the storage of public
utility vehicles and material and office facilities for installation,
maintenance and construction personnel.



   "Quasi-public use" means any use that is listed as a conditional use
within the R-1 zone.



   "Railroad right-of-way" means a strip of land of a maximum width of one
hundred (100) feet only for the accommodation of a main line or branch line
railroad tracks, switching equipment and signals, but not including lands on
which stations, offices, storage buildings, spur tracks, sidings, section
gang and other employee housing, yards or other uses are located.



   "Recreational Vehicle." See travel trailer.



   "Raw materials manufacture" means asphalt paving & roofing materials
manufacture; concrete, gypsum & plaster products manufacture; cotton
processing/cotton gins; glass manufacturers (crushing, melting, pressing,
blowing, shaping); graphite refractories; tile & brick manufacturers; metal
reduction, smelting, refining (steel mills, blast furnaces); mineral product
manufacture (crushing, grinding, pulverizing); paper mills; plastic & rubber
compounds; sawmills & planing mills; and similar raw materials manufacturing
uses.



   "Recyclable material" means reusable material including, but not
limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper that are intended for reuse,
remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form.
Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.
Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in
accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health
and Safety Code.



   "Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or
processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or
certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California
Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California
Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling
facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located
on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used
solely for the recycling of material generated by that  residential
property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the
following:



   1.   Collection Facility. A collection facility means a center for
the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials
from the public. Such a facility does not use power driven processing
equipment except as indicated in "Recycling Facilities Criteria and
Standards," as adopted or modified by resolution of the council of the city
of Visalia. Collection facilities may include the following:



   a.   Reverse vending machine(s);



   b.   Small collection facilities that occupy an area of not more
than five hundred (500) square feet, and are limited to handling only
California CRV redeemable beverage containers, and may include:



   1.   A mobile unit,



   2.   Bulk reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50)
square feet,



   3.   Kiosk type units that may include permanent structures,



   4.   Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable
materials.



   c.   Large collection facilities that may occupy an area of more
than five hundred (500) square feet and may include permanent structures.



   2.   Processing Facility. A processing facility means a building or
enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable
materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient
shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as bailing,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the
following:



   a.   A light processing facility occupies an area under forty-five
thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage
area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light
processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing,
compacting, grinding, shredding, and sorting of source separated recyclable
materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a
certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred,
compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;



   b.   A heavy processing facility means any processing facility other
than a light processing facility.



   "Rest Home." See nursing home.



   "Residential boarding facility" means a building or group of buildings
containing individual rooms for the accommodation of residents and having a
common kitchen facility.



   "Reverse vending machine(s)" means an automated mechanical device that
accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including,
but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a
cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the
container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending
machine may sort and process containers mechanically; provided, that the
entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and
temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with
their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of
certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending
machines may be necessary.



   "Sensitive Receptor" means a location, place or facility that contains
people that have an increased sensitivity to air pollution or other
environmental contaminants.  Sensitive receptor locations may include, but
are not limited to, schools, parks and playgrounds, day care centers, nursing
homes, hospitals, and residential dwelling unit(s).



   "Service station" means a place that supplies gasoline, diesel or other
motor fuel to motor vehicles, and including grease racks or elevators, wash
racks or pits, tire repairs, battery servicing and replacement ignition
service, sales of motor vehicle accessories and other customary services for
automobiles, but excluding painting, body work and steam cleaning.



   "Shopping center" means two or more attached uses that are located on
same property and jointly use ancillary facilities.



   "Shopping center, major" means two or more uses located upon a site of
ten acres or more with the major tenant occupying thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet or more.



   "Sign." See Chapter 17.48.



   "Single room occupancy" means a living unit that has a gross floor area
of between 120 and 220 sq. ft., typically that is furnished, with or without
individual bathroom or kitchen facilities, that is intended for long term
occupancy by their tenant or tenants.



   "Sit down restaurant/café" means an establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food and/or beverages to customers in a
ready-to-consume state. Customers are normally provided with an individual
menu, are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the
same table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed.



   "Site" means a usable parcel of land.



   "Site area" means the total horizontal area included within the
property lines of a site.



   "Site depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property
lines.



   "Site width" means the horizontal distances between the side property
lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway
between the front and rear property lines.



   "Smoke Shop/Tobacco Store" means a business with sales of tobacco,
either loose or prepared as cigarettes and products for smoking constituting
more than thirty (30) percent of gross sales and/or thirty (30) percent of
net lease area.



   "Stable" means an accessory structure including but not limited to
corral or paddock for the keeping of one or more horses owned by the
occupants of the premises, and that are not kept for remuneration, hire, or
sale.



   "Stock yard" means an enclosed area where animals are temporarily held
for concentrated feeding or displayed preliminary to slaughtering, shipping
or resale.



   "Street" means a thoroughfare, dedicated as such or acquired for public
use as such, other than an alley, that affords the principal means of access
to abutting land.



   "Structure" means anything constructed or erected that requires
location on the ground, including a building but not including a fence or a
wall used as a fence that is seventy-two (72) inches in height or lower, or
poles and appurtenances thereto used for the provision of public utilities as
specifically excepted from the provision of this title pursuant to Section
17.02.040.



   "Structure, accessory" means a detached subordinate structure located
on the same site with the main structure or the main use of the land;
attached structures open on three sides or more.



   "Structure, main" means a structure housing the principal use of a site
or functioning as the principal use.



   "Supportive housing" means housing with a supporting environment, such
as group homes or single room occupancy (SRO) housing and other housing that
includes a supportive services component such as case management, medical or
psychological counseling and supervision, child care, transportation, and job
training.



   "Transient occupancy" means occupancy, or entitlement to occupancy, by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for
a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less.



   "Transitional housing" means temporary housing (six months to two
years) for a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent
housing. Transitional housing often includes a supportive services component
(e.g. job skills training, rehabilitation counseling, etc.) to allow
individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living.



   "Travel trailer" means any vehicle that at no time exceeds eight feet
in width at its widest point and is less than forty (40) feet in length at
its longest point, and is designed for human habitation, whether
self-propelled or drawn by a motor vehicle, that is intended for permanent or
semi-permanent use and that has no foundation other than wheels and temporary
stabilizing units.



   "Use" means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged,
designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered or enlarged on for
which either a site or structure is or may be occupied or maintained.



   "Vehicle wrecking yard" means a site or portion of a site on which the
dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, or
the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts
is conducted. The presence on a site of two or more motor vehicles that have
not been capable of operating under their own power for thirty (30) days or
more, or in the case of vehicles not self-propelled, that have not been
towable or from which parts have been removed for reuse or sale, shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a vehicle wrecking yard.



   "Yard, front" means an area back from and parallel to the front
property line on which no building, structure or portion thereof shall be
permitted unless specifically permitted by this title.



   "Yard, rear" means an area back from and parallel to the rear property
line on which no building, structure or portion thereof shall be permitted
unless specifically permitted by this title.



   "Yard, side" means an area back from and parallel to the side property
line on which no building, structure or portion thereof shall be permitted
unless specifically permitted by this title. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2015-01 § 1, 2015: Ord. 2012-10, 2012: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: Ord. 2004-20
(part), 2004: Ord. 2000-01 §§ 2, 3, 2000: prior code § 7220)



Chapter 17.06
ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS



Sections:



17.06.010   Establishment of zone names.



17.06.020   Establishment of zones by map.



17.06.030   Division of the zoning map.



17.06.040   Uncertainty of zone boundaries.



17.06.050   Boundary changes because of annexation or right-of-way
abandonment.



17.06.010   Establishment of zone names.



   A.   In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses
of land and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of
buildings and to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about
buildings, and to regulate the density of population, several classes of
zones are established to be known as follows:



   1.   Agricultural zone, abbreviated as A;



   2.   Single-family residential zone – 20,000 square foot minimum
site area, abbreviated as R-1-20;



   3.   Single-family residential zone – 12,500 square foot minimum
site area, abbreviated as R-1-12.5;



   4.   Single-family residential zone – 5,000 square foot minimum
site area, abbreviated as R-1-5;



   5.   Multi-family residential zone – 3,000 square foot minimum
site area, abbreviated as R-M-2;



   6.   Multi-family residential zone – 1,200 square foot minimum
site area, abbreviated as R-M-3;



   7.   Neighborhood commercial zone, abbreviated as C-N;



   8.   Regional commercial zone, abbreviated as C-R;



   9.   Service commercial zone, abbreviated as C-S;



   10.   Mixed use commercial zone, abbreviated as C-MU;



   11.   Mixed used downtown zone, abbreviated as D-MU;



   12.   Professional/administrative office zone, abbreviated as O-PA;



   13.   Office conversion zone, abbreviated as O-C;



   14.   Business research park zone, abbreviated as BRP;



   15.   Light industrial zone, abbreviated as I-L;



   16.   Industrial zone, abbreviated as I;



   17.   Airport zone, abbreviated as AP;



   18.   Quasi-public zone, abbreviated as QP;



   19.   Open space zone, abbreviated as OS.



   B.   The R-1-20, R-1-12.5, and R-1-5 zones may be collectively
identified as Single-family Residential zones, and abbreviated as R-1.



   C.   The R-M-2 and R-M-3 zones may be collectively identified as
Multi-family Residential zones, and abbreviated as R-M. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7226)



17.06.020   Establishment of zones by map.



   The location and boundaries of the various zones are established,
shown, and delineated on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Visalia,"
which is made a part hereof, on file in the community development department.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7227)



17.06.030   Division of the zoning map.



   The zoning map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each
such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within the
zoning map, be subdivided into units that may be separately employed for
purposes of amending the zoning map or for any official reference to the
zoning map. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7228)



17.06.040   Uncertainty of zone boundaries.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid
zones as shown on said zoning map, the city planner, upon written application
or upon own initiative, shall determine the location of such boundaries.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7229)



17.06.050   Boundary changes because of annexation or right-of-way
abandonment.



   A.   All territory that is annexed to the city shall be classified
to a zone that is consistent with the general plan as adopted by the city.



   B.   All territory that is unzoned or becomes unzoned through
abandonment of a public street, alley or railroad right-of-way, shall be
classified to the centerline the same as the property adjoining the street,
alley or railroad right-of-way. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7230)



Chapter 17.08
AGRICULTURAL ZONE



Sections:



17.08.010   Purpose and intent.



17.08.015   Applicability.



17.08.020   Permitted uses.



17.08.030   Accessory uses.



17.08.040   Conditional uses.



17.08.050   Required conditions.



17.08.060   Site area.



17.08.070   Dwelling units per site.



17.08.080   Coverage.



17.08.090   Front yard.



17.08.100   Rear yard.



17.08.110   Side yards.



17.08.120   Height of structures.



17.08.130   Fences, walls, and hedges.



17.08.140   Signs.



17.08.010   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of the Agricultural zone (A) is to preserve
lands best suited for agriculture from the encroachment of incompatible uses,
to prevent the intrusion of urban development into agricultural areas in such
a manner as to make agricultural production uneconomical or impractical to
preserve in agricultural use, land suited to eventual development in other
uses until such time as streets, utilities and other community facilities may
be provided or programmed to ensure the orderly and beneficial conversion of
these lands to nonagricultural use; to provide appropriate areas for certain
predominantly open uses of land that are not injurious to agricultural uses
but that may not be harmonious with urban uses. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7235)



17.08.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
Agricultural (A) zone. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.08.020   Permitted uses.



   The following uses are permitted by right:



   A.   The raising of any type of field, truck or orchard crop and
horticultural specialties;



   B.   The raising of livestock, except stockyards;



   C.   Processing of products produced on the premises except
commercial animal slaughter;



   D.   One-family dwellings;



   E.   Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the
same site with a permitted use, including swimming pools used solely by
persons residing on the site and their guests;



   F.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.48;



   G.   The keeping of household pets subject to the definition of
household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030;



   H.   Accessory dwelling units as specified in Sections 17.12.140
through 17.12.200;



   I.   Employee housing, as defined in California Health and Safety
Code Section 17008;



   J.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001:
Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996; prior code § 7236)



17.08.030   Accessory uses.



   The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with permitted
uses:



   A.   Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 17.32.030;



   B.   Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Section
17.08.120. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior
code § 7237)



17.08.040   Conditional uses.



   The following uses may be permitted, subject to approval of a
conditional use permit, issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
17.38:



   A.   Ambulance service;



   B.   Public and private open recreational facilities, but not
including recreational uses conducted within buildings;



   C.   Bee keeping;



   D.   Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural
type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and
courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations,
ambulance service and other public buildings, structures and facilities;



   E.   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on
the site;



   F.   Electric transmission substations;



   G.   Electric distribution substations;



   H.   Gas regulator stations;



   I.   Cemeteries;



   J.   Communications equipment buildings;



   K.   Private pumping and drilling facilities for oil, gas or other
natural materials, excluding water;



   L.   Public service pumping stations and/or elevated pressure tanks;



   M.   Public and private airports and related facilities;



   N.   Additional residences (not to exceed one per ten acres) as
needed for employees who must maintain a residence upon the site in order for
the agricultural operation to operate efficiently;



   O.   Dairy products, processing, packaging, and associated
administrative uses.



   P.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior
code § 7238)



17.08.050   Required conditions.



   A.   Any use involving a business, service or process not completely
enclosed in a structure, when located on a site abutting on or across a
street or an alley from an R-1 or R-M zone shall be screened by a concrete
block or masonry wall not less than six feet in height if required by the
Site Plan Review Committee.



   B.   Any materials used or created by any business or use shall not
be stacked or piled so as to be visible above the fence or wall, unless
specifically allowed by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7239)



17.08.060   Site area.



   The minimum site area shall be twenty (20) acres for all permitted
uses. The minimum site area for conditional uses shall be specifically
approved by the planning commission in granting the conditional use permit.
(Ord 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7240)



17.08.070   Dwelling units per site.



   Each parcel shall have not more than one dwelling unit, unless
specifically provided under Section 17.08.020. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7241)



17.08.080   Coverage.



   The maximum site area covered by structures shall be five (5) percent
for permitted uses. Greater coverage is allowed with a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7242)



17.08.090   Front yard.



   The minimum front yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7243)



17.08.100   Rear yard.



   The minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7244)



17.08.110   Side yards.



   A.   The minimum interior side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.



   B.   The minimum street side yard shall be thirty (30) feet. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7245)



17.08.120   Height of structures.



   A.   The maximum height of a structure occupied by a permitted use
shall be thirty-five (35) feet.



   B.   The maximum height of accessory structures shall be thirty-five
(35) feet subject to the exception that tank houses, storage tanks,
windmills, radio towers and silos may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.



   C.   The maximum height of a structure occupied by a conditional use
and its accessory structures shall be determined by provisions of the
conditional use permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7246)



17.08.130   Fences, walls, and hedges.



   A.   Fences, walls, concertina wire, and hedges not exceeding seven
(7) feet in height shall be permitted, except that in a required front yard
or street side yard, a fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed four (4) feet in
height.



   B.   Fences may be constructed of any generally acceptable material
except that barbed wire and electric charged fences are not allowed within
thirty (30) feet of an R-1 or R-M zone.  Exceptions to this section may be
granted in accordance with Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.08.140   Signs.



   Signs shall be placed in conformance with Chapter 17.48. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



Chapter 17.10
OPEN SPACE ZONE



Sections:



17.10.010   Purpose and intent.



17.10.015   Applicability.



17.10.020   Permitted uses.



17.10.030   Accessory uses.



17.10.040   Conditional uses.



17.10.050   Required conditions.



17.10.060   Site area.



17.10.070   Dwelling units per site.



17.10.080   Coverage.



17.10.090   Front yard.



17.10.100   Rear yard.



17.10.110   Side yards.



17.10.120   Height of structures.



17.10.130   Fences, walls, and hedges.



17.10.140   Signs.



17.10.010   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of the Open Space zone (OS) is to preserve lands
best suited for open space from the encroachment of incompatible uses, to
prevent the intrusion of urban development into open space areas in such a
manner as to preserve open space for public health and safety, natural
resources, outdoor recreation, and preservation of cultural sites. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
Open Space (OS) zone. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.020   Permitted uses.



   The following uses are permitted by right:



   A.   The raising of any type of field, truck or orchard crop and
horticultural specialties;



   B.   One-family dwellings;



   C.   Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the
same site with a permitted use, including swimming pools used solely by
persons residing on the site and their guests;



   D.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.48;



   E.   The keeping of household pets subject to the definition of
household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030;



   F.   Accessory dwelling units as specified in Sections 17.12.140
through 17.12.200;



   G.   Parks;



   H.   Storm drainage facilities;



   I.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner;



   J.   Employee Housing as defined in California Health and Safety
Code Section 17008.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.030   Accessory uses.



   The following accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with permitted
uses:



   A.   Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 17.32.030;



   B.   Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Section
17.10.120. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.040   Conditional uses.



   The following uses may be permitted, subject to approval of a
conditional use permit, issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
17.38:



   A.   Public and private open recreational facilities, but not
including recreational uses conducted within buildings;



   B.   Bee keeping;



   C.   Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural
type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and
courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations,
ambulance service and other public buildings, structures and facilities;



   D.   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on
the site.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.050   Required conditions.



   A.   Any use involving a business, service or process not completely
enclosed in a structure, when located on a site abutting on or across a
street or an alley from an R-1 or R-M zone shall be screened by a concrete
block or masonry wall not less than six feet in height if required by the
Site Plan Review Committee.



   B.   Any materials used or created by any business or use shall not
be stacked or piled so as to be visible above the fence or wall, unless
specifically allowed by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.060   Site area.



   The minimum site area shall be twenty (20) acres for all permitted
uses. The minimum site area for conditional uses shall be specifically
approved by the planning commission in granting the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.070   Dwelling units per site.



   Each parcel shall have not more than one dwelling unit, unless
specifically provided under Section 17.10.020. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.080   Coverage.



   The maximum site area covered by structures shall be five (5) percent
for permitted uses. Greater coverage is allowed with a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.090   Front yard.



   The minimum front yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



17.10.100   Rear yard.



   The minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



17.10.110   Side yards.



   A.   The minimum interior side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.



   B.   The minimum street side yard shall be thirty (30) feet. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.120   Height of structures.



   A.   The maximum height of a structure occupied by a permitted use
shall be thirty-five (35) feet.



   B.   The maximum height of accessory structures shall be thirty-five
(35) feet subject to the exception that tank houses, storage tanks,
windmills, radio towers and silos may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.



   C.   The maximum height of a structure occupied by a conditional use
and its accessory structures shall be determined by provisions of the
conditional use permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.130   Fences, walls, and hedges.



   A.   Fences, walls, concertina wire and hedges not exceeding seven
(7) feet in height shall be permitted, except that in a required front yard
or street side yard, a fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed four (4) feet in
height.



   B.   Fences may be constructed of any generally acceptable material
except that barbed wire and electric charged fences are not allowed within
thirty (30) feet of an R-1 or R-M zone.  Exceptions to this section may be
granted in accordance with Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.10.140   Signs.



   Signs shall be placed in conformance with Chapter 17.48.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



Chapter 17.12
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE



Sections:



Article 1. General



17.12.010   Purpose and intent.



17.12.015   Applicability.



17.12.020   Permitted uses.



17.12.030   Accessory uses.



17.12.040   Conditional uses.



17.12.050   Site area.



17.12.060   One dwelling unit per site.



17.12.070   Replacement and expansion of legally existing multiple family
units.



17.12.080   Front yard.



17.12.090   Side yards.



17.12.100   Rear yard.



17.12.110   Height of structures.



17.12.120   Off-street parking.



17.12.130   Fences, walls and hedges.



17.12.135   Lot area less than 5,000 square feet.



17.12.137   Signs.



Article 2. Accessory Dwelling Units



17.12.140   Purpose and intent.



17.12.150   Definitions.



17.12.160   General provisions.



17.12.170   Process.



17.12.180   Development requirements.



17.12.190   Appeals.



17.12.200   Existing nonconforming accessory dwelling units.



Article 1. General



17.12.010   Purpose and intent.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zones (R-1-5, R-1-12.5, and
R-1-20), the purpose and intent is to provide living area within the city
where development is limited to low density concentrations of one-family
dwellings where regulations are designed to accomplish the following: to
promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; to provide
space for community facilities needed to compliment urban residential areas
and for institutions that require a residential environment; to minimize
traffic congestion and to avoid an overload of utilities designed to service
only low density residential use. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2
(part), 1997: prior code § 7270)



17.12.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within R-1
zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.12.020   Permitted uses.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zones, the following uses shall be
permitted by right:



   A.   One-family dwellings;



   B.   Raising of fruit and nut trees, vegetables and horticultural
specialties;



   C.   Accessory structures located on the same site with a permitted
use including private garages and carports, one guest house, storehouses,
garden structures, green houses, recreation room and hobby shops;



   D.   Swimming pools used solely by persons resident on the site and
their guests; provided, that no swimming pool or accessory mechanical
equipment shall be located in a required front yard or in a required side
yard;



   E.   Temporary subdivision sales offices;



   F.   Licensed day care for a maximum of fourteen (14) children in
addition to the residing family;



   G.   Twenty-four (24) hour residential care facilities or foster
homes, for a maximum of six individuals in addition to the residing family;



   H.   Signs subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.48;



   I.   The keeping of household pets, subject to the definition of
household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030;



   J.   Accessory dwelling units as specified in Sections 17.12.140
through 17.12.200;



   K.   Adult day care up to twelve (12) persons in addition to the
residing family;



   L.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner;



   M.   Legally existing multiple family units, and expansion or
reconstruction as provided in Section 17.12.070;



   N.   Transitional or supportive housing as defined by California
Health and Safety Code Sections 50675.2(h) and 53260(c);



   O.   In the R-1-20 zone only, the breeding, hatching, raising and
fattening of birds, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, other small animals and
fowl, on a domestic noncommercial scale, provided that there shall not be
less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of site area for each fowl or
animal and provided that no structure housing poultry or small animals shall
be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line, closer than twenty-five
(25) feet to any dwelling on the site, or closer than fifty (50) feet to any
other dwelling;



   P.   In the R-1-20 zone only, the raising of livestock, except pigs
of any kind, subject to the exception of not more than two cows, two horses,
four sheep or four goats for each site, shall be permitted; provided, that
there be no limitation on the number of livestock permitted on a site with an
area of ten acres or more and provided that no stable be located closer than
fifty (50) feet to any dwelling on the site or closer than one hundred (100)
feet to any other dwelling.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7271)



17.12.030   Accessory uses.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, the following accessory uses
shall be permitted, subject to specified provisions:



   A.   Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 17.32.030;



   B.   Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Section
17.12.100(B).



   C.   Cottage Food Operations subject to the provisions of Health and
Safety Code 113758 and Section 17.32.035.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7272)



17.12.040   Conditional uses.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, the following conditional
uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.38:



   A.   Planned development subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.26;



   B.   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious
type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools,
high schools and colleges; nursery schools, licensed day care facilities for
more than fourteen (14) children; churches, parsonages and other religious
institutions;



   C.   Public and private charitable institutions, general hospitals,
sanitariums, nursing and convalescent homes; not including specialized
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing, rest and convalescent homes including
care for acute psychiatric, drug addiction or alcoholism cases;



   D.   Public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service
or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire
stations, ambulance service and other public building, structures and
facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers;



   E.   Electric distribution substations;



   F.   Gas regulator stations;



   G.   Public service pumping stations, i.e., community water service
wells;



   H.   Communications equipment buildings;



   I.   Planned neighborhood commercial center subject to the
provisions of Chapter 17.26;



   J.   Residential development specifically designed for senior
housing;



   K.   Mobile home parks in conformance with Section 17.32.040;



   L.   [Reserved.]



   M. Residential developments utilizing private streets in which the net
lot area (lot area not including street area) meets or exceeds the site area
prescribed by this article and in which the private streets are designed and
constructed to meet or exceed public street standards;



   N.   Adult day care in excess of twelve (12) persons;



   O.   Duplexes on corner lots;



   P.   Twenty-four (24) hour residential care facilities or foster
homes for more than six individuals in addition to the residing family;



   Q.   Residential structures and accessory buildings totaling more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet;



   R.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 2000-02 § 1 (part), 2000; amended
during 10/97 supplement: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part),
1996: prior code § 7273)



17.12.050   Site area.



   The minimum site area shall be as follows:



   Zone         Minimum Site Area



   R-1-5         5,000 square feet



   R-1-12.5      12,500 square feet



   R-1-20      20,000 square feet



   A.   Each site shall have not less than forty (40) feet of frontage
on the public street. The minimum width shall be as follows:



   Zone         Interior Lot      Corner Lot



   R-1-5         50 feet         60 feet



   R-1-12.5      90 feet         100 feet



   R-1-20         100 feet      110 feet



   B.   Minimum width for corner lot on a side on cul-de-sac shall be
eighty (80) feet, when there is no landscape lot between the corner lot and
the right of way. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997:
prior code § 7274)



17.12.060   One dwelling unit per site.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, not more than one dwelling
unit shall be located on each site, with the exception to Section
17.12.020(J). (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior
code § 7275)



17.12.070   Replacement and expansion of legally existing multiple family
units.



   In accordance with Section 17.12.020 legally existing multiple family
units may be expanded or replaced if destroyed by fire or other disaster
subject to the following criteria:



   A.   A site plan review permit as provided in Chapter 17.28 is
required for all expansions or replacements.



   B.   Replacement/expansion of unit(s) shall be designed and
constructed in an architectural style compatible with the existing
single-family units in the neighborhood. Review of elevations for
replacement/expansion shall occur through the site plan review process.
Appeals to architectural requirements of the site plan review committee shall
be subject to the appeals process set forth in Section 17.28.050.



   C.   Setbacks and related development standards shall be consistent
with existing single-family units in the neighborhood.



   D.   Parking requirements set forth in Section 17.34.020 and
landscaping requirements shall meet current city standards and shall apply to
the entire site(s), not just the replacement unit(s) or expanded area, which
may result in the reduction of the number of units on the site.



   E.   The number of multiple family units on the site shall not be
increased.



   F.   All rights established under Sections 17.12.020 and 17.12.070
shall be null and void one hundred eighty (180) days after the date that the
unit(s) are destroyed (or rendered uninhabitable), unless a building permit
has been obtained and diligent pursuit of construction has commenced. The
approval of a site plan review permit does not constitute compliance with
this requirement. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997:
prior code § 7276)



17.12.080   Front yard.



   A.   The minimum front yard shall be as follows:



   Zone         Minimum Front Yard



   R-1-5         Fifteen (15) feet for living space and
side-loading garages and twenty-two (22) feet for front-loading garages or
other parking facilities, such as, but not limited to, carports, shade
canopies, or porte cochere. A Porte Cochere with less than twenty-two (22)
feet of setback from property line shall not be counted as covered parking,
and garages on such sites shall not be the subject of a garage conversion.



   R-1-12.5      Thirty (30) feet



   R-1-20         Thirty-five (35) feet



   B.   On a site situated between sites improved with buildings, the
minimum front yard may be the average depth of the front yards on the
improved site adjoining the side lines of the site but need not exceed the
minimum front yard specified above.



   C.   On cul-de-sac and knuckle lots with a front lot line of which
all or a portion is curvilinear, the front yard setback shall be no less than
fifteen (15) feet for living space and side-loading garages and twenty (20)
feet for front-loading garages. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2004-20
(part), 2004: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997:
prior code § 7277)



17.12.090   Side yards.



   A.   The minimum side yard shall be five feet in the R-1-5 and
R-1-12.5 zone subject to the exception that on the street side of a corner
lot the side yard shall be not less than ten feet and twenty-two (22) feet
for front loading garages or other parking facilities, such as, but not
limited to, carports, shade canopies, or porte cocheres.



   B.   The minimum side yard shall be ten feet in the R-1-20 zone
subject to the exception that on the street side of a corner lot the side
yard shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.



   C.   On a reversed corner lot the side yard adjoining the street
shall be not less than ten feet.



   D.   On corner lots, all front-loading garage doors or other parking
facilities, such as, but not limited to, carports, shade canopies, or porte
cochere, shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet from the nearest public
improvement or sidewalk. A porte cochere with less than twenty- two (22) feet
of setback from property line shall not be counted as covered parking, and
garages on such sites shall not be the subject of a garage conversion.



   E.   Side yard requirements may be zero feet on one side of a lot if
two or more consecutive lots are approved for a zero lot line development by
the site plan review committee.



   F.   The placement of any mechanical equipment, including but not
limited to, pool/spa equipment and evaporative coolers shall not be permitted
in the five-foot side yard within the buildable area of the lot, or within
five feet of rear/side property lines that are adjacent to the required side
yard on adjoining lots. This provision shall not apply to street side yards
on corner lots, nor shall it prohibit the surface mounting of utility meters
and/or the placement of fixtures and utility lines as approved by the
building and planning divisions.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7278)



17.12.100   Rear yard.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zones, the minimum yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet, subject to the following exceptions:



   A.   On a corner or reverse corner lot the rear yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet on the narrow side or twenty (20) feet on the long side
of the lot. The decision as to whether the short side or long side is used as
the rear yard area shall be left to the applicant's discretion as long as a
minimum area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of usable rear
yard area is maintained. The remaining side yard to be a minimum of five feet.



   B.   Accessory structures not exceeding twelve (12) feet may be
located in the required rear yard but not closer than three feet to any lot
line provided that not more than twenty (20) percent of the area of the
required rear yard shall be covered by structures enclosed on more than one
side and not more than forty (40) percent may be covered by structures
enclosed on only one side. On a reverse corner lot an accessory structure
shall not be located closer to the rear property line than the required side
yard on the adjoining key lot. An accessory structure shall not be closer to
a side property line adjoining key lot and not closer to a side property line
adjoining the street than the required front yard on the adjoining key lot.



   C.   Main structures may encroach up to five feet into a required
rear yard area provided that such encroachment does not exceed one story and
that a usable, open, rear yard area of at least one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet shall be maintained. Such encroachment and rear yard area
shall be approved by the city planner prior to issuing building permits.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2
(part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7279)



17.12.110   Height of structures.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, the maximum height of a
permitted use shall be thirty-five (35) feet, with the exception of
structures specified in Section 17.12.100(B). (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2006-07 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code §
7280)



17.12.120   Off-street parking.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.34. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior
code § 7281)



17.12.130   Fences, walls and hedges.



   In the R-1 single-family residential zone, fences, walls and hedges are
subject to the provisions of Section 17.36.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7282)



17.12.135   Lot area less than 5,000 square feet.



   A.   Notwithstanding Section 17.12.050, lots in the R-1-5 zone may
have a lot area of between 3,600 and 4,999 square feet if all of the
following standards are met:



   1.   The Planning Commission finds that the development's overall
density is consistent with the General Plan.



   2.   The maximum number of lots less than 5,000 square feet that may
be approved by a tentative subdivision map shall be fifty (50) percent or
less of the total lots.



   3.   Streets shall be constructed to public street standards.



   4.    Each subdivision with at least 15 lots that are less than
5,000 square feet in size shall make available to buyers at least three (3)
different small lot floor plans with at least four (4) available elevation
designs for each floor plan to construct on those lots.



   5.   The primary frontage of the dwelling unit shall face a public
street, primary entryway, circulation walkway, or open space with sidewalks
that provide delineated paths of travel.



   6.   The primary frontage of the dwelling unit shall include the
primary entrance and at least one window.



   7.   Required covered parking spaces shall be in garages.  Carports
are prohibited.



   8.   The width of the garage shall not be greater than fifty (50)
percent of the width of the dwelling unit.



   9.   The garage shall not extend beyond the front building facade
(living area.)



   10.   All dwelling units shall include a covered front porch at
least four (4) feet deep and six (6) feet wide or an uncovered front
courtyard at least five (5) feet wide and five (5) feet deep that is
surrounded on four sides by the dwelling unit or a wall or fence between
three (3) and four (4) feet high with a pedestrian gate or entryway.



   11.   The building official shall not approve a building permit for
a new dwelling unit on a lot with a lot area less than 5,000 square feet
until the city planner, or designee, has determined that the standards
identified in this section are met.



   12.   The subdivision shall provide a common, usable open space area
of a minimum 3,000 square feet or two hundred fifty (250) square feet per lot
under 5,000 square feet, whichever is greater.  The area shall be landscaped
and maintained with funding from either a homeowner's association or a
landscape and lighting act district.



   B.   Notwithstanding this Chapter, lots with less than five thousand
(5,000) square feet shall have the following minimum dimensions and building
setback areas, unless they were approved with a planned development permit:



   1.   The minimum lot depth shall be seventy (70) feet.



   2.   The minimum lot width shall be forty-six (46) feet for interior
lots and fifty-one (51) feet for corner lots.



   3.   The minimum front building setback area shall be twelve (12)
feet for livable space and twenty (20) feet for garages.



   4.   The minimum rear yard building setback area shall be fifteen
(15) feet.



   5.   The minimum interior side yard building setback area shall be
five (5) feet.



   6.   The minimum corner side yard building setback area shall be ten
(10) feet.



   7.   The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet.



   8.   Lots shall provide for a usable open space area of a minimum
three hundred (300) square feet.  The open space shall be a minimum fifteen
(15) feet wide.



   C.   Lots less having a lot area of 3,600 square feet, or lots that
do not meet the standards in this section may be approved through the planned
development permit process per Chapter 17.26. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.12.137   Signs.



   Signs shall be placed in conformance with Chapter 17.48.  (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



Article 2. Accessory Dwelling Units



17.12.140   Purpose and intent.



   It is the purpose of this article to provide for the following:



   A.   To encourage a range of housing types, styles and costs to suit
the varying needs and desires of the community;



   B.   To allow homeowners a means of obtaining, through tenants and
accessory dwelling units, an additional source of income, companionship,
security, and services;



   C.   To add inexpensive rental units to the housing stock of the
city;



   D.   To create homeownership opportunities for moderate income
households who might otherwise be excluded from the housing market, through
the additional income derived from accessory dwelling units;



   E.   Develop housing in single-family neighborhoods that is
appropriate for a variety of stages in the household life cycle, thereby
lessening fluctuations in neighborhood demand for public services;



   F.   Protect the stability, property values, and character of single
family residential neighborhoods by insuring that accessory dwelling units
are subject to the standards that follow. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7283(A))



17.12.150   Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Principal dwelling unit" means a single-family dwelling unit situated
on a residential lot in the A or R-1 zones to which an accessory dwelling
unit as defined by this article has been or is proposed to be added.



   "Accessory dwelling unit" means an additional dwelling unit having
separate kitchen, sleeping, and sanitation facilities constructed or adopted
within, onto, or detached from a single-family dwelling on a residential lot
in the A or R-1 zones. Accessory dwelling units may also be efficiency units,
as defined in Section 17958.1 of the health and Safety code, and
manufacturing homes, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety
Code.



   "Living area" means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit
including basements and attics but does not include a garage or an accessory
structure. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717 §
2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7283(B))



17.12.160   General provisions.



   An accessory dwelling unit may be established by the conversion of an
attic, basement, garage (if alternative parking area is provided for the
principal dwelling unit), or other portion of a principal dwelling unit. A
detached accessory dwelling unit may be established by the conversion of an
accessory structure or may be new construction. Second dwelling units may be
mobile homes, provided that such units are subject to all applicable
standards of Section 17.32.110, governing the placement of mobile homes on
single-family lots. All applications for accessory dwelling units, whether
processed as a permitted use or an exception, must comply with the general
provisions stated below:



   A.   Accessory dwelling units shall only be allowed on lots located
in the A and R-1 zones;



   B.   In no case shall more than one accessory dwelling unit be
placed on the same lot or parcel;



   C.   Second dwelling units shall be subject to all applicable
building, fire, health and safety codes and may not have adverse impacts on
any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic
Places;



   D.   Second dwelling units may only be constructed on lots or
parcels that are at least five thousand (5,000) square feet in area;



   E.   A covenant running with the land between the city and the
applicant shall be recorded with the Tulare County recorder prior to the
issuance of any building permits requiring that the primary or the proposed
accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by the owner of record;



   F.   The accessory dwelling unit shall be clearly subordinate to the
principal dwelling unit by size, location and appearance;



   G.   The second unit's scale, appearance and character shall be
similar to and compatible in design with the principal dwelling unit and
adjacent residences;



   H.   In no case shall any accessory dwelling unit be approved on a
site on which the principal dwelling unit has been the subject of a garage
conversion pursuant to the regulations of Section 17.32.140 governing such
conversions.



   I.   Size. A manufactured home shall not be less than eight (8) feet
wide by forty (40) feet long and three hundred twenty (320) square feet in
living area. An efficiency unit shall not be less than one hundred fifty
(150) square feet in living area and meet all space and occupancy standards
of Chapter 5 of the Uniform Housing Code;



   J.   Access. Doorway access shall be provided either to the side or
rear of the second housing unit;



   K.   Utility Services. Second housing units shall be provided with
water, sewer, and other utilities as determined by the building official.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997: prior code § 7283(C))



17.12.170   Process.



   The city planner shall approve or deny accessory dwelling unit requests
based upon the specified requirements.  The applicant may appeal the
decision of the city planner to the planning commission, setting forth the
reason for such appeal to the commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the
city planner, in writing, within ten (10) days after notification of such
decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the commission's next
regular meeting. If the appeal is filed within five (5) days of the next
regular meeting of the commission, the appeal shall be placed on the agenda
of the commission's second regular meeting following the filing of the
appeal. The planning commission's review shall be limited to compliance with
the specified requirements. The decision of the commission shall be final
unless appealed to the council pursuant to Section 17.02.145.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior
code § 7283(D))



17.12.180   Development requirements.



   The following development requirements shall apply to accessory
dwelling units:



   A. The increased floor area of the second unit shall not exceed twelve
hundred (1,200) square feet or ) fifty (50) percent of the main dwelling
unit, whichever is greater, and shall be used as an accessory to the primary
single family home.



   B.   Adequate parking area must be available on the streets adjacent
to the accessory dwelling unit. If adequate on-street parking is not
available in the immediate vicinity, or in the case of all second units
located on cul-de-sac lots, one additional off-street parking space must be
provided. Tandem parking shall not be deemed as meeting the above parking
requirement.  The additional parking space shall be waived if in any of the
following instances:



   1.   The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half (0.5)
miles of public transit.



   2.   The accessory dwelling unit is located within an
architecturally and historically significant historic district.



   3.   The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary
residence or an existing accessory structure.



   4.   When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to
the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.



   5.   When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of
the accessory dwelling unit.



   C.   All standards of the underlying zoning district including, but
not limited to, height, lot and yard requirements, and lot coverage shall
apply.



   D.   Detached accessory dwelling units are subject to all applicable
standards for accessory structures, as stated in the development requirements
for the underlying zone, unless a variance has been granted pursuant to
Chapter 17.42. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717
§ 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7283(E))



17.12.190   Appeals.



   The applicant may appeal the decision of the city planner to the
planning commission, setting forth the reason for such appeal to the
commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the city planner in writing,
within ten (10) days after notification of such decision. The appeal shall be
placed on the agenda of the commission's next regular meeting. If the appeal
is filed within five (5) days of the next regular meeting of the commission,
the appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the commission's second regular
meeting following the filing of the appeal.  The planning commission's
review shall be limited to compliance with the specified requirements. The
decision of the commission shall be final unless appealed to the council
pursuant to Section 17.02.145. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2,
2003: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7283(F))



17.12.200   Existing nonconforming accessory dwelling units.



   An existing accessory dwelling unit situated on a lot or parcel in the
A or R-1 zones shall constitute a violation of this title unless: (1) the
unit meets the standards and criteria of Chapter 17.12, and an agreement is
recorded; or (2) the accessory dwelling unit qualifies as a permitted
nonconforming use and structure under the provisions of Chapter 17.40. No
enlargement of habitable space shall be allowed unless the standards and
criteria of Chapter 17.12 are met. This shall not apply to maintenance of the
unit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: Ord. 9717 § 2
(part), 1997: prior code § 7283(G))



Chapter 17.14
[RESERVED]



Chapter 17.16
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES



Sections:



17.16.010   Purpose and intent.



17.16.015   Applicability.



17.16.020   Permitted uses.



17.16.030   Accessory uses.



17.16.040   Conditional uses.



17.16.050   Site area and configuration.



17.16.060   Site area per dwelling unit and per structure.



17.16.070   Front yard.



17.16.080   Side yards.



17.16.090   Rear yard.



17.16.100   Height of structures.



17.16.110   Off-street parking.



17.16.120   Fences, walls and hedges.



17.16.130   Trash enclosures.



17.16.140   Site plan review.



17.16.150   Open space and recreational areas.



17.16.160   Screening.



17.16.170   Screening fence.



17.16.180   Landscaping.



17.16.190   Model good neighbor policies.



17.16.200   Signs.



17.16.010   Purpose and intent.



   In the R-M multi-family residential zones, the purpose and intent is to
provide living areas within the two multi-family residential zones (one
medium density and one high density) with housing facilities where
development is permitted with a relatively high concentration of dwelling
units, and still preserve the desirable characteristics and amenities of a
low density atmosphere. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997: prior code § 7290)



17.16.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within R-M
zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.16.020   Permitted uses.



   In the R-M multi-family residential zones, the following uses are
permitted by right:



   A.   Existing one-family dwellings;



   B.   Multi-family dwellings up to eighty (80) dwelling units per
site in the R-M-2 zone and the R-M-3 zone;



   C.   Fruit, vegetable and horticultural husbandry;



   D.   Swimming pools used only by residents on the site and their
guests, provided that no swimming pool or accessory mechanical equipment
shall be located in a required front yard or in a required side yard;



   E.   Temporary subdivision sales offices;



   F.   Licensed day care for a maximum of fourteen (14) children in
addition to the residing family, situated within an existing single-family
dwelling;



   G.   Twenty-four (24) hour care facilities or foster homes for a
maximum of six individuals in addition to the residing family;



   H.   Signs subject to the provision of Chapter 17.48;



   I.   The keeping of household pets, subject to the definition of
household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030;



   J.   Adult day care for a maximum of twelve (12) individuals in
addition to the residing family, situated within an existing single-family
dwelling;



   K.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner;



   L.   Transitional or supportive housing as defined by California
Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2(h) and 53260(c);



   M.   Single-room occupancy (SRO), as follows:



   1.   Up to fifteen (15) units per gross acre in the R-M-2 zone
district;



   2.   Up to twenty-nine (29) units per gross acre in the R-M-3 zone
district.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30, 1996: prior code § 7291)



17.16.030   Accessory uses.



   In the R-M multi-family residential zone, accessory uses include:



   A.   Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 17.32.030;



   B.   Accessory buildings subject to the provisions of Section
17.16.090B. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord.
9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7292)



17.16.040   Conditional uses.



   In the R-M multi-family residential zone, the following conditional
uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.38:



   A.   Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious
type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools,
high schools and colleges; nursery schools, licensed day care facilities for
more than fourteen (14) children; churches, parsonages and other religious
institutions;



   B.   Public and private charitable institutions; general hospitals,
sanitariums, nursing and convalescent homes; including specialized hospitals,
sanitariums, or nursing, rest and convalescent homes including care for acute
psychiatric, drug addiction or alcoholism cases;



   C.   Public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service
or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative
centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire
stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; public
playgrounds, parks and community centers;



   D.   In the R-M-3 zone only, an open air public or private parking
lot, subject to all provisions of Section 17.34.030, excluding trucks over
3/4 ton;



   E.   Electric distribution substations;



   F.   Gas regulator stations;



   G.   Public service pumping stations and/or elevated or underground
tanks;



   H.   Communication equipment buildings;



   I.   In R-M-2 zone only, mobile home parks;



   J.   More than eighty (80) units per site in the R-M-2 zone, and
within the R-M-3 zone;



   K.   Boarding houses and residential motels;



   L.   [Reserved]



   M.   Senior citizen residential developments;



   N.   Adult day care in excess of twelve (12) individuals;



   O.   Planned developments may utilize the provisions of Chapter
17.26;



   P.   New one-family dwelling, meeting density identified in the
general plan land use element designations;



   Q.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner;



   R.   Residential developments utilizing private streets in which the
net lot area (lot area not including street area) meets or exceeds the site
area prescribed by this chapter and in which the private streets are designed
and constructed to meet or exceed public street standards;



   S.   Residential structures up to four stories in height in the
R-M-3 Zone District when the proposed structure is adjacent to an R-1 Zone
District.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
amended during 10/97 supplement: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30
(part), 1996: prior code § 7293)



17.16.050   Site area and configuration.



   A.   The division of (R-M) multi-family residential property less
than two (2) acres shall be approved as part of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7294)



17.16.060   Site area per dwelling unit and per structure.



   The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be three thousand (3,000)
square feet in the R-M-2 zone and one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet in the R-M-3 zone. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997: prior code § 7295)



17.16.070   Front yard.



   A. The minimum front yard shall be as follows:



   Zone         Minimum Front Yard



   R-M-2            15 feet



   R-M-3            15 feet



   B.   On a site situated between sites improved with buildings, the
minimum front yard may be the average depth of the front yards on the
improved site adjoining the side lines of the site but need not exceed the
minimum front yard specified above.



   C.  All garage doors facing the front property line shall be a minimum
of twenty-two (22) feet from the nearest public improvement or sidewalk.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2004-20 (part), 2004: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997: prior code § 7297)



17.16.080   Side yards.



   A.   The minimum side yard for a permitted or conditional use shall
be five feet subject to the exception that on the street side of a corner lot
the side yard shall be not less than ten feet.



   B.   Side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall
be not less than ten feet.



   C.   On corner lots, all garage doors shall be a minimum of
twenty-two (22) feet from the nearest public improvement or sidewalk.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7298)



17.16.090   Rear yard.



   The minimum rear yard for a permitted use shall be fifteen (15) feet in
the R-M-3 zone and twenty-five (25) feet in the R-M-2 zone, subject to the
following exceptions:



17.16.090



   A.   On a corner or reverse corner lot in R-M-2 zone the rear yard
shall be twenty-five (25) feet on the narrow side or twenty (20) feet on the
long side of the lot. The decision as to whether the short side or long side
is used as the rear yard area shall be left to the applicant's discretion, as
long as a minimum area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of
usable rear yard area is maintained.



   B.   Accessory structures not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height
may be located in the required rear yard, but not closer than three feet to
any lot line; provided, that on a reversed corner lot an accessory structure
shall be located not closer to the rear property line than the required side
yard on the adjoining key lot and not closer to the side property line
adjoining the street than the required front yard on the adjoining key lot.
In placing accessory structures in a required rear yard a usable, open, rear
yard area of at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet shall be
maintained.



   C.   Exceptions to the rear yard setback can be granted for multiple
family units that have their rear yard abutting an alley. The exception may
be granted if the rear yard area is to be used for parking. Through the site
plan review process, consistency with this section may be determined for
permitting purposes subject to the provisions of Section 17.28.050.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7299)



17.16.100   Height of structures.



   The maximum height of structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet or
three (3) stories whichever is taller in the R-M-2 zone. The maximum height
shall be four (4) stories in the R-M-3 zone. Where an R-M-2 or R-M-3 site
adjoins an R-1 site, the second and subsequent stories shall be designed to
limit visibility from the second and third story to the R-1 site. Structures
specified under Section 17.16.090(B) shall be exempt.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
Ord. 2006-07 § 2 (part), 2006: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code §
7300)



17.16.110   Off-street parking.



   Off-street parking shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.34.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7301)



17.16.120   Fences, walls and hedges.



   Fences, walls and hedges shall be subject to the provisions of Section
17.36.040. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior
code § 7302)



17.16.130   Trash enclosures.



   Enclosures for trash receptacles are permitted that comply with the
specifications and requirements of Section 17.32.010 and that are approved by
the site plan review committee. Enclosures within the front yard setback are
permitted for multiple family dwelling units when deemed necessary by city
staff because no other appropriate location for an enclosure exists on the
property. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code
§ 7303)



17.16.140   Site plan review.



   A site plan review permit must be obtained for all developments other
than a single-family residence in R-M zones, subject to the requirements and
procedures of Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.16.150   Open space and recreational areas.



   Any multiple family project approved under a conditional use permit or
site plan review permit shall dedicate at least five (5) percent of the site
to open, common, usable space and/or recreational facilities for use by
tenants as a part of that plan. The calculated space shall not include
setback areas adjacent to a street. Shared open space could include parks,
playgrounds, sports courts, swimming pools, gardens, and covered patios or
gazebos open on at least three (3) sides.  Further, the calculated space
shall not include enclosed meeting or community rooms.  The specific size,
location and use shall be approved as a part of the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7305)



17.16.160   Screening.



   All parking areas adjacent to public streets and R-1 sites shall be
screened from view subject to the requirements and procedures of Chapter
17.28. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code §
7306)



17.16.170   Screening fence.



   Where a multiple family site adjoins an R-1 site, a screening block
wall or wood fence not less than six feet in height shall be located along
the property line; except in a required front yard, or the street side of a
corner lot and suitably maintained. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 §
2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7307)



17.16.180   Landscaping.



   All multiple family developments shall have landscaping including
plants, and ground cover to be consistent with surrounding landscaping in the
vicinity. Landscape plans to be approved by city staff prior to installation
and occupancy of use and such landscaping to be permanently maintained. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7308)



17.16.190   Model good neighbor policies.



   Before issuance of building permits, project proponents of multi-family
residential developments in the R-M zones that are subject to approval by the
Site Plan Review Committee or the Planning Commission, shall enter into an
operational management plan (Plan), in a form approved by the City for the
long term maintenance and management of the development.  The Plan shall
include but not be limited to: The maintenance of landscaping for the
associated properties; the maintenance of private drives and open space
parking; the maintenance of the fences, on-site lighting and other
improvements that are not along the public street frontages; enforcing all
provisions covered by covenants, conditions and restrictions that are placed
on the property; and, enforcing all provisions of the model Good Neighbor
Policies as specified by Resolution of the Planning Commission, and as may be
amended by resolution. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-11 § 1, 2006)



17.16.200   Signs.



   Signs shall be placed in conformance with Chapter 17.48. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



Chapter 17.18
COMMERCIAL ZONES



Sections:



17.18.010   Purpose and intent.



17.18.015   Applicability.



17.18.020   Permitted uses.



17.18.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



17.18.040   Required conditions.



17.18.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.18.060   Development standards in the C-N zone.



17.18.070   Development standards in the C-R zone.



17.18.080   Development standards in the C-S zone.



17.18.010   Purpose and intent.



   A.   The several types of commercial zones included in this chapter
are designed to achieve the following:



   1.   Provide appropriate areas for various types of retail stores,
offices, service establishments and wholesale businesses to be concentrated
for the convenience of the public; and to be located and grouped on sites
that are in logical proximity to the respective geographical areas and
respective categories of patrons that they serve in a manner consistent with
the general plan;



   2.   Maintain and improve Visalia's retail base to serve the needs
of local residents and encourage shoppers from outside the community;



   3.   Accommodate a variety of commercial activities to encourage new
and existing business that will employ residents of the city and those of
adjacent communities;



   4.   Maintain Visalia's role as the regional retailing center for
Tulare and Kings Counties and ensure the continued viability of the existing
commercial areas;



   5.   Maintain commercial land uses that are responsive to the needs
of shoppers, maximizing accessibility and minimizing trip length;



   6.   Ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses.



   B.   The purposes of the individual commercial zones are as follows:



   1.   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (C-N). The purpose and intent of
the neighborhood commercial zone district is to provide for small-scale
commercial development that primarily serves surrounding residential areas,
wherein small office uses as well as horizontal or vertical residential mixed
use are also supported, and provide standards to ensure that neighborhood
commercial uses are economically viable and also integrated into
neighborhoods in terms of design, with negative impacts minimized, with
multimodal access, and context-sensitive design.  Neighborhood Commercial
development shall be subject to design review and public input.  There
should be 10 to 15 dwelling units per gross acre where residential uses are
included.  Shopping centers shall be of a total size of 5 to 12 acres and
located no closer than one mile from other General Plan designated
Neighborhood Commercial locations, or from existing grocery stores, anchored
by a grocery store or similar business no larger than 40,000 square feet in
size, and include smaller in-line stores of less than 10,000 square feet.
Alterations and additions in existing nonconforming centers may be permitted,
subject to design review and conditions of approval to minimize neighborhood
impacts.



   2.   Regional Commercial Zone (C-R). The purpose and intent of the
regional commercial zone district is to provide areas for retail
establishments that are designed to serve a regional service trade area. The
uses permitted in this district are to be of a large-scale regional retail
nature with supporting goods and services. Uses that are designed to provide
service to residential areas and convenience, neighborhood and community
level retail are not permitted, while office uses are to be limited.



   3.   Service Commercial Zone (C-S). The purpose and intent of the
planned service commercial zone district is to provide areas that accommodate
wholesale, heavy commercial uses, such as lumberyards and construction
material retail uses, etc., and services such as automotive, plumbing, and
sheet metal fabrication. It is intended that uses in this district be those
that can be compatible with heavy truck traffic and noise. Uses that would
restrict the operation of generally permitted heavy commercial businesses are
not provided in this district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7310)



17.18.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
C-N, C-R, and C-S zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.18.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in the C-N, C-R, and C-S zones shall be determined by
Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017; Ord.
2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2014-07
§ 3 (part), 2014; Ord. 2012-10, 2012; Ord. 2012-08, 2012; Ord. 2012-02,
2012; Ord. 2011-07 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2010-16, 2010; Ord. 2009-02, 2009; Ord.
2006-17, 2006; Res. 2004-75 (part), 2004; Ord. 2004-08 § 3, 2004; Res.
2004-14 (part), 2004; Res. 2003-95 (part), 2003; Res. 2002-83, 2002; Res.
2002-26, 2002; Res. 2001-40, 2001; Res. 2001-29, 2001; Ord. 2000-01 § 6,
2000; Ord. 9903 § 3, 1999; Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997; amended by council
August 13, 1997; amended by council June 3, 1996 and May 20, 1996: prior code
§ 7328)



17.18.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



   Conditional and temporary uses in the C-N, C-R, and C-S zones shall be
determined by Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015;
Ord. 2014-07 § 3 (part), 2014; Ord. 2012-10, 2012; Ord. 2012-08, 2012; Ord.
2012-02, 2012; Ord. 2011-07 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2010-16, 2010; Ord. 2009-02,
2009; Ord. 2006-17, 2006; Res. 2004-75 (part), 2004; Ord. 2004-08 § 3, 2004;
Res. 2004-14 (part), 2004; Res. 2003-95 (part), 2003; Res. 2002-83, 2002;
Res. 2002-26, 2002; Res. 2001-40, 2001; Res. 2001-29, 2001; Ord. 2000-01 §
6, 2000; Ord. 9903 § 3, 1999; Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997; amended by
council August 13, 1997; amended by council June 3, 1996 and May 20, 1996:
prior code § 7328)



17.18.040   Required conditions.



   A.   A site plan review permit must be obtained for all development
in all C-N, C-S, and C-R zones, subject to the requirements and procedures in
Chapter 17.28.



   B.   All businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street
parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas,
nurseries, garden shops, Christmas tree sales lots, bus depots and transit
stations, electric distribution substation, and recycling facilities;



   C.   All products produced on the site of any of the permitted uses
shall be sold primarily at retail on the site where produced;



   D.   All new construction in existing C-N zones not a part of a
previously approved planned development shall conform with development
standards determined by the site plan review committee. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7319)



17.18.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
as prescribed in Chapter 17.34. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7325)



17.18.060   Development standards in the C-N zone.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the C-N zone:



   A.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   B.   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   6.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.18.070   Development standards in the C-R zone.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the C-R zone:



   A.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   B.   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: twenty (20) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: twenty (20) feet;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   6.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.18.080   Development standards in the C-S zone.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the C-S zone:



   A.   Minimum site area: five thousand (5,000) square feet.



   B.   Maximum building height: sixty (60) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: ten (10) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: ten (10) feet;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   6.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



Chapter 17.19
MIXED USE ZONES



Sections:



17.19.010   Purpose and intent.



17.19.015   Applicability.



17.19.020   Permitted uses.



17.19.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



17.19.040   Required conditions.



17.19.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.19.060   Development standards in the C-MU zones outside the downtown
area.



17.19.070   Development standards in the D-MU zone and in the C-MU zones
inside the downtown area.



17.19.010   Purpose and intent.



   A.   The several types of mixed zones included in this chapter are
designed to achieve the following:



   1.   Encourage a wide mix of commercial, service, office, and
residential land uses in horizontal or vertical mixed use development
projects, or on adjacent lots, at key activity nodes and along corridors.



   2.   Maintain Visalia's downtown Conyer Street to Tipton and Murray
Street to Mineral King Avenue including the Court-Locust corridor to the
Lincoln Oval area) as the traditional, medical, professional, retail,
government and cultural center;



   3.   Provide zone districts that encourage and maintain vibrant,
walkable environments.



   B.   The purposes of the individual mixed use zones are as follows:



   1.   Mixed Use Commercial Zone—(C-MU).  The purpose and intent of
the mixed use commercial zone district is to allow for either horizontal or
vertical mixed use development, and permit commercial, service, office, and
residential uses at both at key activity nodes and along corridors.  Any
combination of these uses, including a single use, is permitted.



   2.   Mixed Use Downtown Zone—(D-MU). The purpose and intent of the
mixed use downtown zone district is to promote the continued vitality of the
core of the community by providing for the continuing commercial development
of the downtown and maintaining and enhancing its historic character.  The
zone is designed to accommodate a wide mix of land uses ranging from
commercial and office to residential and public spaces, both active and
passive. The zone is intended to be compatible with and support adjacent
residential uses, along with meeting the needs of the city and region as the
urban center of the city; to provide for neighborhood, local, and regional
commercial and office needs; to accommodate the changing needs of
transportation and integrate new modes of transportation and related
facilities; and to maintain and enhance the historic character of the city
through the application of architectural design features that complement the
existing historic core of the city. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.19.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
C-MU and D-MU zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.19.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in C-MU and D-MU zones shall be determined by Table
17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.19.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



   Conditional and temporary uses in the C-MU and D-MU zones shall be
determined by Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.19.040   Required conditions.



   A.   A site plan review permit must be obtained for any development
in any C-MU and D-MU zones, subject to the requirements and procedures in
Chapter 17.28.



   B.   All businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street
parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas,
nurseries, garden shops, Christmas tree sales lots, bus depots and transit
stations, electric distribution substation, and recycling facilities;



   C.   All products produced on the site of any of the permitted uses
shall be sold primarily at retail on the site where produced. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



17.19.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



   Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided
as prescribed in Chapter 17.34. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.19.060   Development standards in the C-MU zones outside the downtown
area.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the C-MU zone and located outside the Downtown Area, which is defined as the
area that is south of Murray Avenue, west of Ben Maddox Way, north of Mineral
King Avenue, and east of Conyer Street:



   A.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   B.   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   6.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   E.   The provisions of Chapter 17.58 shall also be met, if
applicable. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.19.070   Development standards in the D-MU zone and in the C-MU zones
inside the downtown area.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the D-MU and C-MU zone and located inside the Downtown Area, which is defined
as the area that is south of Murray Avenue, west of Ben Maddox Way, north of
Mineral King Avenue, and east of Conyer Street:



   A.   Minimum site area: No minimum.



   B.   Maximum building height: one hundred (100) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: zero (0) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: zero (0) feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: zero (0) feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: zero (0) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on
property line);



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: zero (0) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet
except where a building is located on side property);



   6.   Street side on corner lot: five (5) feet.



   E.   The provisions of Chapter 17.58 shall also be met, if
applicable.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



Chapter 17.20
OFFICE ZONES



Sections:



17.20.010   Purposes.



17.20.015   Applicability.



17.20.020   Permitted and conditional uses.



17.20.030   Required conditions.



17.20.040   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.20.050   Development standards in the O-PA zone.



17.20.060   Development standards in the O-C zone.



17.20.010   Purposes.



   A.   The several types of office zones included in this chapter are
designed to achieve the following:



   1.   Provide appropriate areas for various types of offices to be
concentrated for the convenience of the public, and to be located and grouped
on sites that are in logical proximity to the respective geographical areas
and respective categories of patrons that they serve in a manner consistent
with the general plan;



   2.   Maintain the central downtown business district (Conyer Street
to Tipton and Murray Street to Mineral King Avenue including the Court-Locust
corridor to the Lincoln Oval area) as Visalia's traditional, medical,
professional, retail, government and cultural center;



   3.   Protect office areas from excessive noise, illumination,
unsightliness, odor, smoke, and other objectionable influences;



   4.   Ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses.



   B.   The purpose of the individual office land use zones are as
follows:



   1.   Professional/Administrative Office Zone—(O-PA). The purpose
and intent of the professional/administrative office zone district is to
provide areas for professional and administrative offices where they can be
effectively integrated into surrounding areas.



   2.   Office Conversion Zone—(OC). The purpose and intent of the
office conversion zone district is to promote the conversion, rather than the
demolition, of existing residential structures where feasible, in designated
areas for low-intensity administrative and professional offices. Office uses
that are typically high generators of vehicle trips or parking need
generators are not provided in this district. This zone will create
opportunities for the long-term preservation of historic structures and the
residential character of non-historic neighborhoods through the office
conversion process. The development criteria will reduce the potential for
land use conflicts between the office conversion sites and their adjacent
residential neighborhoods. These provisions will serve to maintain the
streetscape through architectural compatibility and the placement of on-site
parking at the rear of the sites. This will also serve to maintain the
historic and aesthetic character of the core area. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7372)



17.20.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
O-PA and O-C zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.20.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in the O-PA and OC zones shall be determined by Table
17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7375)



17.20.025   Conditional and temporary uses.



   Conditional and temporary uses in the O-PA and OC zones shall be
determined by Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7375)



17.20.030   Required conditions.



   A.   A site plan review permit must be obtained for all development
in the O-PA and O-C zones subject to the requirements and procedures in
Chapter 17.28;



   B.   All businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street
parking and loading areas, outdoor dining areas, and play areas. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7380)



17.20.040   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



   A.   Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities
shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.34.



   B.   On-site parking is prohibited in the front and street side
setback areas for O-C zoned properties;



   C.   Adequate parking for OC zoned properties must be provided on
site to serve the desired office use. Parking is to be developed at the rear
of the subject site, and should be master planned with adjacent sites to
allow the common use of planter strips, access points and handicap parking
spaces to the greatest extent possible. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7385)



17.20.050   Development standards in the O-PA zone.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
the O-PA zone:



   A.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   B.   Maximum building height: fifty (50) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   4.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: fifteen (15)
feet;



   6.   Street side yard on corner lot: ten (10) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: fifteen (15) feet;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet;



   3.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   4.   Side: five (5) feet (except where a building is located on side
property line);



   5.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: five (5) feet;



   6.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.20.060   Development standards in the O-C zone.



   The following development standards shall apply to property located in
O-C zone district These standards would include, but not be limited to, the
application of consistent height and bulk, matching setbacks, and compatible
architectural design that will be reviewed and approved through the site plan
review process:



   A.   Minimum site area: five thousand (5,000) square feet.



   B.   Maximum building height: thirty (30) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: shall be consistent with adjacent primary setbacks or a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. On interior lots where adjacent structures
are less than twenty-five (25) feet, averaging may be used;



   2.   Rear: twenty-five (25) feet.



   3.   Side: five (5) feet;



   4.   Street side on corner lot: ten (10) feet;



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: twenty-five (25) feet or consistent with building
setbacks;



   2.   Rear: five (5) feet, except where there is alley access.



   3.   Side: five (5) feet;



   4.   Street side on a corner lot: ten (10) feet or consistent with
building setbacks;



   F.   Additional standards:



   1.   Maintain front and street side residential setbacks, in
addition to maintaining and enhancing the historical residential streetscape;



   2.   Develop existing alleys to a width of eighteen (18) to twenty
(20) feet. Dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of up to two feet
per lot will be required, excepting sites that have a primary structure
located in the dedication area and for which there is adequate parking on the
site;



   3.   Signs shall be compatible with the character of the main
structure, and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.48.



   4.   Existing structures that are compatible with the adjacent
properties and streetscape shall be maintained as the primary structure for a
site;



   5.   All additions and alterations shall be consistent with the
existing design of the primary unit as determined through the site plan
review process;



   6.   Offices that are of a twenty-four (24) hour use or high-volume
customer destination that cannot be accommodated through on-site parking are
prohibited adjacent to residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



Chapter 17.22
INDUSTRIAL ZONES



Sections:



17.22.010   Purposes.



17.22.015   Applicability.



17.22.020   Permitted uses.



17.22.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



17.22.040   Required conditions.



17.22.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.22.060   Development standards in the I-L and I zones.



17.22.010   Purposes.



   A.   The two types of industrial zones included in this chapter are
designed to achieve the following:



   1.   Encourage the location of new industries that do not generate
substantial amounts of pollutant emissions, impacts on air quality, or other
natural resources;



   2.   Ensure compatibility between industrial lands and adjacent
dissimilar land uses;



   3.   Retain and strengthen the city's role as a regional
manufacturing center in the Southern Central San Joaquin Valley;



   4.   Provide appropriate industrial areas to accommodate enterprises
engaged in the manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating,
painting, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandise or equipment;



   5.   Provide adequate space to meet the needs of industrial
development, including off-street parking and loading;



   6.   Direct industrial uses to and encourage expansion of the
northwest industrial areas;



   7.   Protect areas appropriate for industrial use from intrusion by
dwellings and other conflicting uses;



   8.   Protect residential and commercial properties and nuisance-free
nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration,
heat, glare, fire, explosion, noxious fumes, radiation and other hazards and
objectionable influence incidental to certain industrial uses;



   9.   Preserve land designated for light and heavy industrial uses by
limiting the intrusion of commercial or service commercial uses.



   B.   The purpose of the industrial land use zones are as follows:



   1.   Light Industrial Zone—( I-L). The purpose and intent of the
Light Industrial zone district is to provide an area for uses that are
characterized by low intensity research and development, warehousing and
limited manufacturing and production, processing, assembling and packaging or
treatment of food products from previously prepared materials. Uses that may
restrict the operation of the above due to sensitivity to noise, truck
traffic, etc., are not provided in this district.



   2.   Industrial Zone—( I). The purpose and intent of the
Industrial zone district is to provide an area for uses that are
characterized by the manufacturing, processing or assembling of semi-finished
or finished products from raw materials. Uses that may restrict the operation
of the above due to sensitivity to noise, truck traffic, etc., are not
provided in this district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7392)



17.22.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
I and I-L zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.22.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in I and I-L zones shall be determined by Table
17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7393)



17.22.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



   Conditional and temporary uses in the I and I-L zones shall be
determined by Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7393)



17.22.040   Required conditions.



   A.   No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or
materials shall be employed which is determined by the planning commission to
be injurious to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to
property located in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke,
cinder, refuse, noise, vibration, illumination, glare or heavy truck traffic
or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion or to emit electrical
disturbances that adversely affect commercial or electronic equipment outside
the boundaries of the site;



   B.   No use shall emit visible smoke of a shade equal to or darker
than No. 2 on a standard Ringelmann Chart issued by the United States Bureau
of Mines or smoke of an equivalent opacity, except that smoke of a shade
equal to No. 3 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for four minutes in any
thirty (30) minute period;



   C.   A site plan review permit must be obtained for all development
in an I-L or I zone, subject to the requirements and procedures in Chapter
17.28. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7395)



17.22.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



   Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall
be provided on the site of each use as prescribed in Chapter 17.34. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7396)



17.22.060   Development standards in the I-L and I zones.



   A.   The I-L and I zone districts include streets of varying width,
carrying capacity and intended service. The development standards vary by
type of street in order to maintain a consistent streetscape and achieve a
high quality visual impact necessary to sustain an attractive and viable
industrial area.  The following development standards shall apply to
property located in the I-L and I zones:



   A.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   B.   Maximum building height: seventy-five (75) feet.



   C.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Frontage on major road: twenty-five (25) feet. (Major roads are
defined as roads shown as arterials or collectors on the Circulation Element
Map, including but not limited to Goshen Avenue, Plaza Drive, and Avenue 308);



   2.   Frontage on minor road: fifteen (15) feet. (Minor roads are
defined as roads shown as local streets on the Circulation Element Map,
including but not limited to Elowin Court, Clancy Drive, and Rasmussen
Avenue);



   3.   Frontage on interior roads: ten (10) feet. (Interior roads
provide access only to parcels within a development.);



   4.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: twenty (20)
feet;



   6.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   7.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: twenty (20)
feet;



   8.   Side abutting railroad right-of-way: twenty-five (25) feet.



   D.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Frontage on major road: twenty-five (25) feet. (Major roads are
defined as roads shown as arterials or collectors on the Circulation Element
Map, including but not limited to Goshen Avenue, Plaza Drive, and Avenue 308);



   2.   Frontage on minor road: fifteen (15) feet. (Minor roads are
defined as roads shown as local streets on the Circulation Element Map,
including but not limited to Elowin Court, Clancy Drive, and Rasmussen
Avenue);



   3.   Frontage on interior roads: ten (10) feet. (Interior roads
provide access only to parcels within a development.);



   4.   Rear: zero (0) feet;



   5.   Rear yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: ten (10) feet;



   6.   Side: zero (0) feet;



   7.   Side yards abutting an R-1 or R-M zone district: ten (10) feet;



   8.   Side abutting railroad right-of-way: twenty-five (25) feet.



   E. Additional standards:



   1.   Properties subdivided into parcels of less than five acres
shall provide a common or joint storm drainage facility or pond, to be
maintained through a private property owners' association formed at the time
of subdivision.



   2.    An eight-foot masonry wall is required along property line
where a site abuts an R-1 or R-M zone district. (Ord 2017-01 (part), 2017)



Chapter 17.24
BUSINESS RESEARCH PARK ZONE



Sections:



17.24.010   Purpose.



17.24.015   Applicability.



17.24.020   Permitted uses.



17.24.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



17.24.040   Required conditions.



17.24.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.24.060   Development standards.



17.24.010   Purpose.



   A.   This chapter is designed to achieve the following:



   1.   Provide for large-scale office developments in the community;



   2.   Accommodate large-scale business and research activities;



   3.   Protect residential and office areas from excessive noise,
illumination, unsightliness, odor, smoke, and other objectionable influences;



   4.   Ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses.



   B.   The purpose and intent of the planned business research park
zone district is to provide for business, scientific, educational and light
industrial uses in a campus-type setting. Planned business research parks are
to be planned and developed as integrated units via specific or master plans
and are intended to accommodate large-scale office developments at locations
that provide close-in employment opportunities; promote Visalia's community
identity through special site development standards such as lot sizes,
setbacks, landscaping, building scale, parking, open areas, etc.; and provide
on-site ancillary uses including day care, food service, banks, recreation,
etc., served by a variety of transportation modes to reduce vehicle trips.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7749)



17.24.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
BRP zone district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.24.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in BRP zone shall be determined by Table 17.25.030 in
Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7749.1)



17.24.030   Conditional and temporary uses.



   Conditional and temporary uses in the BRP zone shall be determined by
Table 17.25.030 in Section 17.25.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code
§ 7749.1)



17.24.040   Required conditions.



   A.   A site plan review permit must be obtained for all development
in the P-BRP zone subject to the requirements and procedures in Chapter 17.28.



   B.   All businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street
parking and loading areas, outdoor dining areas, and play areas.



   C. All development shall be subject to a conditional use permit. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2010-06 § 1 (part), 2010: prior code § 7749.2)



17.24.050   Off-street parking and loading facilities.



   Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall
be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.34. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7749.3)



17.24.060   Development standards.



   For properties that are zoned business research park, the following
development criteria shall be applied in conjunction with the development
standards.  Where variations in standards exist the more restrictive shall
apply.



   A.   All development shall be subject to the conditional use permit
process in Chapter 17.38;



   B.   All development shall require a master plan or a specific plan.
The master plan shall be designed to accommodate large scale business and
research activities in campus-type developments. These developments shall
provide a cohesive architectural design to create a campus style setting
within a project or center. Shared vehicular and pedestrian access, parking,
and common open space and related amenities shall be integrated into project
design. Overall design of development shall be compatible with existing and
developing character of the neighboring area. The master plan or specific
plan, and the architectural design elements, including a comprehensive sign
program, as required by this subsection, shall be included with and approved
as part of the Conditional Use Permit as required by Section 17.24.050(C);



   C.   Development should provide convenience/service amenities for
employees within the BRP zone;



   D.   Alternate transportation opportunities including mass transit
and ride sharing shall be encouraged;



   E.   Minimum site area: five (5) acres.



   F.   Maximum building height: seventy-five (75) feet;



   G.   Minimum required yards (building setbacks):



   1.   Front: forty-five (45) feet frontage on Plaza Drive –
twenty-five (25) feet front on Hurley, Crowley, Neeley, Kelsey;



   2.   Side: twenty (20) feet;



   3.   Street side on a corner lot: twenty (20) feet;



   4.   Rear: thirty (30) feet;



   H.   Minimum required landscaped yard (setback) areas:



   1.   Front: thirty (30) feet frontage on Plaza Drive; twenty-five
(25) front on Hurley, Crowley, Neeley, Kelsey (includes any portion of
building that abuts a public street): twenty-five (25) feet. Setback
averaging may be used where incorporated into an approved master plan’



   2.   Side: twenty (20) feet,



   3.   Street side on a corner lot: twenty (20) feet,



   4.   Rear: twenty (20) feet. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2010-06 § 1 (part), 2010: prior code § 7749.4)



Chapter 17.25
USES IN THE COMMERCIAL, MIXED USE, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES



Sections:



17.25.010   Purpose and intent.



17.25.020   Applicability.



17.25.030   Commercial, Office, and Industrial Zone Use Table.



17.25.010   Purpose and intent.



   No structure, or any part thereof, shall be erected, enlarged, or
reduced, nor shall any site or structure be used, designated, or intended to
be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is included among the
uses listed in the land use tables in this chapter as permitted,
administratively permitted, or conditionally permitted in the zone district
in which such structure, land, or site is located, except as otherwise
authorized by this title. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.25.020   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
following zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.25.030   Commercial, Office, and Industrial Zone Use Table.



   A.   The following table (Table 17.25.030) identifies which land
uses are permitted by right, require a use permit, or are not allowed in the
C-N, C-R, C-S, C-MU, D-MU, O-PA, O-C, BRP, I-L, and I zones. 



   B.   A "P" means that the use is permitted by right in that zone. 
A "C" means the use requires a conditional use permit in that zone.  An "A"
means the use requires an administrative use permit in that zone.  A "T"
means the use requires a temporary use permit in that zone.  A blank box
means the use is not allowed in that zone.



   C.   Land uses are listed alphabetically, with some uses grouped by
type under a general heading.



   D.   Land uses with specific land use prohibitions or standards
shall meet the requirements found in the identified Chapter or Section in the
last column of the table.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-06, 2016;
Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2014-07 § 3 (part),
2014; Ord. 2012-10, 2012; Ord. 2012-08, 2012; Ord. 2012-02, 2012; Ord.
2011-07 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2010-16, 2010; Ord. 2009-02, 2009; Ord. 2006-17,
2006; Res. 2004-75 (part), 2004; Ord. 2004-08 § 3, 2004; Res. 2004-14
(part), 2004; Res. 2003-95 (part), 2003; Res. 2002-83, 2002; Res. 2002-26,
2002; Res. 2001-40, 2001; Res. 2001-29, 2001; Ord. 2000-01 § 6, 2000; Ord.
9903 § 3, 1999; Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997; amended by council August 13,
1997; amended by council June 3, 1996 and May 20, 1996: prior code § 7328)



TABLE 17.25.030



To view Table as a PDF document, CLICK HERE.



 


Commercial, Mixed Use, Office, and Industrial Zones Use Matrix



P = Use is Permitted by Right         C = Use Requires Conditional
Use Permit
T = Use Requires Temporary Use Permit      Blank = Use is Not Allowed




 


 

   USE
 

Commercial and Mixed Use Zones

 

Office Zones

 

Industrial Zones

 

Special Use Standards (See identified Chapter or Section)




C-N

 

C-R

 

C-S

 

C-MU

 

D-MU

 

O-PA

 

O-C

 

BRP

 

I-L

 

I





 
 
   A
 
 


 
 
AGRICULTURAL - FARMING
 
17.08



A1

 
Beekeeping
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A2

 
Farmers’ Market
 



 

P

 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A3

 
Grain Elevators/Silos
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A4

 
Greenhouses (commercial growers)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



A5

 
Horse stables/Ranch (3 or more horses)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A6

 
Limited Raising of Small Animals, Livestock, and fowl on a Domestic
Noncommercial Scale (2 cows, 4 sheep, goats, no pigs)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A7

 
Raising of Livestock and Fowl, except Stockyards (commercial)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A8

 
Raising of Field, Truck or Orchard Crop & Horticultural Specialties
 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 
 



A9

 
Riding Academies/Stables
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



A10

 
Roadside Stands Selling Produce Grown on Site
 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 
 



A11

 
Animal Shelters/Humane Societies
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 


 
 
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS
 
17.62


 
 
AUDITORIUMS (see THEATERS)
 
 


 
 
AUTOMOTIVE (for gas stations see SERVICE STATIONS)
 
 


  A12
 
Auto Leasing/Renting
 



 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A13

 
Auto Dismantling/Wrecking/Salvage Yards
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
17.32.070



A14

 
Auto Machine Shops
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



A15

 
Auto Oil, Lube & Smog Test Shops
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A16

 
Auto Repairs, Major-Overhauling, Rebuilding, Painting
 



 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A17

 
Automotive Supplies, Parts & Accessories
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A18

 
Automotive Upholsterers
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A19

 
Boat Sales/Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A20

 
Car Washing - self service
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A21

 
Car Washing - automated
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



A22

 
Car Sales - New & Used
 



 



 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A23

 
Motorcycles, Sales and Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A24

 
RV/Boat Storage Yards
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



A25

 
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



A26

 
Tire Sales & Service (excluding major repairs) – stand alone
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A27

 
Tire Sales & Service (excluding major repairs) – located within the primary
permitted use on the site
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



A28

 
Towing/Road Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



A29

 
Truck/Trailer Sales and/or Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



A30

 
Truck Rental/Leasing
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 


 
 
   B
 
 


 
 
BANKS & FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
 
 



B1

 
Stand-Alone Automatic Teller (ATM)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



B2

 
Office
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 


 
 
BARBERS, HAIRSTYLISTS, TANNING CENTERS, COSMETICIANS, & DAY SPAS
 
 



B3

 
Stand Alone
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 
 



B4

 
Located within the Primary Permitted Use on the Site
 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



B5

 
Tattooist
 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
BED & BREAKFAST ACCOMMODATIONS
 
 



B6

 
Traditional
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 
17.32.150



B7

 
Inns
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 
17.32.150



B8

 
Boarding/Rooming Houses
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
BUS DEPOTS
 
 



B9

 
Station (passenger services)
 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 
 



B10

 
Repair Yard & Shops
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



B11

 
Public & Private Transfer Point
 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 


 
 
   C
 
 



C1

 
Catering Services
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



C2

 
Cemeteries & Mausoleums
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
17.52



C3

 
Christmas Tree Sales Lots/Other Seasonal Commercial Uses/Special Events
 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 



 



 



 



 



 
 


 
 
CHURCHES & OTHER RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS
 
 



C4

 
Up to 200 Seats
 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 
 



C5

 
More than 200 Seats
 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 
 



C6

 
Clothing/Costume Rental
 



 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
COMMUNICATIONS
 
 



C7

 
Communications Equipment Building
 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



C8

 
Radio and TV Broadcasting Studios – with antenna off-site
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



C9

 
Radio and TV Broadcasting Studios – with antenna on-site
 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



C10

 
Wireless telecommunication facilities – more than 100 feet away from
property planned/zoned residential
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
17.32.163



C11

 
Wireless telecommunication facilities – within 100-ft of property
planned/zoned residential
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 
17.32.163


 
 
   D
 
 


 
 
DAYCARE, LICENSED
 
 



D1

 
Adult – six or fewer adults
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



D2

 
Adult – 7 to 12 adults
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



D3

 
Adult – 13 or more adults
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



D4

 
Children– 8 or fewer
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



D5

 
Children – 9 to 14
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



D6

 
Children – 15 or more
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



D7

 
In Conjunction with Primary Use
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



D8

 
Drive-Thru Lanes Meeting All Standards in Sect. 17.32.162
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
17.32.162



D9

 
Drive-Thru Lanes Not Meeting All Standards in Sect. 17.32.162
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
17.32.162



D10

 
Drive-Thru Lanes in Industrial Zone
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
17.32.161





 
   E
 
 





 
EATING & DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
 
 



E1

 
Bars/Taverns– within 300 feet of any residence/public use
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



E2

 
Bars/Taverns – not within 300 feet of any residence/

public use
 



 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



E3

 
Micro-breweries/micro-wineries (with or without restaurants)
 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
17.63



E4

 
Craft distilleries
 



 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
Craft distilleries Permitted in 17.63 Overlay District



E5

 
Cafeterias
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 
 



E6

 
Fast Food Restaurants
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
See Lines D8 and D9 of Table 17.25.030 for Drive-thru lane zoning
requirements.



E7

 
Fast Food Restaurants (Industrial Zone)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
17.32.161



E8

 
Pizza/Sandwich Shops – serving wine/beer
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



E9

 
Pizza/Sandwich Shops –no alcohol
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 
 



E10

 
Ice Cream Shop
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



E11

 
Night Clubs/Discotheques
 



 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



E12

 
Live Entertainment
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
17.04



E13

 
Sit-Down Restaurant/Café – with or without full bar using less than 25% of
public area
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 
 



E14

 
Sit-Down Restaurant/Café– full bar using greater than 25% of public area
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 
 



E15

 
Enclosed Solid Waste Transfer Stations
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   F
 
 



F1

 
Florist
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 



 
 



F2

 
Fortunetelling/Palm Reader
 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
5.20





 
FUEL STORAGE
 
 



F4

 
Propane/Butane
 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



F5

 
Propane/Butane (maximum 2000 gallons)
 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



F6

 
Propane/Butane within 50 feet of Planned/zoned Residential
 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



F7

 
Propane/Butane within 50 feet of Planned/zoned Residential (maximum 2000
gallons)
 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



F8

 
Above Ground Tanks dispensing Class I, II, and III-A liquids– within 100
feet of a residential use or residential zoned property
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
17.32.025



F9

 
Above Ground Tanks dispensing Class I, II, and III-A liquids– more than 100
feet from a residential use or residential zoned property
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
17.32.025



F10

 
Pump & Underground Storage Tank
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



F11

 
Pump & Underground Storage Tank – 500 gallons or less
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



F12

 
Pump & Underground Storage Tank – more than 500 gallons
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



F13

 
Petroleum & Petroleum Products Storage
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 





 
Public Fuel Dispensing (see Service Stations)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



F14

 
Funeral Home/Mortuary
 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   G
 
 



G1

 
Galleries– Art/Photography/Crafts
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   H
 
 



H1

 
Home Occupation Businesses
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
17.32.030



H2

 
Hotels and Motels
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 
 





 
   I
 
 





 
   J
 
 





 
   K
 
 



K1

 
Kennels (located 500 feet or more from a residential zone)
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 


 
 
   L
 
 


 
 
LAUNDRY/DRY CLEANERS
 
 



L1

 
Dry Cleaners (cleaning plant)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 



 



 
 



L2

 
Dry Cleaners (cleaning plant including carpet/rug cleaning and dyeing)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



L3

 
Diaper Supply Service
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



L4

 
Linen & Uniform Supply Service
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



L5

 
Self service
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   M
 
 





 
MANUFACTURING/ASSEMBLING
 
 





 
Building & Construction Trade
 

 
 



M1

 
– building materials yards (storage & distribution)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M2

 
– cabinetmaker/carpenter shops
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M3

 
– concrete & ready-mix manufacture & distribution
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



M4

 
– contractor’s equipment storage yards
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M5

 
– drilling/dredging/ditching service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M6

 
– lumberyard (see also RETAIL)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



M7

 
– sheet metal shop
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 





 
Chemical Products, except as more specifically described below
(manufacturing, blending, compounding, packaging, bottling)
 

 
 



M8

 
– laboratories (i.e., organic/inorganic)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



M9

 
– paint, dye & glue manufacturers
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
 



M10

 
– pharmaceuticals
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



M11

 
– manufacture of raw plastic materials, colorants, liquids, powders, resins
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
 



M12

 
– soap detergent & other cleaning preparations
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
 





 
Food & Beverage – Preparation & Bottling/Packaging & Distribution
 

 
 



M13

 
– animal & marine fats & oils (refining & rendering)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 



M14

 
– beer & ale distributors
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M15

 
– breweries and wineries producing 60,000 barrels or less per year
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M16

 
– breweries and wineries producing more than 60,000 barrels per year
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 



M17

 
– commercial bakeries
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M17

 
– dairy products processing & packaging
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



M18

 
– fruit & vegetable brokers & shippers
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M19

 
– grain, feed & flour mills
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M20

 
– ice manufacturers & storage
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M21

 
– meat & poultry product processing including butchering/slaughtering
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 



M22

 
– meat and food locker, packaging
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M23

 
– nut processing (dehydrating, hulling & drying)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M24

 
– packaging of previously prepared food items
 



 



 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



M25

 
– processing, canning & packing food products
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M26

 
– refinery for food products, i.e. sugar
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 



M27

 
– snack food preparation, packaging
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M28

 
– soft drink bottling & distribution
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M29

 
– vegetable oil mills
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M30

 
– water processing & bottling
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M31

 
Flammable/Combustible Liquids
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
13.32.027



M32

 
Heavy Equipment/Machine Manufacture/Assembly (welding & fabrication, i.e.,
agricultural equipment, aircraft equipment parts & supplies, large
appliances, auto/truck manufacturing, industrial machinery)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 



M33

 
Kiln works for clay and pottery products
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M34

 
Light Manufacturing/Assembly (i.e., computer hardware & parts, electric
supplies – coils, wire, cable, etc.)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 





 
Printing & Publishing Industry
 

 
 



M35

 
– desktop, blueprint & photocopy
 



 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



M36

 
– publishing, printing &/or binding (newspapers, magazines, brochures,
books, etc.)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 





 
Products Manufactured/Assembled from Previously Prepared Materials
 

 
 



M37

 
– manufacture of paper & plastic packaging & cartons
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



M38

 
– clothing assembly/imprinting
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M39

 
– metal fabrication & die cutting
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M40

 
– rubber & plastic product manufacturing
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
 



M41

 
– textile mills (dyeing, weaving, knitting, cutting)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 
 



M42

 
– packaging/distribution of prepared materials (non-food items)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



M43

 
Raw Materials Manufacture
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
17.04



M44

 
Stone mills/monument yards
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
 





 
Trucking, Warehousing, and Internet Fulfillment Centers
 

 
 



M45

 
– combined office/warehouse-type buildings
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M46

 
– general warehousing & storage
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M47

 
– local bus charter
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



M48

 
– moving companies/trucking/storage
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M49

 
– refrigerated warehouses/storage
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M50

 
– school bus yards
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



M51

 
– trucking & freight forwarding terminal
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



M52

 
Massage Therapist
 

C

 

P

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 
 





 
MEDICAL FACILITIES/SERVICES (for medical/dental offices see OFFICES)
 
 



M53

 
Hospitals, Acute Care (general medical/surgical)
 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M54

 
Ambulance Services/Medical Transport
 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 
 



M55

 
Convalescent Hospitals/Senior Care Facilities/Nursing Homes
 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M56

 
Clinics (medical group, urgent care/walk-ins, dental, rehabilitation ,
Outpatient Surgery Center)
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



M57

 
Dialysis Centers and Blood Donation Centers
 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 
 



M58

 
Hospices
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M59

 
Laboratories (medical testing & diagnostic)
 



 



 



 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



M60

 
Medical Equipment/supplies (oxygen, prosthetics, walkers, etc.)
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 
 



M61

 
Opticians– Dispensing
 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 
 



M62

 
Psychiatric Hospitals, including Treatment or Substance Abuse
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M63

 
Residential Alcohol/Substance Abuse Treatment Facility
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M64

 
Rehabilitation Hospitals
 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



M65

 
Museums (special interest/historical– public/private)
 



 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   N
 
 





 
   O
 
 





 
OFFICES
 
 





 
General Business and Professional (i.e., data processing services, employment
agencies, insurance agencies, etc.)
 

 
 



O1

 
– less than 2,000 sq. ft.
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 
 



O2

 
– 2,000 sq. ft. to 6,000 sq. ft.
 

C

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 
 



O3

 
– more than 6,000 sq. ft.
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 
 



O4

 
– up to 25% of total leased area for center
 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 
 



O5

 
– more than 25% of total leased area for center
 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 
 



O6

 
Medical (i.e., Physical therapists, physicians/surgeons,
dentists/orthodontists, optometrists, chiropractors, etc.)
 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 
 



O7

 
Counseling/psychologist– individuals
 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 
 



O8

 
Counseling/psychologist – groups
 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 
 



O9

 
Offices Associated with Industrial Uses (not exceeding 25% of total building
area)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



O10

 
Temporary Trailers (construction)
 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 
 





 
   P
 
 



P1

 
Parcel Delivery Services/Parcel Distribution (UPS, Federal Express, etc.)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



P2

 
Parking Facilities For Off-Site Uses
 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



P3

 
Park & Ride
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 





 
PHOTOCOPY SERVICES/DESKTOP PUBLISHING
 
 



P4

 
With Printing Press
 



 

P

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



P5

 
Without Printing Press
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 
 





 
PHOTOGRAPHY/PHOTO SERVICES
 
 



P6

 
Photography Studio
 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 
 



P7

 
Photography Labs/Blue Printing/Microfilming (developing, printing – no
retail on site)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



P8

 
Photography labs (developing, printing – no retail on site)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



P9

 
Photography Labs with Retail on Site
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



P10

 
Planned Unit Developments
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
17.26



P11

 
Private Clubs and Lodges
 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
17.32.115



P12

 
Private Postal Service (Mail Boxes, Mailing Service) (See Also Parcel
Delivery Services)
 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 





 
PUBLIC COMMUNITY SERVICES
 
 



P13

 
Community & Recreation Centers
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



P14

 
Community Gardens
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



P15

 
Fire Stations
 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



P16

 
Police Stations & Substations
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



P17

 
Post Offices
 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 
 



P18

 
Public Buildings, Offices & Grounds
 

C

 

P

 



 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
 



P19

 
Public Golf Courses/Driving Ranges
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



P20

 
Public Libraries
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
 



P21

 
Public Parks/Playgrounds
 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



P22

 
Post Office Substations
 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 





 
   Q
 
 





 
   R
 
 



R1

 
Freight Stations, Repair & Yards
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



R2

 
Passenger Stations
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
RECREATION FACILITIES
 
 



R3

 
Athletic and Health Clubs (gymnasiums, fitness centers, racquet clubs)
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
 



R4

 
Athletic and Health Clubs (gymnasiums, fitness centers, racquet clubs) less
than 5,000 sq. ft.
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



R5

 
Aquatic Centers
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
 



R6

 
Private Libraries
 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 
 



R7

 
Athletic/Playing Fields
 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R8

 
Bowling Alleys
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R9

 
Circus, Carnivals, Fairs & Festivals, Revivals/Assemblies
 



 

T

 

T

 

T

 

T

 



 



 

T

 

T

 



 
 



R10

 
Dance, Yoga & Music Studios
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



R11

 
Martial Arts
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 
 



R12

 
Golf Courses & Driving Ranges
 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R13

 
Miniature Golf Courses
 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R14

 
Ice & Roller Skating Rinks
 



 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R15

 
Pool Halls/Billiard Parlors
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R16

 
Video Machines/Coin-Operated Games – 1 to 4 machines
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 



 



 
17.32.120



R17

 
Video Machines/Coin-Operated games – 5 or more machines
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
17.32.120



R18

 
Other Recreational Facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 
 



R19

 
Rifle and Pistol Range, indoor
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 





 
RECYCLING FACILITIES
 
 



R20

 
Heavy Processing
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 
17.32.160



R21

 
Light Processing
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
17.32.160



R22

 
Large Collection
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
17.32.160



R23

 
Small Collection
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
17.32.160



R24

 
Reverse Vending Machines
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
17.32.160



R25

 
Temporary Facilities, i.e. recycling of Christmas trees, tree trimmings, etc.
 



 

T

 

T

 

T

 



 



 



 



 

T

 

T

 
17.32.160



R26

 
Household Hazardous Waste Collection Center
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
17.32.160





 
RESIDENTIAL (see also Residential Zones)
 
 



R27

 
Residential Units, New or Expansions, which may or may not be associated with
a commercial activity
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



R28

 
Group/Foster Homes, Licensed – 1 - 6 individuals in addition to residing
family
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



R29

 
Group/Foster Homes, Licensed – more than 6 individuals
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



R30

 
Emergency Shelters
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



R31

 
Emergency/Temporary Housing
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 
 



R32

 
Household Pets
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



R33

 
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) units
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 






R34

 
Transitional and Supportive Housing as defined by California Health and
Safety Code Sections 50675.2(h) and 53260(c)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

Permitted in all Residential zoned districts






 
RETAIL
 
 





 
General Merchandise
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R35

 
– less than 4,000 sq. ft.
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 

C

 



 



 
 



R36

 
– 4,000 to 6,000 sq. ft.
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R37

 
– 6,001 to 40,000 sq. ft.
 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R38

 
– 40,001 to 60,000 sq. ft.
 



 

P

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
17.32.050



R39

 
– over 60,000 sq. ft.
 



 

P

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
Building/Landscape Materials
 

 
 





 
– lumberyards (See MANUFACTURING/
ASSEMBLING)
 

 
 



R340

 
– fencing stores/yards
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



R41

 
– floor & wall coverings
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R42

 
Garden Centers/Nurseries – located within primary use
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R43

 
Garden Centers/Nurseries – stand alone
 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



R44

 
Glass Stores (windows, etc. for auto, residential, commercial)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R45

 
Hardware Stores including lumberyards
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R46

 
Hardware Stores 10,000 square feet or more
 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R47

 
Hardware Stores less than 10,000 square feet
 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R48

 
Paint Stores
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R49

 
Home Improvement
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
Drugstore/Pharmacy
 

 
 



R50

 
– including general retail merchandise
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
17.32.050

17.32.055



R51

 
– not including general retail merchandise, 1,500 sq. ft. or more
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



R52

 
– not including general retail merchandise, up to 1,500 sq. ft.
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 
 



R53

 
Farm Equipment Sales
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



R54

 
Feed Stores
 



 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
Food Stores
 

 
 



R55

 
– convenience store – 7000 sq. ft. or less
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



R56

 
– liquor store within 300 feet of residential/public use
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R57

 
– liquor store not within 300 feet of residential/public use
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
In C-R zone, 5,000 sq. ft. minimum building area in per Ordinance 2012-08



R58

 
– specialty food stores (bakery, delicatessen, butcher shop, meat market,
health food, gourmet/imported food, etc.)
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
17.32.050



R59

 
– supermarkets/grocery stores
 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
17.32.050



R60

 
– wine tasting with sales
 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



R61

 
Furniture & Furnishings – new
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R62

 
Furniture & Furnishings– secondhand *up to 10,000 square feet
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R63

 
Gun Shops – within primary use
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R64

 
Gun Shops – stand alone
 



 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
Magazine/Newspaper Sales (Freestanding Booth/Stand/
Kiosk)
 

 
 



R65

 
– indoor
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



R66

 
– outdoor
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 



 



 
 





 
Outlet Stores
 

 
 



R67

 
– bakery
 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R68

 
– apparel
 



 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R69

 
– furnishings
 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R70

 
Pawnshops
 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R71

 
Pet Stores
 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
17.32.050



R72

 
Pool/Spa Supplies/Equipment
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 



 
17.32.050



R73

 
Secondhand Store/Thrift Shops– up to 2,000 square feet
 



 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R74

 
Secondhand Store/Thrift Shops – greater than 2,000 square feet
 



 

P

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



R75

 
Smoke Shops (retail of cigarettes and smoke devices/paraphernalia)
 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   S
 
 





 
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE (see also Quasi-Public and Residential Zones)
 
 



S1

 
Preschool/After-School Care
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 
 



S2

 
Elementary Schools, K-6 or K-8
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



S3

 
Middle Schools
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



S4

 
High Schools
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



S5

 
Colleges/Universities (academic)
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 
 



S6

 
Business, Trade, Vocational, Charter or other Specialized Schools
 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 



S7

 
After Hours Academic Education Facilities (After 6:00 p.m.)
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



S8

 
Tutoring Centers
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 





 
SERVICE, COMMERCIAL
 
 



S9

 
Air Conditioning Shops
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S10

 
Appliance, Electrical Equipment, Tools (disassemble & repair)
 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S11

 
Check-Cashing Service
 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S12

 
Chemical Stripping/Powder Coating
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



S13

 
Chrome & Anodizinig Shops
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



S14

 
Courier Services
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



S15

 
Auction House
 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



S16

 
Bail Bonds
 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 
 



S17

 
Equipment Rental – conducted outdoors
 



 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S18

 
Equipment Rental – conducted indoors
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S19

 
Exterminators/Fumigators
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S20

 
Gunsmith Shops, including incidental retail
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S21

 
Heavy Machinery and Equipment (welding, cutting, grinding, casting, etc.)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



S22

 
Janitorial Service
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S23

 
Lawn Maintenance & Tree Trimming
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S24

 
Locksmiths
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S25

 
Other Household & Maintenance Services
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



S26

 
Pet Grooming/Dog Training (conducted indoors)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S27

 
Printing Service (see also Photocopy Services)
 

C

 



 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S28

 
Repair Shops (tools, non-automotive, mechanical equipment)
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S29

 
Sharpening Service – tools, knives, saw blades, lawn mowers, etc.
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S30

 
Sharpening Service – small tools not including saw blades and lawn mowers
 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S31

 
Sheltered Workshops
 

C

 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 
 



S32

 
Shoe Repair Shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S33

 
Sign Painting & Fabrication
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S34

 
Taxidermists
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S35

 
Tailor, Dressmaking, & Alterations
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S36

 
Upholstering Shops (furniture only)
 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 



S37

 
Upholstering Shops – Showroom with minimum 35% of gross receipts to be
retail sales
 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
SERVICE STATIONS
 
 



S38

 
Fuel dispensing only – not including major auto repair services of any kind
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 
 



S39

 
Also including major auto repair services
 



 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



S40

 
Also including light servicing of trucks
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 



 
 



S41

 
Storage, Sorting, Collection, Or Bailing of Iron, Junk, Paper, Rags, Or Scrap
(Not Including Auto Dismantling)
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



S42

 
Storage Tanks, Non-Fuel
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 





 
   T
 
 



T1

 
Taxi/Limousine Service
 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 



 



 
 





 
THEATERS
 
 



T2

 
Auditoriums
 



 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



T3

 
Drive-in
 



 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 
 



T4

 
Movie
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 
 



T5

 
Live Performance
 



 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 
 





 
   U
 
 



U1

 
Unenclosed Solid Waste Transfer Stations
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 
 





 
UTILITIES
 
 



U2

 
Business Offices
 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



U3

 
Electric Distribution Substations
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 
 



U4

 
Elevated Pressure Tanks
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



U5

 
Gas Regulator Stations
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



U6

 
Public Service Pumping Stations
 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 

C

 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 
 



U7

 
Payment Centers
 

P

 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 

P

 



 



 
 



U8

 
Public Utility Service Yards
 



 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 





 
   V
 
 





 
VETERINARY SERVICES
 
 



V1

 
Animal Care Clinic (no boarding)
 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 



 

C

 



 



 

P

 



 
 



V2

 
Hospitals/Clinics (located 500 ft. from a residential zone including short
term boarding of animals)
 

C

 



 

C

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 





 
   W
 
 



W1

 
Wholesale Commercial Establishment
 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 



 
 





 
WAREHOUSING STORAGE
 
 



W2

 
– primary use
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 
 



W3

 
– not to exceed 20% of gross floor area of permitted use
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



W4

 
– in excess of 20% of gross floor area of permitted use
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

C

 
 



W5

 
Mini Storage Facilities
 



 



 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

C

 
 





 
   X
 
 


 
 
   Y
 
 


 
 
   Z
 
 


 
 
   OTHER
 
 



OT1

 
Other Uses Similar in Nature and Intensity as Determined by the City Planner
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 
 



OT2

 
Other Uses Similar in Nature and Intensity as Determined by the City Planner
Subject to the Granting of a Conditional Use Permit
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 
 




 



(Ord. 2019-04, 2019: Ord. 2018-09, 2018; Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015; Ord.
2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2014-07 § 3 (part), 2014; Ord. 2012-10, 2012; Ord.
2012-08, 2012; Ord. 2012-02, 2012; Ord. 2011-07 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2010-16,
2010; Ord. 2009-02, 2009; Ord. 2006-17, 2006; Res. 2004-75 (part), 2004; Ord.
2004-08 § 3, 2004; Res. 2004-14 (part), 2004; Res. 2003-95 (part), 2003;
Res. 2002-83, 2002; Res. 2002-26, 2002; Res. 2001-40, 2001; Res. 2001-29,
2001; Ord. 2000-01 § 6, 2000; Ord. 9903 § 3, 1999; Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997; amended by council August 13, 1997; amended by council June 3, 1996 and
May 20, 1996: prior code § 7328)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




Chapter 17.26
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT



Sections:



17.26.010   Purpose and intent.



17.26.020   Definitions.



17.26.030   Location.



17.26.040   Development standards.



17.26.050   Application procedures.



17.26.060   Exceptions.



17.26.070   Amendments.



17.26.080   Timing.



17.26.010   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of the Planned Development regulations contained
in this chapter is to provide for land development consisting of a related
group of residential housing types or commercial uses, including but not
limited to, attached or detached single-family housing, cluster housing,
patio homes, town houses, apartments, condominiums or cooperatives or any
combination thereof and including related open spaces and community services
consisting of recreational, commercial and offices, infrastructure,
maintenance and operational facilities essential to the development, all
comprehensively planned. Such land development normally requires deviation
from the normal zoning regulations and standards regarding lot size, yard
requirements, bulk and structural coverage in an effort to maximize the
benefits accruing to the citizens of Visalia. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7410)



17.26.020   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:



   "Density bonus" means dwelling unit increases based on project
amenities provided as part of a planned development.



   "Dwelling unit" means one or more habitable rooms, designed for or used
by one family for living and sleeping purposes and having only one kitchen or
kitchenette. Dwelling unit can include various types including, but not
limited to, attached or detached single-family homes, cluster homes, patio
homes, town houses, condominiums, apartments, or cooperatives.



   "Environment, natural" means the physical condition of a proposed PD
site prior to proposed



development; including, but not limited to, natural features such as
waterways, vegetation, topographical features, and animal life.



   "Homeowner's association" means an incorporated entity formed under
applicable laws and including all properties within a planned development.
Such association normally maintains and administers the common open space
associated with a planned development.



   "Lot or parcel net area" means the land area contained within the
boundary of a lot or parcel. Land within public or private streets or
property held in common for a particular development amenity is not
considered as "net lot area."



   "Maintenance district" means an assessment district formed under
applicable laws that pays for maintaining dedicated or private open space
facilities.



   "Neighborhood commercial center" means a convenience shopping complex
providing services within a neighborhood and meeting applicable ordinance and
general plan requirements.



   "Open space" means the area within a planned development not occupied
with structures, driveways or parking and storage areas.



   "Open space, common" means the area within a planned development under
the control and ownership of a homeowner's association. Common open space may
include recreation facilities, access and parking, paths, and storage areas.



   "Open space, usable" means the area within a planned development that
is deemed suitable for use by the residents of the PD; not including parking
areas, private patios, required building separations, parking and access, or
storage areas.



   "Parking, guest" means designated off-street parking areas within a
planned development reserved for guest or visitor parking.



   "Parking, required" means off-street parking areas within a planned
development to be used for long-term storage of resident vehicles,
recreational vehicles, boats and trailers.



   "Planned development" means a development that includes a mix of land
uses and that requires a deviation from normal zoning standards regarding lot
size, yard requirements, bulk and structural coverage and is subject to
provisions of this chapter.



   "Planned residential development" means a planned development
consisting of residential uses only and subject to the provisions of this
chapter.



   "Planned unit development" means a planned development including two,
or more, of the following uses: residential, commercial, professional office,
quasi-public, and industrial.



   "Recreation facility" means an area within a planned development that
includes recreational installations for common use. Such installations
normally include such things as a swimming pool, recreation building, patio
areas, tot lots, and exercise areas.



   "Site area, gross" means the total horizontal area included within the
property lines of a proposed planned development after dedication of required
right-of-way and open space areas. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2
(part), 1997: prior code § 7411)



17.26.030   Location.



   A planned development may be located in residential, commercial or
industrial zone upon approval of necessary permits required under this
chapter. Planned residential developments and planned unit developments may
be located only in appropriate zones as follows:



   1.   A planned residential development may be allowed in any
residential zone.



   2.   A planned unit development  with commercial/industrial uses
may be located where those uses are allowed in the underlying zone. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7412)



17.26.040   Development standards.



   The following is a list of development standards considered to be
necessary to achieve the purpose and intent of this chapter:



   A.   Site Area.



   1.   The minimum site area for a planned residential development
shall be one acre of gross site area.



   2.   The minimum site area for a planned unit development with
residential uses shall be ten acres.



   3.   The minimum site area for a planned unit development without
residential uses shall be five acres.



   4.   The minimum site area for a planned unit development with only
industrial uses shall be twenty (20) acres.



   5.   Parcels smaller than the minimums stated above may be
considered if the planning commission finds there are unique circumstances
(shape, natural features, location, etc.) that would deprive the land owner
of development potential consistent with other properties classified in the
same underlying zone.



   B.   Density. The average number of dwelling units per net area
shall not exceed the maximum density prescribed by the site area regulations
or the site area per dwelling in which the planned unit development is
located, subject to a density bonus that may be granted by the city council
upon recommendation by the planning commission. A density bonus may be
granted as part of a planned development based on the following guidelines:



   Percent of Net Site in            Area Percent of



   Usable Open Space            Density Bonus



   6% to 10%                  6%



   11% to 20%                  10%



   21% to 25%                  16%



   Over 25%                  20%



   C.   Usable Open Space. Usable open space shall be provided for all
planned developments that include residential uses, except as provided in
this section. Such open space shall include a minimum of five percent of the
net site area of the residential portion of a planned development. The
requirement for mandatory usable open space may be waived in developments
wherein the net lot area of each lot meets or exceeds minimum standard in the
underlying zone classification.



   D.   Site Design Criteria.



   1.   Location of proposed uses and their relationship to each other
with a planned development shall be consistent with general plan policies and
ordinance requirements.



   2.   The natural environment of a site is to be considered as part
of the design criteria. Such features as natural ponding areas, waterways,
natural habitats, and mature vegetation are to be considered.



   3.   If a planned development is located adjacent to a major
arterial street, or other existing possible land use conflict, adequate
buffering shall be included in the plan.



   E.   Landscaping and Structural Coverage. Landscaping provided
within a planned development shall conform to the general standards imposed
by the underlying zone. Additional landscaping may be required as part of a
planned development due to unusual circumstances.



   F.   Circulation.



   1.   Vehicle circulation shall be based on a street pattern as
outlined within the circulation element of the general plan. Use of private
streets and variations to normal city street standards are encouraged.



   2.   There shall be no direct vehicle access from individual lots
onto major arterial streets.



   3.   Pedestrian access and bicycle paths should be incorporated
within planned developments. Such paths and bikeways to be separated from
vehicle streets when possible.



   G.   Parking.



   1.   Required parking shall conform with the existing parking
standards required under the zoning ordinance.



   2.   Guest parking and storage parking shall be encouraged and may
be required in planned development.



   3.   All parking shall be screened from adjacent public
right-of-way. Such screening may include dense plantings, fences, landscaped
berms, or grade separation.



   4.   Parking clusters shall be provided rather than large (single)
parking areas.



   H.   Trash Enclosures.



   1.   Trash enclosures shall be provided as specified by the city
solid waste department.



   2.   Such enclosures shall be screened from view from adjacent
structures and roadways and be provided with solid gates. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7413)



17.26.050   Application procedures.



   The following procedures specify the process for review of a planned
development.



   A.   Pre-Application Review. Pre-application review shall be a
two-step process including a mandatory meeting with the planning department
and submittal of a concept plan to the site plan review committee. Such
pre-application review shall include, but is not limited to, the following
elements:



   1.   Site area and location;



   2.   Land use relationships within and outside the proposed site;



   3.   Circulation and access;



   4.   Environmental features;



   5.   Open space and project amenities;



   6.   Available and needed public improvements and facilities.



   B.   Application Process. After completing the pre-application
review process the owner, or agent, shall file an application for a planned
development. Such application submittal shall be processed as a conditional
use permit and shall require a site plan review permit. The city planner
shall determine the extent of development detail required as part of the
application submittal. Such details may include, but is not limited to, the
following:



   1.   Legal description and boundary survey map of the exterior
boundaries of land to be developed;



   2.   A topographic map indicating anticipated grading or fill areas,
groupings of existing trees, and other natural features;



   3.   For residential development:



   a.   The number and type of dwelling units. This may be stated as a
range of maximum and minimum number of units by type,



   b.   The approximate total population anticipated in the entire
development,



   c.   The proposed standards of height, open space, structural
coverage, pedestrian and traffic circulation, and density within use areas;



   4.   For nonresidential uses:



   a.    Types of uses proposed within the entire area,



   b.   Anticipated employment base which may be stated as a range,



   c.   Methods proposed to control possible land use conflicts and
environmental impacts,



   d.   The proposed structure heights, open space buffering,
circulation, and parking/loading,



   e.   Pertinent social or economic characteristics of the development
such as school enrollment, residence, employment, etc.;



   5.   A preliminary utilities report;



   6.   The location, area, and type of sites proposed for open space,
recreational facilities, and public facilities;



   7.   The anticipated timing for each phase, if any, of the
development. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord.
9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7414)



17.26.060   Exceptions.



   Exceptions to the design criteria specified in Section 17.26.040 may be
modified by the city council upon recommendation by the planning commission
based on unique circumstances. Such exceptions shall be reviewed by the site
plan committee for comment prior to planning commission recommendation. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7415)



17.26.070   Amendments.



   Minor amendments to an approved planned development may be granted by
the planning commission upon recommendation of the site plan committee. Major
amendments shall be processed as an amendment to a conditional use permit
with required public hearings. Major amendments include, but are not limited
to, the following:



   A.   Changes in residential density;



   B.   Changes in land use relationships;



   C.   Changes in the location and/or scope of open space;



   D.   Changes in circulation patterns;



   E.   Other changes as determined by the planning commission upon
request. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code
§ 7416)



17.26.080   Timing.



   Once granted, a planned development approval shall be valid for a
period of two years. Extensions may be granted by the planning commission for
one year periods, not to exceed three such extensions. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9718 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7417)



Chapter 17.28
SITE PLAN REVIEW PERMIT



Sections:



17.28.010   Purpose and intent.



17.28.012   Definitions.



17.28.015   Applicability.



17.28.020   Site plan review committee.



17.28.030   Application procedure.



17.28.040   Issuance and re- submittal.



17.28.050   Appeals to the planning commission.



17.28.060   [Reserved]



17.28.070   Site plan review permit issuance.



17.28.080   Required improvements.



17.28.085   Timing of improvements.



17.28.090   Building permits.



17.28.100   Lapse of site plan review permit.



17.28.110   Suspension and revocation.



17.28.120   Permit to run with the land.



17.28.010   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose of the site plan review permit is to assure that
developments, new and remodeled buildings and structures, and improvements to
land are reviewed to ensure substantial compliance with the general plan,
municipal code, policies, and improvement standards of the city. 



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7422)



17.28.012   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:



   “Change of occupancy” means a change in the purpose or level of
activity within a building that involves a change in application of the
requirements of the California Building Code.



   “Change of use” means the use of a building or part of a building
that changes from one use to another use.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017)



17.28.015   Applicability.



   A.   The provisions of this chapter apply to:



   1.   Any development requiring site plan review permit as per this
Title.



   2.   New commercial, industrial and other non-residential structures
or additions to existing commercial, industrial or other non-residential
structures.



   3.   New multi-family residential development or additions to
existing multi-family residential development.



   4.   Divisions of land or adjustments to property lines.



   5.   Interior alterations that increase the useable floor area of a
non-residential structure.



   6.   A change of use for a building/structure or a change in
occupancy for a building/structure.



   7.   Improvements made in the public right of way, except those
initiated by the city, State, or a utility company.



   8.   Other non-residential improvements to land or buildings deemed
by the city planner to be subject to the site plan review process. Such
improvements include but are not limited to improvements that impact the
structural integrity of buildings, that alter electrical wiring, that alter
the building's plumbing, that alter the exterior drainage of land, that
impacts access to property, that risks substantial visual impacts to
surrounding properties, that could potentially alter any applicable zoning
requirements, or could otherwise be subject to the criteria set forth in
Section 17.02.170.



   B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:



   1.   New or remodeled single-family dwellings;



   2.    Repairs and maintenance to a site or structure that does not
add to, enlarge, or expand the area occupied by the land use, or the floor
area of the structure and that are substantially similar in design as the
original construction;



   3.   Interior alterations that do not increase the useable floor
area of a structure, or modify the use of a structure;



   4.   Construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or
public agency of underground or overhead utilities.



   C.   The total combined use area of the site of the proposed
development shall be subject to site plan review permit procedures and all
applicable goals, policies, codes, regulations, and improvement standards of
the city.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.28.020   Site plan review committee.



   A.   Members. The site plan review committee shall be comprised of
staff representatives of the engineering, building, and planning divisions of
the community development as well as the fire department; in addition, the
city planner may request input from any other city department or public
agency, subject to city council policies.



   B.   Powers and Duties. The site plan review committee shall have
the power to:



   1.   Review site plan review permit applications for consistency
with the general plan, municipal code, policies, regulations, and improvement
standards of the city.



   2.   Apply requirements to a site to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



   3.   Require revisions to the site plan to bring it into consistency
with the General Plan and local ordinances.



   4.   Identify the city permits necessary to construct the proposed
project.



   5.   Require that the site plan be revised, and/or provide direction
to the project applicant be permitted to proceed to submit for the necessary
city permits; or



   6.   Require that the site plan be resubmitted with required
revisions. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 96- 5 § 30 (part), 1996: prior
code § 7423)



17.28.030   Application procedure.



   A.   Information. The community development department shall make
available a site plan review application form.  The site plan shall be drawn
to a scale that clearly indicates all dimensions and includes the following
information as well as information identified in the site plan review
application form:



   1.   Address;



   2.   Assessor's parcel number;



   3.   Vicinity map on cover sheet;



   4.   Scale and north arrow;



   5.   Dimensions of property;



   6.   Location of existing and proposed buildings and/or structures
showing dimensions from property lines and their intended use;



   7.   Location, height and material of existing and/or proposed
fences and walls;



   8.   Location of off-street parking. Indicate the number of parking
spaces, type of paving, direction arrows and parking dimensions;



   9.   Location and width of drive approaches;



   10.   Method of on-site drainage;



   11.   Location of existing and/or proposed public improvements (such
as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utility poles, fire hydrants, street lights,
traffic signal devices, etc.);



   12.   Method of sanitary disposal;



   13.   Location of signs, their size, height, type of illumination
and type of building material;



   14.   Location of trash refuse area;



   15.   Location and type of existing trees. Oak trees must have the
approximate diameter size;



   16.   Location of areas to be landscaped;



   17.   Loading and storage areas indicating any fences and walls to
be used as screening;



   18.   Location and height of all roof mounted structures;



   19.   Lighting, including the location and height of all exterior
fixtures;



   20.   Such other data as may be required to permit the site plan
review committee to make the required findings;



   21.   Elevations, if required by the city planner;



   22.   Additional information as required by the city planner or the
historic preservation advisory board.



   B.   Submittal: The site plan shall be submitted to the community
development department along with a completed site plan review application
form. The number of copies of the site plan required shall be determined by
the site plan review committee and posted at the community development
department and on the city website.  If all of the required information as
outlined within Section 17.28.030(A) is not submitted, the application may be
rejected by the city planner.



   C.   Review Timeline: Plans submitted by four p.m. on a Thursday
shall be reviewed by the site plan committee at their regular meeting at nine
a.m. on the following Wednesday. Additional time may be required for site
plans that must be reviewed by other agencies and/or city committees.  The
site plan review committee may modify these times by posting a revised
schedule at the community development department and on the city website.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7424)



17.28.040   Issuance and re-submittal.



   A.   The site plan review committee shall declare their intention to
allow the project to proceed to apply for the necessary city permits, or
require resubmittal of the site plan at the site plan review committee
meeting.



   B.   Within thirty (30) working days after submission, the site plan
review committee shall provide, in writing to the applicant, either to
proceed with applying for necessary city permits, either with or without
required revisions, or require resubmittal of the site plan review and
identify required revisions.  The site plan review committee shall consider
each project's consistency with current city ordinances and whether it will
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.  In issuing direction
to proceed, the committee shall consider the following:



   1.   That all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code are
complied with;



   2.   That the following are so arranged that traffic congestion is
avoided and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected with no
adverse effect on surrounding property and to provide for a site plan which
supports current adopted planning commission and city council policies:



   a.   Facilities, improvements and utilities,



   b.   Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation,



   c.   Setbacks,



   d.   Location of service use areas,



   e.   Walls,



   f.   Landscaping;



   3.   That proposed lighting is so arranged as to deflect the light
away from adjoining properties and will not cause a traffic hazard;



   4.   That proposed equipment which is used in conjunction with a use
is so designed to avoid excessive noise at the property line of the use;



   5.   That the project’s design features, and construction
management, and operational plans will reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides
and particulates associated with construction and use of the development as
required by the Indirect Source Review (ISR) regulations adopted by the City
(See Section 17.32.300) or, alternatively, that payment is made for off-site
emissions reduction fees as established by the San Joaquin Valley Air
Pollution Control District (SJVAPCD).



   B.   In making the required findings, the site plan review committee
shall assure that the approval will be consistent with established policies
and regulations relating to public improvements, street improvements, as
approved and adopted by the city council, including necessary dedications and
traffic safety.



   C.   Upon completion or review, the Community Development Department
shall notify the applicant of the committee's determination along with a copy
of the finally approved site plan.  (Ord. 2018-18 § 1 (part), 2018: Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7425)



17.28.050   Appeals to the planning commission.



   The applicant or any interested person may appeal a decision of the
site plan review committee to the planning commission, setting forth the
reason for such appeal to the commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the
city planner in writing with applicable fees, within ten (10) days after
notification of such decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of
the commission's next regular meeting. If the appeal is filed within five (5)
days of the next regular meeting of the commission, the appeal shall be
placed on the agenda of the commission's second regular meeting following the
filing of the appeal. The commission shall review the site plan and shall
uphold or revise the decision of the site plan review, based on the findings
set forth in Section 17.28.040. The decision of the commission shall be final
unless appealed to the council pursuant to Section 17.02.145. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2010-02 § 3, 2010: Ord. 2006-18 § 5, 2007: Ord. 9605 §
30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7426)



17.28.060   [Reserved].



17.28.070   Site plan review permit issuance.



   After the final site plan has been directed to proceed, the planning
department staff shall notify the applicant of the site plan review
determination. Once the applicant receives a site plan review determination
notification, building permit applications may be submitted, or if required,
applications for discretionary development permits may be submitted. No
permits may be issued for the erection or enlargement of building or
structures and no persons shall perform any development or construction of
work on the site except within full compliance of this section. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7428)



17.28.080   Required improvements.



   Because of changes that may occur in a local neighborhood due to
increased vehicular traffic generated by facilities requiring a site plan
review permit, and upon the principle that such development should be
required to provide street dedications and improvements proportionate to such
increased



vehicular traffic, the following dedications and improvements may be deemed
necessary by the site plan review committee and may be required as a revision
to any site plan.



   A.   If the development borders or is traversed by an existing
street, the applicant may be required to:



   1.   Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a bordering local
streets to the extent of one-half the ultimate width established by the city
as the standard for such local streets; as per adopted improvement standards;



   2.   Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a traversing
collector street to its ultimate width established by the city as the
standard for such collector streets;



   3.   Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a bordering or
traversing arterial street to its ultimate width established by the city as
the standard for such arterial street;



   4.   Install curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street signs, street lights
and street trees along one side of a bordering, or along both sides of a
traversing, local collector, or arterial street;



   5.   Install utilities and drainage facilities to the full extent of
the service requirements generated by the development;



   6.   Grade and improve bordering local, collector, or arterial
streets from the curb to the centerline of the ultimate right-of-way;



   7.   Grade and improve traversing local, collector, or arterial
streets from curb to curb;



   8.   Grade and improve parking lane and one traffic lane adjacent to
the development along a bordering collector or arterial streets;



   9.   Grade and improve both parking lanes and the two outside
traffic lanes of a traversing collector or arterial streets.



   B.   All new streets shall be dedicated and improved in accordance
with the requirements of subsection (A) of this section.



   C.   Fire hydrants shall be installed as per city requirements.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7429)



17.28.085   Timing of improvements.



   All improvements shall be to city standards existing at the time the
site plan is approved and shall be installed at the time of the proposed
development. Where it is determined by the site plan review committee that it
is impractical to install any or all improvements at the time of the proposed
development, an agreement to make such improvements may be accepted in lieu
thereof. In any event, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the
city for the provision of improvements before a building permit may be
issued, as specified in Sections 16.24.050 and 16.24.060. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



17.28.090   Building permits.



   Before a building permit may be issued for any building or structure
proposed as part of the approved site plan review permit, the building
official shall secure written approval from the city planner that the
proposed building is in conformity with the regulations, general provisions,
and required revisions identified in the site plan review permit. Before a
building may be occupied, the building inspector shall certify to the city
planner that the site has been developed in conformity with the regulations,
general provisions, and required revisions identified in the site plan review
permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code
§ 7430)



17.28.100   Lapse of site plan review permit.



   A site plan review permit shall lapse and become null and void one year
following the date of approval unless, prior to the expiration of one year, a
building permit is issued by the building official and construction is
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7431)



17.28.110   Suspension and revocation.



   Upon violation of any of the applicable provisions of this chapter or
upon failure to comply with the revisions identified in the permit, a site
plan review permit approval shall be suspended by the city planner or site
plan review committee. Notice of such suspension shall be sent immediately to
the person responsible for noncompliance by the building official or by the
City code enforcement officer. Within thirty (30) days of the suspension, the
planning commission shall consider the suspension. If not satisfied that the
regulation, general provision, or required revisions identified in the site
plan review permit are being complied with, the commission may revoke the
site plan approval or take such action as may be necessary to insure
compliance. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7432)



17.28.120   Permit to run with the land.



   A site plan review permit approved pursuant to the provisions set forth
in this Section shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a
change of ownership of the site. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7433)



Chapter 17.30
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



Sections:



Article 1. General Provisions



17.30.010   Purpose and applicability.



17.30.015   Development standards.



17.30.017   Development in conformance with officially adopted master
plans and specific plans.



Article 2. Central Business District Parking Zone



17.30.020   Purpose and intent.



17.30.025   Location.



17.30.030   Required parking/imposition of in-lieu fee.



17.30.035   Fee.



17.30.040   Payment of parking in-lieu fee.



17.30.045   Timing of fee payment/security.



17.30.050   Parking in-lieu fee trust fund.



17.30.055   Refund of fees paid.



17.30.060   Exemptions and credits/transfer.



Article 1. General Provisions



17.30.010   Purpose and applicability.



   It is the purpose of this article to establish development standards
and requirements that foster a workable relationship among land uses, enhance
the aesthetics of the city, and promote the public health and safety.  The
standards in this article shall apply to all zone districts. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7435)



17.30.015   Development standards.



   A.   Site Area. The minimum parcel size varies according to the zone
district in which the parcel is located. However, this title shall not
preclude parcels of less than the required minimum, which exist at the time
of adoption of this title, from securing site plan review permits and
building permits. Parcels of less than the required minimum size may be
created upon approval of an acceptable master plan by the site plan review
committee.



   B.   Setback. The minimum building setbacks in each zone district
shall be conformed to the requirements set forth in that zone district.
However, the site plan review committee may grant an exception to the
required standards based on the uniqueness of the property or the specific
design needs of the project. The average setback and landscaping under such
exception shall be equal to the required standard.



   C.   Landscaping. The city will review and approve all landscaping
for developments approved or reviewed through the site plan review permit
process in order to maintain high quality developments in Visalia. If
landscaping is required as a result of request for building permit, the
landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building
plans. The minimum landscaping areas shall conform to the requirements set
forth in applicable zone district development standards and also the
following standards:



   1.   General.



   a.   All areas within a required setback to contain living ground
covering or nonliving ground coverings.  All plants within required setbacks
to be of species suited to valley conditions, using Sunset Western Garden
Book Zones 8 and 9 as a guide. The use of low water-using varieties, grouped
by similar water usage is strongly recommended.  All landscape areas shall
meet the requirements of the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance,
or if applicable, the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance of the City of
Visalia.



   b.   Islands of a minimum area of eighty square feet shall be
established at a maximum separation of ten continuous parking stalls. The
islands shall be landscaped with ground covers and with a minimum of one
fifteen (15) gallon tree planted in each island. Actual numbers of trees will
be based on size of project as determined by the planning division.



   c.   All landscaping as required within section shall be reviewed by
the planning department as to the type, density of planting and size of
plants intended for use. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained
by the property owner.



   d.   All landscaped areas shall be surrounded with six-inch high
concrete curbing, unless waived by the site plan review committee.



   e.   All landscaping on public property and parks shall conform to
standards adopted by the park and recreation commission.



   f.   Exceptions to landscaping requirements may be granted by the
historic preservation advisory board for sites located within an historic
district or for sites listed on the local register.



   2.   Trees.



   a.   Spacing of trees to be variable depending on type and eventual
size, but that there be a general minimum standard of one fifteen (15) gallon
tree for each twenty feet of frontage of a required landscaped setback,
exclusive of vehicular site lines.



   b.   Trees to be used in parking lots to be of a type that will form
a full head on a single trunk, i.e., Chinese Elm, Chinese Pistache, Golden
Rain, Valley Oak or other approved species.



   3.   Shrubs.



   a.   At least seventy-five (75) percent of shrubs planted to be of
five-gallon minimum size. One-gallon plants may be used if planted with
approved low water-using varieties.



   b.   Shrubs within a required setback to be spaced in such a way so
that at maturity the plants will provide eighty (80) percent coverage. This
is typically achieved by a plant spacing of five five-gallon plants per one
hundred (100) square feet.



   4.   Ground Covers.



   a.   Definition. "Living ground cover" means low-growing plants or
shrubs that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in
one year or less, excluding turf. To achieve desired coverage, low growing,
groundcover plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve (12)
inches on center. Low-growing, shrub type ground covers in one gallon cans
shall be planted a maximum of two feet on center. Spacing may be increased to
three feet on center for fast growing plants as approved by the planning
division.



   In areas susceptible to foot traffic, the use of nonliving ground cover
or long-lived low-growing shrubs and groundcovers, such as Dwarf Coyote Bush,
Lantana and Junipers are required. Other groundcovers that do not last as
long, such as Baby Tears, Gazania, African Daisy, and annual or perennial
flowers must be limited to fifteen (15) percent of the total living
groundcover area.



   b.   Definition. "Nonliving ground cover" means artificial turf,
forest humus or walk-on bark, rock, and other similar materials.  Humus or
bark shall be placed in planted areas at a minimum thickness of three (3)
inches.



   c.   All soil surfaces are to be covered by plant materials or
nonliving groundcovers as defined in subsection (C)(5)(b) of this section.



   5.   Parking Lots.



   a.   Planter required every other row to a width determined by the
site plan review committee.



   b.   Such planters to contain approved trees on twenty (20) foot
centers.



   c.   Shrubs and trees to be arranged in such a way as to avoid
damage from the front of parked cars extending into the planter areas.



   6.   Turf.



   a.   Living or nonliving turf shall be limited to twenty-five (25)
percent of the total landscape area, and the use of low water-using
varieties. Public parks, golf courses, cemeteries, schools, properties within
a historic district, and residential office conversions are to be reviewed
for exemptions on a project by project basis.



   b.   No turf will be allowed:



   I.   In traffic medians;



   ii.   Storm drainage ponds with slopes in excess of 1:6;



   iii.   On mounds or slopes exceeding 1:10.



   7.   Irrigation Plans.



   a.   Irrigation plans are required to be submitted along with
landscape plans. Irrigation plans must show an irrigation water use
calculation per the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. If the
landscape is required as the result of a request for building permit, the
landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building
plans.



   b.   Water efficient systems (drip, minispray, bubbler type, etc.)
shall be used whenever feasible.



   c.   All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic
controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have
multiple cycle capabilities and a flexible calendar program.



   d.   Separate valves shall be installed based on water use of
planting and exposures on irrigation systems with seven or more valves. Turf
areas should be on a separate valve from nonturf areas on all irrigation
systems regardless of size.



   e.   Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within
each control valve.



   f.   Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head
coverage and placed at a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the diameter of
throw.



   g.   Overhead sprays shall not throw water onto hardscaped or other
non-planted, or bare ground areas, including sidewalks between landscaped
areas.



   h.   A minimum of four-inch pop-up sprinklers are required in turf
areas, and areas adjacent to walkways and curbs. All sprinklers must be
designed and installed to clear all plant material at maturity and obstacles
in its throw zone.



   i.   Serviceable check valves or separate valves according to water
zones are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage.



   j.   Drip or bubbler irrigation systems are required on all trees
and shrubs regardless if planted alone, in groundcover or turf areas.



   k.   Irrigation controllers are required and must use
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize automatic rain
shut-off devices.



   l.   All irrigation systems must meet the latest Model Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance requirements.



   E.   Loading. All loading facilities required as part of a proposed
use shall be screened from view from both the parking areas and the public
right-of-way.



   F.   Screening and Storage.



   1.   Where practical, all roof mounted air conditioners, roof vents,
etc. should be screened from view from ground level. Such screening must be
of a style and material such that it is an integral part of the building
architecture. This would not apply to multiple family development.



   2.   Where commercial, office, or industrial site adjoins an R-1 or
R-M district, a concrete block or masonry wall to a height recommended by the
site plan review committee shall be located on the property line except in a
required front yard, or the street side of a corner lot and suitably
maintained. This requirement may be waived if an alternative landscaped
buffer is provided as approved by the planning commission as an exception.



   3.   A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
structure, on a site across a street or alley from an R-1, or R-M district
shall be screened by a concrete block or masonry wall to a height to be
determined by the site plan review committee, if the site plan committee
finds said use to be unsightly.



   4.   Open storage of materials and equipment, except commercial
vehicles and used car sales lots, shall be permitted only within an area
surrounded and screened by a concrete block or masonry wall to a height to be
determined by the site plan review committee; provided, that no materials or
equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence.



   5.   In all commercial, office, mixed use, and business research
park zone districts all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed  structure, except for off-street
parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas,
nurseries, garden shops, bus depots and transit stations and electric
distribution substations.



   6.   Where commercial or office uses abut property zoned R-1, the
upper stories of the structure to be occupied with commercial or office uses
shall be so designed, or windows screened, to limit visibility onto the R-1
zoned property.



   G.   Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for proposed developments shall be limited
to the extent that access is provided to the site with a minimum of ingress
and egress points so as to protect the safe traffic flow of Visalia's major
arterial streets.



   H.   Lighting. No on-site lighting shall directly or indirectly
illuminate adjacent properties or the public street that provides access. The
lights and standard to be used shall be approved by the site plan review
committee.



   I.   Auto Traffic Easements. When deemed necessary for the traffic
safety of the community, the site plan review committee shall have the right
to require as a condition of granting a planned development site plan review
permit, that a parcel provide an easement for purposes of vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2014-07 § 3 (part), 2014: prior code §
7463)



17.30.017   Development in conformance with officially adopted master
plans and specific plans.



   Where the city council has adopted an official master plan, as
specified by general plan policies, or adopts a specific plan pursuant to
Sections 12.04.010 et. seq. of the Visalia Municipal Code, the specific
development requirements of the master plan or specific plan shall be applied
as a condition to the granting of a site plan review permit for subdivision
approval for a project or a project area that is encumbered by the master
plan or a specific plan.



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7464)



Article 2. Central Business District Parking Zone



17.30.020   Purpose and intent.



   To ensure that uses established within the central business district
parking zones meet minimum off-street parking standards outlined under
Chapter 17.34 of the Visalia Municipal Code or, that such uses pay an in-lieu
fee for future downtown parking facilities. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001: prior code § 7437)



17.30.025   Location.



   This article shall apply to the central business district parking zone
A and central business district parking zone B as indicated by the central
business district parking zone map on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001: Ord. 97-20 §§ 1, 2, 1997:
prior code § 7438)



17.30.030



17.30.030   Required parking/imposition of in-lieu fee.



   A.   Any person who, after the effective date of this article, seeks
to construct any new building or structure or make alterations and/or
enlargements of existing uses shall provide off-street parking in proportion
to the need created by the land use requirements outlined in Visalia
Municipal Code Section 17.34.020.



   In the case of alterations and/or enlargements of existing uses, or a
change of uses within an existing structure, Section 17.34.020 parking space
requirements shall apply only to the additional use as specified in Section
17.34.090, based on the last previous use of the property or structure.



   If off-street parking spaces are not provided in accord with Section
17.34.020, a parking in-lieu fee shall be assessed by city in the manner and
amount as set forth in this article.



   B.   Parking in-lieu fees may be used in-lieu of providing the
required parking spaces under Section 17.34.020 for real properties within
central business district parking zones. Parking in-lieu fees may replace up
to one hundred (100) percent of the required on-site parking spaces for real
properties within the central business district parking zone A. Parking
in-lieu fees may be used to replace up to fifty (50) percent of the required
on-site parking spaces for real properties within the central business
district parking zone B. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the on-site
parking required, under Section 17.34.020, shall be provided in the central
business district parking zone B.



   C.   No permit for any activity requiring provision of off-street
parking or payment of in-lieu fees shall be issued unless and until the
off-street parking is included in the proposed plans and specifications or
the in-lieu fee required has been paid or provided for payment as set forth
in this article. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001:
prior code § 7439)



17.30.035   Fee.



   A.   The city council shall establish by resolution, a parking
in-lieu fee calculated to provide the sum of money necessary to provide
future public parking facilities that will benefit the proposed use. Such fee
shall be conditional and based on the following findings by the city council:



   1.   That the parking in-lieu fee is proportionate to the cost of
acquiring land and constructing off-site parking; and



   2.   That the parking in-lieu fee is fairly apportioned on the basis
of benefits conferred on the property developed or to be developed or on the
need for off-street parking created by proposed or existing development of
property.



   B.   The parking in-lieu fee shall be that amount as established by
resolution of the city council. Effective July 1, 2002 and each July first
thereafter, the in-lieu fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the
following criteria:



   1.   On April 1st of each year the city engineer shall review the
current Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index (ENRCCI) for the
cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco, California. When the average of such
indices differs from the average of the indices for the preceding April 1st,
the factor of increase or decrease shall be applied to the in-lieu fee. Such
factor shall be computed by dividing the average ENRCCI for the current April
1st by that pertaining to the previous April 1st. The parking in-lieu fee
rate may be multiplied by the factor to determine the adjusted parking
in-lieu fee rate. The city engineer shall present the new fee rate for
adoption by resolution of council after at least one public hearing.



   2.   If in the determination of the city engineer the adjustment of
the in-lieu fee produced by the procedure in subsection (B)(1) of this
section is not representative of the actual changes in costs of parking
facilities, the city engineer may, in lieu of the procedure set forth in said
paragraph, compute a new parking in-lieu fee rate for adoption by resolution
of the city council. The city council may adopt the new fee rate upon a
majority vote after at least one public hearing.



   3.   In the event of the adoption of a new schedule of fees by
resolution of the city council, such new schedule shall become effective
sixty (60) days after the adoption thereof by the city council. The
adjustment of such schedule provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section
shall begin the April 1st next occurring after adoption of the schedule.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001)



17.30.040   Payment of parking in-lieu fee.



   A.   The fee payer shall pay the in-lieu fee required by this
article to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate
of occupancy. In the case where such fees are due by virtue of a change or
expansion of use that does not require a certificate of occupancy, payment
shall be due before such change or expansion takes place.



17.30.040



   B.   All funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly
transferred for deposit in a parking in-lieu fee fund and used solely for the
creation of additional parking within the central business district parking
zones as set forth in this article. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-03
§ 5 (part), 2001)



17.30.045   Timing of fee payment/security.



   A.   Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 17.30.040, the
payment of the required parking in-lieu fees may be made in ten (10) equal
installments as follows:



   1.   The first ten (10) percent installment shall be due at the time
a building permit or certificate of occupancy is issued and/or
intensification or initiation of use that causes the fee to be assessed.



   2.   The remaining ninety (90) percent shall be paid in twenty (20)
percent installments annually on the anniversary of the first installment.
The interest rate shall be a fixed rate computed initially on the basis of an
interest rate equal to the most recently calculated average annual interest
received on all of the city's investment funds plus two (2) percent.



   B.   Any portion of the in-lieu fee that is not paid prior to the
issuance of a building permit, certificate of occupancy and/or
intensification or initiation of use that causes the fee to be assessed, and
alternatively employs the payment method outlined in subsection A of this
section, shall be adequately secured. Such security shall be subject to
approval by the city manager or his/her designee and shall be one of the
following types:



   1.   A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate
sureties; or



   2.   A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent
or trust company, at the option of the city, or money or negotiable bonds of
the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys; or



   3.   An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions
subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that
the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and
guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit by such a financial
institution; or



   4.   A note secured by a deed of trust in real property. If the deed
of trust is subordinate to other deeds of trust against the property, the
total encumbrances against the property, including the proposed subordinate
deed of trust, shall not exceed eighty-five (85) percent of the appraised
value of the



property. The applicant requesting such type of security shall obtain, at its
expense, an appraisal of the property by a certified real estate appraiser.



   5.   Rolling the balance due, including interest, to the property
tax roll. This method is only available to the owner of the property, or in
the case of a leasehold or rental interest, with the property owner's
consent. Owner shall work with the Finance Department of the city and execute
the documents necessary to implement this alternative. The placement on the
property tax roll may cause the second installment payment to occur earlier
or later than one year after the initial payment depending on the timing of
the placement on the property tax roll. The collection on the property tax
roll shall not preclude the earlier payment of the balance due.



   6.   Notwithstanding the requirement for security as prescribed in
this subsection, the city manager or his/her designee may allow the
owner-applicant to make the installment payments on the anniversary of the
first installment without the requirement of security described herein
subject to a signed agreement that provides that should any installment
payment become thirty (30) or more days delinquent, that installment and
accrued interest shall be placed on the property tax roll. Any remaining
installments due and owing shall continue to become due on the anniversary of
the initial installment and are subject to being rolled to the tax role if
not paid within thirty (30) days of when due. The collection on the property
tax roll shall not preclude the earlier payment of the balance due.



   C.   The ten (10) equal installment plan shall be contingent upon
proper security and subject to the execution of a covenant accepting the
terms of the approval, in a form approved by the city attorney, which
covenant shall run with the land and be recorded with the county recorder by
the city clerk. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2008-06 § 1, 2008: Ord.
2002-01 § 2, 2001)



17.30.050   Parking in-lieu fee trust fund.



   A.   Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited by
the city in a special fund entitled "central business district parking zones
parking in-lieu fund," which is established.



   B.   The central business district parking zones parking in-lieu
fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing
off-street parking facilities to serve the central business district parking
zones. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001)



17.30.055   Refund of fees paid.



   A.   In-lieu fees collected under this article shall be deposited
into the central business district parking zones parking in-lieu fund and
committed, either by the formation of an improvements district or by
allocation to a project.



   B.   For the fifth fiscal year following the first deposit into the
fund, and every five years thereafter, the city shall make all of the
following findings with respect to the portion of the fund remaining
unexpended, whether committed or uncommitted:



   1.   Identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put;



   2.   Demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the
purpose for which it is charged;



   3.   Identify all sources and amounts of funding anticipated to
complete financing of incomplete improvements;



   4.   Designate the approximate date on which the funding anticipated
to complete financing of incomplete improvements is expected to be deposited
into the appropriate account or fund.



   C.   The findings in Subsection B need only be made for moneys in
possession of the city, and need not be made with respect to letters of
credit, bonds, or other instruments taken to secure payment of the fee at a
future date.



   D.   When sufficient funds have been collected to complete financing
on incomplete public improvements for which the fund was established, and the
improvements remain incomplete, the city shall identify, within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the determination that sufficient funds have been
collected, an approximate date by which the construction of the public
improvement will be commenced. If this determination is not made in the time
and manner outlined herein, the unexpended portion of the fees collected
shall be refunded to the then current record owner or owners of the lots or
units, as identified on the last equalized assessment roll, of the
development project or projects on a prorated basis, and any interest accrued
thereon, less a five percent administrative fee as compensation for
collection of the fee and administration of this article.



   E.   The refund of unexpended revenues may be by direct payment, by
temporary suspension of fees, or by any other reasonable means adopted by
resolution of the city council.



   F.   If the administrative cost of refunding unexpended revenues
exceeds the amount to be refunded, the city council, after a public hearing,
notice



of which has been published pursuant to Government Code Section 6061, and
posted in three prominent places within the central business district parking
zones, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other
purpose for which fees are collected subject to this chapter and that serves
the project on which the fee was originally imposed. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001: prior code § 7439.1)



17.30.060   Exemptions and credits/transfer.



   A.   Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from payment of the
parking in-lieu fee:



   The first one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross
building area of existing buildings where occupancy is changing to a more
intensive use. This exemption shall not apply to residential uses converting
to office or commercial uses.



   B.   Credits/Transfer. The following credits shall be made against
required parking in-lieu fees and subject to the following transfer
restrictions:



   1.   Credit for prior parking in-lieu fee installments for a new use
or expansion thereof if installments are current.



   2.   In the event that a lessee making payments pursuant to this
section ceases to occupy the leased premises prior to making the full parking
in-lieu fee payments, no parking in-lieu fee credit may be transferred unless
the owner or new tenant assumes the obligation to pay the remaining
installments.



   3.   No refund of such payments shall be made when there is a change
to a use requiring less parking.



   4.   Parking in-lieu fees paid for pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall be assigned only to the property for which the building
permit or certificate of occupancy was issued and shall not be assigned or
transferred for use on any other property. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-03 § 5 (part), 2001: prior code § 7440)



Chapter 17.32
SPECIAL PROVISIONS



Sections:



Article 1. General



17.32.010   Trash storage.



17.32.020   Height limits.



17.32.025   Above ground tanks.



17.32.027   Flammable/combustible liquids manufacture.



17.32.030   Home occupation permits.



17.32.035   Cottage food operations.



17.32.040   Planned mobile home parks.



17.32.050   Retail stores in the C-N zone.



17.32.055   Drug stores/pharmacies in the O-PA zone.



17.32.060   Subdivision sales offices.



17.32.070   Vehicle wrecking and storage.



17.32.080   Maintenance of landscaped areas.



17.32.090   Yard requirements— Exceptions.



17.32.100   Mobile living units.



17.32.110   Mobile homes on lots.



17.32.115   Private clubs and lodges.



17.32.120   Video machine arcades.



17.32.130   [Reserved].



17.32.140   Garage conversions.



17.32.150   Bed and breakfast facilities.



17.32.160   Recycling facilities.



17.32.161   Fast food with and without drive-through for the light
industrial zone.



17.32.162   Drive-thru lanes performance standards.



17.32.163   Regulation of wireless telecommunication facilities.



Article 2. Density Bonuses, Concessions and Other Incentives for Lower and
Very Low-Income Households and for Senior Housing



17.32.170   Purpose and intent.



17.32.180   Applicability.



17.32.190   Definitions.



17.32.200   Grant of density bonus development incentive.



17.32.210   Preliminary proposal.



17.32.220   Development incentives and concessions.



17.32.230   Density bonus plan.



17.32.240   Multiple density bonuses.



Article 3. Keeping of Racing, Homing, and Sporting Pigeons as Household Pets



17.32.250   Purpose and intent.



17.32.260   Applicability.



17.32.270   Limitations.



17.32.280   Additional limitations.



17.32.290   Permit requirements.



Article 4. Indirect Source Review



17.32.300   Adoption of indirect source review (ISR) regulations.



Article 1. General



17.32.010   Trash storage.



   Permanent trash enclosures may be required for multiple family
developments of four units or greater, all commercial, professional office
and industrial uses subject to Chapter 8.28 of the Visalia Municipal Code.
The specific location, design and size of a trash enclosure shall be reviewed
and approved by the site plan review committee. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7477)



17.32.020   Height limits.



   A.   Measurement. The height of a structure shall be measured
vertically from the average elevation of the ground level along the front
property line to the highest point of the structure.



   B.   Exceptions. Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, penthouses,
water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, scenery lofts, new wireless
telecommunication facilities, radio and television aerials, transmission
towers, fire towers and similar structures and necessary mechanical
appurtenances covering not more than ten percent of the ground area covered
by the structure may be erected to a height not more than twenty-five (25)
feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the zone in
which the site is located. Utility poles and towers shall not be subject to
the height limits prescribed by the regulations for the zone in which the
site is located. Utility poles and towers shall not be subject to the height
limits prescribed in the zone regulations. Nothing in this title pertaining
to fence and wall heights shall be construed so as to apply to a fence or
wall required by any law, regulation or safety standard of the state of
California or agency thereof. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2015-01 § 4,
2015: prior code § 7478)



17.32.025   Above ground tanks.



   Above ground tanks dispensing Class I, II, and III-A liquids that are
located within 100 feet of a residential use or residential zoned property
shall comply with the special enclosure requirements of the Uniform Fire Code
"Con Vault" type tanks. Installations are to be individually approved by the
Fire Chief or his/her designee in conformance with adopted operational
procedures. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.32.027   Flammable/combustible liquids manufacture.



   Any use involving the manufacture of flammable/combustible liquids
shall first be approved by the Fire Chief or his/her designee and comply with
applicable regulations of the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.32.030   Home occupation permits.



   A.   Home occupation permits may be processed as an administrative
matter by the city planner and no hearing shall be required.



   B.   For the purpose of this section, a home occupation shall be
considered any conduct for pecuniary gain by an art or profession, the
offering of a service or conduct of a business, or handicraft manufacture of
products within or from a lawful residential use, which is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the structure for a dwelling purpose, and which
does not change the character of the residential use. A home occupation may
be permitted by issuance of a home occupation permit by the planning
department staff in accordance with the following regulations and no business
license shall be issued beforehand:



   1.   A home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of a
structure as a dwelling;



   2.   A home occupation shall not be conducted in an accessory
structure. There shall be no storage or display of equipment, supplies or
products in an accessory structure or outside the dwelling;



   3.   There shall be no sign of whatever nature identifying the home
occupation;



   4.   No person, other than a resident of the dwelling, shall be
employed or subcontracted on the premises in the conduct of a home occupation;



   5.   No commercial vehicles in excess of three-quarter ton capacity
shall be used to deliver materials to or remove materials from the premises;



   6.   Not more than one vehicle of not more than three-quarter ton
capacity used in connection with the home occupation shall be kept on the
site. Any trailer, wheeled equipment, or any vehicle displaying or
advertising the home occupation shall not be visible from off the premises;



   7.   The home occupation shall not involve the use of power
equipment on the premises using motors exceeding one horsepower combined
capacity;



   8.   There shall be no external alteration of appearances of the
dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted that would reflect the
existence of said home occupation. Existence of a home occupation shall not
be apparent;



   9.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family detached residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted
in other than a single-family detached residence. No equipment or process
shall be used that creates visual or audible electrical interference in any
radio or television receiver off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises;



   10.   The home occupation shall not involve the storage or use of
pesticides;



   11.   The home occupation shall not require additional off-street
parking spaces;



   12.   Required covered or uncovered parking shall not be used for
the conduction of home occupations;



   13.   No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of
eleven p.m. and eight a.m.;



   14.   The home occupation requiring the installation of additional
plumbing within the existing dwelling shall be approved by planning
commission;



   15.   Additional requirements or conditions may be added as deemed
necessary by the city planner;



   16.   In order to limit commercial traffic in neighborhoods, no
customers may come to your residence for any business transaction.



   C.   A home occupation permit shall be revoked by the city planner
upon violation of any condition or regulation, or any limitation of any
permit issued, unless such violation is corrected within ten (10) days of
notice of such violation. Any permit may be revoked for repeated violations.



   D.   In the event of denial or revocation, or objections to
limitations placed thereon, an appeal may be made in writing to the planning
commission as provided in Section 17.28.050. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7479)



17.32.035   Cottage food operations.



   A.   Cottage foods operations operating in accordance with Health
and Safety Code Sections 114365-114365.6 shall be considered a home
occupation and shall obtain a home occupation permit in accordance with
Chapter 17.78 prior to commencement of the use.



   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.32.030, a cottage
food operation is allowed to employ one full-time equivalent employee on site.



   C.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.32.030, a cottage
food operation may sell food produced on-site directly to consumers at the
site.



   D.   A cottage food operation shall be conducted in the residence's
existing kitchen.



   E.   An approved home occupation permit shall not be effective until
the appropriate permit is obtained from the Tulare County Health and Human
Services Agency and shall automatically expire and be null and void if the
County permit or approval expires, is disapproved, or is revoked. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.32.040   Planned mobile home parks.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the
available housing opportunities for the present and future residents of
Visalia by the establishment of policies and development standards for the
planned mobile home parks. The development standards for the planned mobile
home parks will further encourage the creation of stable, attractive,
residential environments within the individual mobile home parks themselves
and provide for a desirable transition or buffer to the surrounding areas.



   B.   Definitions.



   "Mobile home" means a structure exceeding eight feet in width and forty
(40) feet in length, having a chassis and designed to be movable, with
kitchen, bathroom and living facilities, designed for use as a single-family
dwelling unit when connected to appropriate utility lines, and has no
foundation other than wheels or temporary stabilizing units. Smaller units
can be considered as a mobile home if it is a long-term (greater than thirty
(30) days) installation.



   "Mobile home park" means any parcel, or contiguous parcels of land
under single ownership designed or intended to be used to accommodate mobile
homes on a permanent or semi-permanent basis regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for such accommodations.



   "Mobile home site" means any portion of a mobile home park designated
for the occupancy of one mobile home and approved on-site structures in
connection with such occupancy.



   "Travel trailer" means any vehicle that at no time exceeds eight feet
in width at its widest point and is less than forty (40) feet in length at
its longest point, and is designed for human habitation whether
self-propelled or drawn by a motor vehicle, which is intended for permanent
or semi-permanent use and that has no foundation other than wheels and
temporary stabilizing units.



   C.   Supplemental Regulations. The provisions of this section shall
be considered supplemental to applicable state regulations and to other
pertinent city ordinances. Where this section, and such regulations and other
ordinances do not control, the provisions of the Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Mobile Home Court Development Guide, FHA G
4200.7, January 1970, or successor documents thereto, shall be used by the
city as "minimum standards" guide to administrative decisions regarding
mobile home park developments.



   D.   Permitted Uses.



   1.   Mobile homes for single-family dwelling use;



   2.   Common recreation facilities and structure;



   3.   Administrative offices for mobile home park use only;



   4.   Accessory uses normally incidental to mobile home park.



   E.   Prohibitions.



   1.   Mobile homes, other than those being offered for sale in
properly zoned commercial areas, when occupied, shall be located only within
approved mobile home parks or in existing mobile home parks that are
nonconforming uses.



   2.   Travel trailers shall not be located or occupied in mobile home
parks except as hereinafter specified.



   3.   Commercial activities, except the initial sale of mobile homes,
whether or not appurtenant to the operation of a mobile home park, shall not
be permitted in mobile home parks.



   4.   No more than one mobile home shall be allowed on each mobile
home site.



   F.   Required Permit.



   1.   All planned mobile home parks shall be subject to design review
and a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of the code shall be
granted prior to the commencement of construction of any mobile home parks.



   2.   Application for a conditional use permit of a planned mobile
home park shall be accompanied by the following information:



   a.   A complete plot plan showing all physical features of the
proposed mobile home park site and adjacent public streets and areas;



   b.   A complete storm drainage plan providing for the ultimate
disposal of storm water showing on-site facilities and off-site storm lines;



   c.   A complete sanitary sewer plan for the entire and individual
mobile home sites, including all off-site lines and, where necessary, left
stations, adequate to serve the proposed development;



   d.   A complete water source and distribution plan for the entire
mobile home park;



   e.   A complete plot plan of sites, landscaping, parking areas,
access, recreation and storage areas.



   G.   Development Standards.



   1.   Mobile Home Park Locational Factors.



   a.   The park shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, dust,
noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion of the site shall be
subject to predictable sudden flooding or erosion.



   b.   The park shall be placed in areas that are zoned for
residential purposes only to assure that mobile home residents can enjoy the
same safeguards from conflicting land uses (i.e., industry, service
commercial, etc.) as could residents located adjacent to this form of
residential categories.



   c.   The park shall be evaluated for its impact upon adjacent land
uses. The adverse impacts such as overcrowding the educational facilities,
neighborhood and the public recreational facilities must be avoided.



   d.   Mobile home parks shall be served by existing community sewer
and water systems. The development of such parks with individual water and
sewer systems will not be permitted.



   e.   All mobile home park entrances and exits shall have direct
access to a collector street as shown on the approved streets and highways
plan. Secondary access to mobile home parks could be permitted by the
planning commission from local streets.



   2.   Mobile Home Park Size and Density.



   a.   The minimum area for a mobile home park development shall be
ten acres. However, it shall not exceed forty (40) acres per development.
This would allow up to two hundred forty (240) mobile homes per development.



   b.   The maximum gross density shall be that of the underlying Zone
District.



   3.   Setbacks.



   a.   Mobile Home Park.



   Front yard: twenty-five (25) feet;



   Side yard: twenty-five (25) feet;



   Rear yard: twenty-five (25) feet.



   b.   Individual Mobile Home Lot.



   Front yard: ten feet;



   Side yard: five feet;



   Rear yard: five feet.



   c.   No mobile home shall be located in any required yard space
except that tow bars may extend into such yard space and covered porches or
patios may extend not more than one-half the distance into a required side
yard.



   d.   Required mobile home park yards shall be fully landscaped,
sprinklered and maintained, in accord with landscape plans to be submitted
and approved with conditional use permit applications.



   e.   No travel trailer or boat shall be stored in any required yard
area or elsewhere on any mobile home site.



   f.   Mobile home sites shall be so designed, the mobile homes so
placed, as to maintain fifteen (15) feet side to side, ten feet corner to
corner, and ten feet end to end clearances.



   4.   Patios and Pads.



   a.   Each mobile home site shall have a hard surfaced patio area of
concrete not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area. Any permanent
porch greater than fifteen (15) square feet in area shall be counted as part
of the required patio area.



   b.   Each mobile home site shall have a mobile home support pad
consisting of a dust-free surface over a base adequate to support the mobile
home. Said spaces shall be kept free of obstacles such as porches and storage
sheds.



   c.   Individual mobile home sites shall be a minimum of two thousand
six hundred (2,600) square feet.



   d.   No mobile home site shall be less than thirty (30) feet in
width.



   5.   Parking.



   a.   Not less than one guest parking space shall be provided at a
central location or locations for each four mobile home sites.



   b.   Adequate parking in accord with Chapter 17.34 of the zoning
ordinance shall be provided for central recreation buildings, mobile home
park offices, and similar approved facilities.



   c.   Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, non-occupied travel
trailers and other uses shall be provided at a ratio of one space to each ten
mobile home sites. Said parking shall be clustered and shall be screened from
view by means of solid fence and/or landscaping.



   d.   All parking areas shall be constructed and maintained in accord
with Section 17.32.030.



   e.   Parking in the rear is encouraged as a good design feature.



   f.   All parking areas shall have a minimum of ten percent of
landscaping with no more than eight parking stalls prior to installation of
an eighty (80) square foot landscaped island.



   6.   Private Streets.



   a.   Entrance streets shall be located not less than one hundred
fifty (150) feet from public street intersections and the location and design
thereof shall be approved by the city. Entrance streets, and other collector
streets within the mobile home park shall be not less than thirty-six (36)
feet minimum width.



   b.   All other streets within the mobile home park shall be of
thirty (30) feet minimum width.



   c.   Cul-de-sacs shall be a maximum of six hundred (600) feet in
length with a fully paved turnaround at the end of eighty (80) feet minimum
diameter.



   d.   Parking shall be permitted on both sides of entrance and
collector streets and on only one side of other streets, and shall be so
signed. Such parking may be calculated in total mobile home parks or
individual mobile home property requirements.



   e.   Streets shall be designed in accord with the current structural
cross section requirements for the city subdivision streets, except that
widths shall be as per this code section and concrete center gutters of not
less than twenty-four (24) inches width and such greater width as may be
determined by the city to be necessary to carry storm drainage may be
substituted for standard curb and gutter.



   f.   Driveways for individual sites and to community areas shall be
improved as prescribed in Section 17.34.030.



   7.   Lighting.



   a.   Public right-of-way lighting, with underground wiring, shall be
provided abutting mobile home parks, with a minimum installation of one seven
thousand (7,000) lumen ornamental pole electrolier at the park entrance, one
at any abutting public street intersection, and/or one at each three hundred
thirty (330) foot interval along park street borders.



   b.   Interior park lighting, with underground service shall provide
for all interior streets.



   8.   Storm Drainage.



   a.   Mobile home parks shall pay a storm drainage fee per acre
equivalent to that charged for multi-family developments.



   b.   The mobile home park application shall be accompanied by a
complete drainage plan, including proposed ultimate disposal, and the city
will review same for conformity with drainage master plans for the area.



   c.   Maintenance of all mobile park drainage facilities shall be the
responsibility of the developer. Underground and pump facilities shall be
built to current city subdivision standards.



   9.   Sanitary Sewers.



   a.   All mobile home parks shall be connected to the city sanitary
sewer system and shall pay sewer fees per acre equivalent to that charged for
multi-family development.



   b.   All sanitary sewers in mobile home park streets shall be
designed in full accord with current city public sewer standards, except that
the city engineer may approve six inch mains not to exceed two hundred (200)
feet in length with clean outs at the end of such six inch mains in lieu of
holes.



   c.   All sewer laterals to individual mobile home sites shall comply
fully with applicable city codes for single-family residential dwelling
connections.



   10.   Water System.



   a.   All mobile home parks shall be served by a central water supply
system approved by the city.



   b.   All water system design shall meet the standards prescribed by
the city fire chief as required to maintain Class IV fire rating
requirements, including line sizes, pressures, standby pumps and/or well
supplies, storage and fire hydrant specifications and placement. All required
fire hydrants shall be installed and paid for by the developer within the
park and on adjacent public rights-of-way.



   11.   Undergrounding. All public utilities shall be installed
underground, including electrical supply, telephone, street lighting cable,
community antenna TV and ducting provision for cable television. A community
TV antenna shall be provided; usage of individual antenna on each mobile home
will not be permitted.



   12.   Street Name Signs. Approved street names and street name signs
shall be provided and maintained at each in-park street intersection and at
each entrance to a public street.



   13.   Utility Connections. All required conditions, including
paving, landscaping, street signs, etc., shall be completed prior to
connection to a sanitary sewer for any mobile home park or site therein.



   14.   Other Facilities.



   a.   Each mobile home park shall have a laundry building for clothes
washing and drying. A yard area may be provided adjacent to said building for
clothes hanging, and shall, if provided, be screened with a six-foot masonry
wall.



   b.   The park owner shall utilize city approved disposal bins for
disposal of all solid waste. Locations of disposal bins shall be shown on the
site plan and approved by the city. Common outdoor garbage collection areas
shall be screened with a six-foot-high masonry fence and shall be located as
not to cause traffic hazard.



   c.   No in-park commercial facilities, including the sale of
convenience goods, will be allowed except for vending machines sales that may
be permitted in central recreation or management areas only.



   15.   Miscellaneous Regulations.



   a.   Open irrigation ditches within or adjoining to a mobile home
park shall be piped or fenced in accord with this ordinance code.



   b.   No permanent shed other than storage shed, mobile home porch
and steps or temporary sunscreen or windscreen shall be erected on any mobile
home site.



   c.   All mobile homes shall be fitted with appropriate metal or
screen block skirts obscuring stands at the time of placement on the site.



   d.   The maximum permitted height of any structure or mobile home
shall be thirty (30) feet.



   e.   All pertinent state and city regulations concerning the
development and operation of mobile home parks shall be observed.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7480)



17.32.050   Retail stores in the C-N zone.



   No retail store, food store, or other commercial use with over 40,000
square feet of floor space shall be allowed in the C-N zone. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017)



17.32.055   Drug stores/pharmacies in the O-PA zone.



   Drug stores or pharmacies that also sell general retail merchandise in
the O-PA zone may only be located on the corner property at arterial/arterial
or arterial/collector intersections. The parcel size shall not exceed 60,000
square feet and the building size shall not to exceed 14,000 square feet.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.32.060   Subdivision sales offices.



   In an R-1 or R-M zone, no sales offices of any character shall be
permitted in any subdivision except one sales office in a subdivision of not
less than five acres located not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from
any existing dwelling outside of the subdivision. Any temporary sales office
in a subdivision may be located in a model home on a lot located in the
subdivision. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7482)



17.32.070   Vehicle wrecking and storage.



   A.   All vehicle wrecking and storage yards shall be screened by a
solid fence or wall not less than six feet in height, located on the property
line, except in a required front yard, and suitably maintained.



   B.   No storage or parts, debris or inoperable vehicles shall be
permitted outside the screened area.



   C.   All existing vehicle wrecking and storage yards that do not
conform to the screening requirements of this section shall conform within
one year from notification from the building official.



   D.   All vehicle wrecking and storage yards shall be located on a
site no less than two (2) acres in size. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7483)



17.32.080   Maintenance of landscaped areas.



   A landscaped area provided in compliance with the regulations
prescribed in this title or as a condition of a use permit or variance shall
be planted with materials suitable for screening or ornamenting the site,
whichever is appropriate, and plant materials shall be maintained and
replaced as needed, to screen or ornament the site. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7484)



17.32.090   Yard requirements—Exceptions.



   A.   Architectural features including sills, chimneys, cornices and
eaves may extend into a required side yard or a space between structures not
more than thirty (30) inches and may extend into a required front or rear
yard not more than thirty-six (36) inches.



   B.   Open and covered, unenclosed porches, platforms, stairways and
landing places, no part of which is more than eighteen (18) inches above the
surface of the ground, may extend into a required front yard or space between
buildings not more than six feet.



   C.   Fences, walls, hedges, walks, driveways and retaining walls may
occupy any required yard or other open spaces, subject to the limitations
prescribed in the zoning district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7485)



17.32.100   Mobile living units.



   A.   Definitions.



   "Mobile living unit" means camp car, commercial coach, mobile home,
recreational vehicle, or travel trailer, as each of these terms are defined
in Chapter 1, Sections 18000 through 18013 (Part 2, Mobile Homes) and in
Chapter 1, Sections 18200 through 18220 (Part 2.1, Mobile Home Parks Act),
Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, and a
camp trailer, house car, or trailer coach, as each of these is defined in
Division 1 (Section 100 through 675) of the Vehicle Code of the state of
California, or any other vehicle or structure designed or altered in such a
manner as will permit occupancy or use thereof for living or sleeping
purposes, and so designed or equipped with wheels, or capable of being
mounted on  wheels, and used as a conveyance on public streets or highways,
propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a vehicle or
device exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   "Person" means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm,
company, corporation, trust, or unincorporated association.



   B.   Use or Occupancy of Mobile Living Units for Living or Sleeping
Purposes Prohibited. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, it
is unlawful for any person to occupy, for living or sleeping purposes, any
mobile living unit within the city upon any street, alley, road, highway,
public parking lot or upon any other parcel of publicly or privately owned
real property.



   C.   Permitted Use and Occupancy of Mobile Sleeping Units. Section
17.32.100(B) shall not apply to or prohibit the occupancy of mobile living
units for living or sleeping purposes at the following times or places:



   1.   While the mobile living unit is in motion upon a street, road,
highway or alley;



   2.   While the mobile living unit is parked in a lawfully
established and licensed mobile home park, recreational trailer park or labor
camp subject to Chapter 4, Par 9, Division 2 of the Labor Code of the state
of California or in other public or private facilities that are designed,
equipped and licensed by the city to accommodate mobile living units and that
provide for temporary or permanent sewer and waste water connections to the
mobile living unit and that provide temporary or permanent utility
connections to such mobile living unit;



   3.   While the mobile living units parked on private property, and
not on a public street, parking lot or right-of-way, at the expressed
invitation of the person owning or having the right to possess the private
property and;



   a.   The mobile living unit is not connected to any utility or sewer
or waste water facilities on other than in a temporary electrical connection
installed and connected to the mobile living unit in compliance with all
applicable laws and ordinances of the city,



   b.   The owner or persons having the right of possession of the
private property upon which the mobile living unit is parked receives no
direct or indirect payment, gratuity or remuneration of any kind from the
owner of or occupant of the mobile living unit for allowing the same to be
parked upon said private property,



   c.   The mobile living unit is not parked on private property for
more than seven days in any twelve (12) month period,



   d.   The occupants of the mobile living unit do not discharge any
litter, sewage or waste water, effluent, garbage or other matter out of or
from the mobile living unit while so parked except into public or private
facilities intended for the disposal of such material;



   4.   While the mobile living unit is lawfully parked upon a public
street, right-of-way or parking lot, and;



   a.   The mobile living unit is parked for a period not to exceed
fourteen (14) hours during the period from six p.m. one day to eight a.m. the
next day for two consecutive nights,



   b.   The mobile living unit is not parked upon a public street or
right-of-way or parking lot in a residential zone of the city,



   c.   Said mobile living unit conforms to all applicable sections of
the Vehicle Code of the state of California,



   d.   The mobile living unit is completely self-contained so far as
utilities are concerned including disposal of waste water and sewage,



   e.   The occupants of the mobile living unit do not discharge any
litter, sewage or waste water, effluent, garbage or other matter out of or
from the mobile living unit while so parked except into public or private
facilities intended for the disposal of such material.



   D.   No Prohibition of Storage. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prohibit the owner or occupants of the mobile living unit from
parking the same upon property owned by him or of which he has the right of
possession as long as the same is not used for living or sleeping purposes in
violation of any other provisions of this chapter.



   E.   Punishment for Violation.



   1.   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute an infraction pursuant to Section 19(c) of the California Penal
Code.



   2.   Any violation thereof shall be punishable by: (a) a fine not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (b) a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation of this
chapter within one year; (c) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for each additional violation of this chapter. Each day a violation
of this chapter continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense and
punishable as such.



   F.   Declaration of Public Nuisance. Any occupancy or use of a
mobile living unit and the mobile living unit itself, parked or occupied in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared
unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may initiate any necessary
proceedings for the abatement, removal and prohibition of use thereof in the
manner provided by law and may take all steps available to it to accomplish
such ends and may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for granting
such relief that will remove and abate the mobile living unit or use and
restrain and enjoin any person from moving, using or maintaining a mobile
living unit upon a site or place or in a manner contrary to the provisions of
this chapter. The remedies prescribed in this chapter are cumulative and
nonexclusive.



   G.   Violation Procedure. Any person found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter may be notified and cited in accordance with the
provisions established by the planning department of the city and approved by
the city council thereof. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 28, 1996:
prior code § 7486)



17.32.110   Mobile homes on lots.



   It is the purpose of this section to, where approved, allow the
placement of mobile homes on individual lots. The mobile homes would have to
conform with the minimum development standards for the zone in which it is
located and, in addition, meet the criteria set forth in this section.



   A.   Location Exceptions. Mobile homes may be placed on individual
lots in all single-family residential zones and with the following exception:
lots located within the city historic preservation district.



   B.   Effect of Conversion. A mobile home that has been placed on a
foundation system pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be a mobile
home and subject to local property taxation.



   C.   Site plan review Permit. A mobile home on a foundation system
on an individual lot is permitted upon approval of the city's site plan
committee pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of the zoning regulations.



   D.   Eligibility. A mobile home shall not be located on a permanent
foundation on a private lot unless it:



   1.   Was constructed and certified under the National Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974;



   2.   Has not been altered in violation of applicable codes.



   E.   Criteria. Mobile homes located on a foundation system on an
individual lot shall:



   1.   Be occupied only as a residential type use;



   2.   Be subject to all provisions of this section applicable to
residential structures. Such review to include parking, setbacks, and
building separations;



   3.   Meet all requirements for the zone in which they locate;



   4.   Be attached to a foundation system in compliance with all
applicable building regulations;



   5.   Mobile home review may include consideration of roof overhang,
roofing material, and siding material to assure aesthetic compatibility with
traditional single-family housing structures.



   F.   Surrender of Registration. Subsequent to applying for the
required building permits, and prior to occupancy, the owner shall request a
certification from the building department of a certificate of occupancy be
issued pursuant to Section 18557(a)(2) of the California Health and Safety
Code. Thereafter, any vehicle license plate, certificate of ownership, and
certificate of registration issued by a state agency is to be surrendered to
the appropriate state agencies. Any mobile home that is permanently attached
with foundation must bear a California insignia or federal label, pursuant to
Section 18550(b) of the Health and Safety Code.



   G.   Building Permit Required. Prior to the installation of a mobile
home on a permanent foundation system, the mobile home owner or a licensed
contractor shall obtain a building permit from the building department. To
obtain such a permit, the owner or contractor shall comply with all
requirements of Section 18557(a) of the State Health and Safety Code. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7487)



17.32.115   Private clubs and lodges.



   Notwithstanding Table 17.25.030, private clubs and lodges shall not be
permitted on C-R zoned properties fronting Mooney Boulevard between SR 198
and Visalia Parkway. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.32.120   Video machine arcades.



   It is the purpose of this section to set forth development and
operational standards for arcades. Such standards are adopted to protect the
public welfare from potential problems associated with the operation of video
machine arcades.



   A.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply:



   "Video arcade" means a commercial establishment that contains five or
more "video machines."



   "Video machine" means any machine, device or apparatus, the operation
or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the
deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disc, slug, or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening or by the payment of any fee or fees, for the use as
a game, contest, which is operated through the use of electronic means with
images and sounds transmitted through a cathode ray tube.



   B.   Permits Required.



   1.   Video arcades may be approved as a conditional use in the C-N,
C-R, C-MU and D-MU zones pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of the Visalia zoning
regulations.



   2.   Video machines, up to four in number, may be approved by the
planning department pursuant to Section 17.38.070 (temporary uses) of the
zoning regulations. Such permits shall be subject to the operational criteria
set forth in subsection (C) of this section.



   C.   Operational Criteria.



   1.   Location. Video machines and arcades shall not be located
closer than six hundred (600) feet to any public schools.



   2.   Hours of Operation. Normal hours of operation shall be between
the hours of ten a.m. and eleven p.m. unless alternate hours are approved by
the city council as part of a conditional use permit. Machines located in
businesses may be operated during normal business hours if approved by the
planning department (four or fewer machines) or city council (arcades). In
any case, school aged children shall be prohibited from operating video
machines while school is in session.



   3.   Security/Supervision. The use shall be under the supervision of
an adult during all hours of operation. Additional supervision or security
may be required as deemed necessary by the city council under the terms of
the conditional use permit. The work station of the adult attendant shall be
such that the entry and immediate outside area is visible. Supervision
responsibility shall extend to the public and/or parking areas in the
vicinity of the arcade.



   4.   Alcoholic Beverages. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to
be bought or consumed on the premises, including the public and/or private
areas in the vicinity. This shall not apply to businesses that are licensed
and approved for alcoholic beverage sale and use.



   5.   Noise. No noise or sound generated by an arcade shall be
audible outside of the arcade building.



   6.   Loitering. Gathering and loitering of individuals in the arcade
and public and/or parking areas in the vicinity of the arcade shall be
prohibited.



   D.   Monitoring of Use. Periodic inspections, which may or may not
be announced in advance, may be conducted by the city to ascertain compliance
of any arcade with the conditions of the use permit under which the arcade is
operating. Violations of the conditional use permit or the provisions of this
section shall be subject to enforcement under the provisions of Chapter 17.46
of the zoning regulations. Continuing violations may lead to revocation of
the conditional use permit for an arcade, as set forth under Section
17.38.040 of the zoning regulations. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code
§ 7488)



17.32.130   [Reserved].



17.32.140   Garage conversions.



   A.   Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this section to allow,
in certain cases and subject to specific design requirements, the conversion
of garages and carports for living space in circumstances where the
provisions of Section 17.34.020A cannot be met post-conversion. Such
conversion is deemed acceptable if the following requirements are met.



   B.   Requirements:



   1.   The site is being used as a single-family, detached, residence
with a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet;



   2.   The area converted shall be used as part of the main dwelling
and shall not be used as a separate dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit;



   3.   The area converted shall be subject to all applicable building
code requirements;



   4.   The site shall be owner occupied and that such ownership shall
have been in effect for a minimum of twelve (12) months prior to approval of
a conversion under this section;



   5.   The garage door shall either be removed from the structure, or
a wall shall be constructed behind the pre-existing garage door with the
garage door remaining in place. The exterior elevation of the conversion
shall be compatible in design with the existing dwelling;



   6.   In the case of garage door removal buffering, such as a
planter, shall be provided between the carport or garage and the remaining
parking area;



   7.   The remaining parking area shall have two parking spaces, each
space having a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum depth of eighteen
(18) feet from the property line.



   C.   Approval Process. The city planner or his/her designee shall
approve or deny garage conversion requests based upon the specified
requirements. Interested individuals may appeal the decision of the city
planner to the planning commission. The planning commission's review shall be
limited to compliance with the specified requirements. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2003-23 § 2, 2003: prior code § 7490)



17.32.150   Bed and breakfast facilities.



   A.   Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this section to
provide for the following:



   1.   To allow, in limited cases, the operation of bed and breakfast
facilities; and



   2.   To regulate such operations for the protection of the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.



   B.   Definitions.



   "Bed and breakfast inns" means a single-family dwelling that is
predominantly residential in character, containing three to six guestrooms
offering overnight accommodations for rent, wherein a breakfast meal is
customarily included in the lodging rate.



   "Bed and breakfast, traditional" means a facility similar to a bed and
breakfast inn, containing only one or two rooms for lodging purposes.



   C.   Process. Applications for traditional bed and breakfast
facilities meeting the criteria stated below shall be subject to approval of
a site plan review permit pursuant to Chapter 17.28. Such applications may be
referred to the planning commission by the site plan review committee.
Applications for bed and breakfast inns shall be subject to approval of a
conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.38. Bed and breakfast inns
shall be subject to any such condition as deemed appropriate by the planning
commission to further the purposes of this section.



   D.   Development Criteria for Traditional Bed and Breakfast
Facilities. Traditional bed and breakfast facilities are permitted, pursuant
to a site plan review permit, in R-1 and R-M zoned areas located within the
boundaries of the historic district and on individual properties located
outside the historic district when such properties are listed on the local
register of historically significant structures. In order for a site plan
review permit to be approved, the following development criteria shall be met:



   1.   All standards of the underlying zoning district including, but
not limited to, height, lot and yard requirements, and lot coverage shall
apply;



   2.   One additional off-street parking space shall be provided for
each room available for lodging purposes. Tandem parking shall not be deemed
as meeting this requirement;



   3.   The owner of the facility shall reside on site;



   4.   Bed and breakfast facilities shall be subject to all applicable
building, fire, health and safety codes;



   5.   No person who is paying rent in exchange for lodging shall
occupy a guest room on the premises for more than fourteen (14) consecutive
nights;



   6.   The scale and appearance of the bed and breakfast facility
shall remain primarily residential in character; all buildings and site
improvements shall be similar to and compatible in design with the
surrounding neighborhood and adjacent residences. The site plan review
committee and/or the planning commission shall have authority to grant or
deny applications for bed and breakfast facilities based upon design and
aesthetic criteria, as well as all other provisions of this section;



   7.   One externally lighted sign shall be allowed at the facility.
The sign may be either wall mounted or free standing and shall not exceed six
square feet in area. A freestanding sign shall not exceed five feet in
height. The historic preservation board shall have authority to review and
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the location, size, materials and
design of any sign proposed in conjunction with a bed and breakfast facility,
subject to the above area and height limitations;



   8.   Bed and breakfast facilities shall be operated by the permanent
occupants of the facility. No more than one person not residing at the
facility shall be employed in the operation of the facility;



   9.   In no case shall any bed and breakfast facility be approved on
a site on which the dwelling has been the subject of a garage conversion
pursuant to the regulations of Chapter 17.32 governing such conversions.



   E.   Development Criteria for Bed and Breakfast Inns. Bed and
breakfast inns are permitted as a conditional use in R-1 and R-M zoned areas
located within the boundaries of the historic district and on individual
properties located outside the historic district when such properties are
listed on the local register of historically significant structures. In order
for a conditional use permit for a bed and breakfast inn to be approved, the
following development criteria shall be met:



   1.   All of the provisions and criteria listed in Section
17.32.150(D) for traditional bed and breakfast facilities, with the exception
of subsections (D)(3) and (D)(8) of this section. However, the planning
commission may require one or more of these criteria as conditions to be met
in specific instances;



   2.   A bed and breakfast inn facility shall consist of no more than
two residential dwellings on a maximum of two adjacent parcels. A facility
consisting of more than one dwelling or parcel shall be considered a single
facility. Adjacent parcels shall be adjoining contiguous parcels that are not
separated by a public right-of-way.



   3.   The owner of the bed and breakfast inn shall reside at the
facility. If more than one person who resides off the facility is employed,
one additional off-street parking space for every two such employees shall be
provided.



   F.   Appeals. Interested individuals may appeal the decision of the
site plan review committee regarding traditional bed and breakfast inn
facilities to the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 17.28.
Decisions of the planning commission regarding bed and breakfast inn
facilities may be appealed to the city council as set forth in Section
17.02.145. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-07 § 4, 2001: prior code §
7491)



17.32.160   Recycling facilities.



   A.   Permits Required. No person shall permit the placement,
construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining
a permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section. Recycling
facilities may be permitted as set forth in the following table:



Figure 17.32.160(A): Permits for
Recycling Facilities



 

Type of Facility
 
Zones Permitted
 
Permit Required




Reverse vending machine(s)
 
All commercial zones
 
No permit required


Reverse vending machine(s)
 
All industrial zones
 
No permit required


Small Collection
 
C-N, C-R, C-S, C-MU
 
Conditional use permit


Small Collection
 
I, I-L
 
Planned development permit


Large Collection
 
C-S
 
Conditional use permit


Large Collection
 
I, I-L
 
Planned development permit


Light Processing
 
C-S
 
Conditional use permit


Light Processing
 
I, I-L
 
Planned development permit


Heavy Processing
 
I-L
 
Conditional use permit


Heavy Processing
 
I
 
Planned development permit




 



   B.   Review Criteria. The city council is empowered to adopt by
resolution specific criteria and guidelines for review of applications for
recycling facilities. The council may amend these standards from time to
time, by resolution.



   1.   Small collection facilities shall be located on a developed
commercial or industrial center of no less than two acres in site area; and



   2.   No portion of a small collection facility shall encroach closer
than 25 feet or the minimum landscape setback required by the underlying
design district, whichever is greater, to a front, side, or rear landscape
setback area, including ultimate rights of way; and,



   3.   Small collection facilities shall be located entirely on a
fully paved surface. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-10, 2012: Ord.
9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7492)



17.32.161   Fast food with and without drive-through for the light
industrial zone.



   A.   Location Criteria.



   1.   Parcel must be a corner property at arterial/arterial
intersections or directly adjacent to a corner parcel with an existing fast
food or sit down restaurant.



   2.   Up to two fast food or sit down restaurants may be located at
an intersection and not be subject to the one-mile distance requirement.



   3.   Cannot be located within one mile of an existing or approved
fast food location with or without drive-through or sit down restaurant.



   4.   Site must be located in the industrial park roughly defined as
south of Riggin Avenue, west of Shirk to Highway 99 and north of the Hurley
Avenue alignment.



   5.   A drive-thru kiosk only, serving beverages but without foods
prepared on the site, may be allowed on an improved arterial/collector
intersection with approval of a conditional use permit (CUP) if the site is
located on a legally existing underdeveloped parcel that is less than 12,000
square feet in net area.  Such location shall not be subject to the one-mile
separation requirement specified in this section A.3. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2007-17 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2000-02 § 1 (part), 2000)



17.32.162   Drive-thru lanes performance standards.



   A.   Purpose and Intent.  It is the purpose of this section to
specify performance standards applicable to uses that seek to incorporate a
drive-thru lane in association with a specified use.  This section does not
apply to carwashes and lube and oil changing stations.



   B.   Performance standards:



   1.   Separation from residences.  The drive-thru lane shall be no
less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the nearest residence or
residentially zoned property.



   2.   Stacking.  The drive-thru lane shall contain no less than ten
(10) vehicle stacking, measured from pickup window to the designated entrance
to the drive-thru lane.  There shall be no less than three vehicle spaces
distance from the order menu/speaker (or like device) to the designated
entrance to the order window.



   3.   Circulation.  No portion of the drive-thru lane shall obstruct
any drive aisles or required on-site parking.  The drive-thru shall not take
ingress or egress from a local residential road.



   4.   Noise.  No component or aspect of the drive-thru lane or its
operation shall generate noise levels in excess of 60 dB between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily.



   5.   Screening.  The entire drive-thru lane shall be screened from
adjacent street and residential view to a height of three feet.  Screening
devices shall be a combination of berming, hedge and landscape materials, and
solid walls as approved by the City Planner.



   6.   Menu boards and signage.  Shall be oriented or screened to
avoid direct visibility from adjacent public streets. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2014-07 § 3, 2014)



17.32.163   Regulation of wireless telecommunication facilities.



   A.   Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is
to promote quality, clarity and consistency in applying the requirements and
guidelines for the acceptance, processing and approval of new wireless
telecommunication facilities and modifications to existing wireless
telecommunication facilities. The purpose and intent of this section is also
protect the benefits derived by the city, its residents, and the general
public from access to personal wireless telecommunication services while
minimizing, to the greatest extent feasible, the redundancy of wireless
telecommunication facilities. The city desires to balance these goals, by
permitting the installation and operation of wireless telecommunication
facilities where they are needed, while reducing, to the greatest extent
feasible, adverse economic, safety and/or aesthetic impacts on nearby
properties and the community as a whole.



   B.   Definitions. The definitions set for in this section shall
apply to this title.



   "Ancillary structure" means any development associated with a wireless
telecommunications facility, including but not limited to foundations,
concrete slabs on grade, guy wire anchors, generators and transmission cable
supports. This definition does not include equipment cabinet.



   "Antenna" means any apparatus designed for transmitting and/or
receiving electromagnetic waves



that includes but is not limited to, telephonic, radio or television
communications. Types of antenna include, but are not limited to,
omnidirectional (whip) antennas, sectorized (panel) antennas, or parabolic
(dish) antennas.



   "Antenna array" means a single set or group of antennas and their
associated mounting hardware, transmission lines or other appurtenances that
share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support.



   "Attached wireless telecommunications facility" means a wireless
telecommunication facility and ancillary structures that are secured to an
existing structure, as defined in Section 17.04.030, with any accompanying
equipment cabinet, which may be located either on the roof or inside/outside
of the building or structure. An attached wireless telecommunications
facility is considered to be an accessory use to the existing principal use
on a site.



   "Collocate or Collocation" means location or placement of wireless
telecommunications facilities by two (2) or more wireless personal service
providers on an antenna or antennas and feed lines on a common antenna
support structure or other structure on which there is an existing antenna
array. The term "Collocation" shall not be applied to a situation where two
(2) or more wireless personal service providers independently place attached
wireless telecommunication facilities on an existing building or structure.



   "Combined antenna" means an antenna or antenna array designed and
utilized to provide services for more than one (1) wireless provider for the
same or similar type of services.



   "Conceal or Concealed" means a wireless telecommunication facility in
which the antenna, monopole, and/or tower, and sometimes the support
equipment, are hidden from view, or effectively disguised as may reasonably
be determined by the city planner or planning commission as applicable, such
as in a false tree, monument, cupola, or other concealing structure that
either mimics, or also serves as, a natural or architectural feature in a
compatible environment concealed wireless telecommunication facilities that
do not mimic or appear as a natural or architectural feature to the average
observer are not within the meaning of this definition.



   "Coverage" means the geographic area served by an individual wireless
telecommunications facility installation.



   "Digital Antenna System (DAS)" means a network of spatially separated
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that
provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure.



   "Eligible facilities request" means a request that involves
collocation, removal, or replacement of wireless telecommunication facilities.



   "Equipment cabinet" means a structure located at a base station that is
above the base flood elevation and designed exclusively to contain radio or
other equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless
telecommunication signals. An equipment cabinet cannot be used for storage
and/or habitable space.



   "Existing structures and facilities" means any wireless
telecommunications facility for which a permit has been properly issued
pursuant to this Section or prior to its adoption.



   "Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner
within a reasonable period of time, taking into account environmental,
physical, legal, cost and technological factors.



   "Lattice structure" means a tapered style of antenna support structure
that typically consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple
legs and cross-bracing and metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas.



   "Location" means the area where a wireless telecommunications facility
is located or proposed to be located. Reference to location shall be exact
longitude and latitude, to the nearest tenth of a second, with bearing or
orientation referenced to true north.



   "Modification" means the change, or proposed change, of any portion of
a wireless telecommunication facility from its description in a previously
approved wireless telecommunication facility permit. Modification includes
structural reinforcement, change in antenna type, and changes that alter the
appearance, size or height of a wireless telecommunication facility.



   "Monopole" means a style of freestanding antenna support structure that
consists of a single shaft usually composed of two (2) or more hollow
sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of antenna
support structure is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires
or other stabilization devices. These components are mounted to a foundation
that rests on or in the ground or on the roof of a building.



   "Mount" means the surface upon which antennas arts mounted. Mounts
include, but are not limited to roof-mounts (mounted on the roof of a
building) and side-mounts (mounted on the side of a building).



   "Non-residential use" means uses such as churches, schools, and
residential care facilities that are not a residential use but may be allowed
in a residential zone typically with a conditional use permit.



   "Personal wireless telecommunications services" means commercial mobile
radio services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless
exchange access service as identified in the Telecommunications Act of 1996.



   "Siting" means the method and form of placement of a wireless
telecommunications facility on a specific area of a property.



   "Support equipment" means the physical, electrical and/or electronic
equipment included within a wireless telecommunication facility used to
house, power, and/or process signals from or to the facility's antenna or
antennas.



   "Utility tower" means an open framework structure or steel pole used to
support electric transmission facilities.



   "Wireless telecommunications facility" means a staffed or unstaffed
commercial facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency
signals, or other wireless communications, and usually consisting of any
combination of the following for that purpose: a mount, an antenna support
structure, a monopole, a lattice structure, an ancillary structure, an
antenna or antenna array or combined antenna, transmission cables, support
equipment, and/or equipment cabinet.



   C.   Preferred Zones and Locations. When doing so would not conflict
with the standards set forth in this Section or with federal law, wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be located in the most appropriate
location as described in this subsection (C), which range from the most
appropriate to the least appropriate.



   1.   Collocation on existing facilities and structures located on
city owned property;



   2.   Collocation on existing structures and facilities in the public
or quasi-public zone;



   3.   Collocation on existing facilities and structures or attached
wireless telecommunication facilities in the allowed Commercial, Office or
Industrial Zones;



   4.   Location of new wireless telecommunication facilities on city
owned property;



   5.   Location of new wireless telecommunication facilities in the
Public or Quasi-Public Zone;



   6.   Location of new wireless telecommunication facilities in the
allowed Commercial, Office and Industrial Zones.



   D.   Setbacks.



   1.   Fall Zone Setback. In order to ensure public safety, all new
wireless telecommunication facilities shall maintain a setback at a 1:5
ratio, measured from property lines, based on the height of the cell tower,
including any antenna or antenna array attached thereto. All new wireless
telecommunication facilities shall also meet the minimum setback requirements
of the underlying design district.



   2.   Variance. Setbacks for wireless telecommunication facilities
may be modified if the requirements of Chapter 17.42 can be satisfied and the
applicant can demonstrate that the siting for the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility will be the least visually obtrusive profile, will
not detract from the beauty and/or character of the area in which it is
proposed to be located, and will not cause a public safety issue.



   E.   Height limits for new wireless telecommunication facilities
shall be determined per Table 17.32.163(E)(A) The planning commission may
approve additional height beyond the maximum allowed subject to the
provisions Chapter 17.42 (Variance and Exceptions) of the Visalia Zoning
Ordinance.



Table 17.32.163(E)(A): Maximum Height of Wireless Telecommunication Facilities



 


Type of Facility

 

Maximum Height



Concealed and attached to building
 
Shall not exceed the height of the structure on which the attached wireless
telecommunication facility is attached by more than twenty-five (25) feet.


Non-concealed attached to building
 
Shall not exceed the height of the structure on which the attached wireless
telecommunication facility is attached by more than twenty-five (25) feet.


Freestanding tower
 
Shall not exceed the height of the zone district in which the wireless
telecommunication facility is located by more than twenty-five (25) feet.


Collocation on existing buildings and structures (legal nonconforming)
 
An attached wireless telecommunication facility may locate on a building or
structure that is legally non-conforming with respect to height, provided
that the facility does not project above the existing height by more than
twenty-five (25) feet.



 



   F.   Concealed Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Required. All
new wireless telecommunication facilities are required to be concealed. A
wireless telecommunication facility that is not concealed may be permitted so
long as the following findings can be met:



   1.   The siting of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility
will not adversely impact the use of the property, other buildings and
structures on the property, or the surrounding area or neighborhood.



   2.   The siting of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility
will result in the least intrusive visual impact to the area.



   3.   To the maximum extent reasonably feasible, the proposed
wireless telecommunications facility has been designed to blend with the
surrounding area and is appropriately designed for the specific site.



   G.   Concealed Wireless Telecommunication Facility Options.



   1.   The use of so-called "monopines, monopalms and other
mono-trees" to conceal wireless telecommunication facilities shall be
evaluated during the site plan review permit process. The applicant shall
demonstrate that these structures will blend in with the surrounding
neighborhood in order to be considered. Photo simulations are required for a
proposed mono-tree. The city planner may condition additional architectural
features (monopine, monopalm, horizontal installation, application of color)
to a wireless telecommunication facility to ensure compatibility with the
surrounding physical environment. Due to environmental factors such as wind,
rain and sun, the owner/applicant shall conduct an annual inspection on all
mono-trees to ensure that the faux foliage continues to resemble a tree, and
fully screens all antennas, antenna arrays, mounts, ancillary structures
and/or support equipment. All mono-tree designs shall incorporate appropriate
three-dimensional bark cladding, and shall provide for screening foliage to
extend beyond all antennas by no less than twenty-four (24) inches. The
design, number and placement of any branch-like structures affixed to the
tower shall insure adequate camouflaging of the antennas, antenna arrays,
mounts, ancillary structures and/or support equipment.



   2.   The use of alternative structures, including but not limited to
such structures as a church cross, statue, light pole, flagpole,
architectural feature such as a clock tower, shall be subject to the site
plan review permit process as described in subsection (1) above.
Consideration as to when a wireless telecommunication facility may be
concealed using an "alternative structure" will be based upon the extent to
which it is designed to internally house antennas, antenna arrays, mounts,
ancillary structures, and/or support equipment.



   H.   Collocation Required.



   1.   To limit the adverse visual effects of a proliferation of
wireless telecommunication facilities in the city, the proposed construction
of new wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed to accommodate
collocation of two (2) or more service providers. Any new wireless
telecommunication facility may be required to collocate with another existing
or new facility, unless it can be demonstrated to be technically or
economically infeasible.



   2.   Collocation on existing large towers. Collocation of the
wireless telecommunication facilities of more than three (3) telecom
providers on existing towers greater than seventy (70) feet in height is
permitted pursuant to the site plan review permit review process.



   I.   Substantial Change to the Physical Dimensions of Existing
Structure or Facility.



   1.   Modifications to an existing structure or facility are
permitted and do not require discretionary review where such modifications
will not result in a "substantial change," as set forth in subsection (I)(2)
below. Modifications resulting in a "substantial change" to an existing
structure or facility shall be submitted for review under the site plan
review permit process as described in this section.



   2.   A "substantial change" to an existing structure or facility
shall constitute the following:



   a.   The modification increases the height of the existing structure
or facility by more than ten (10) percent, or the height of one (1)
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna or
antenna array not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater.



   b.   The modification would add an antenna, antenna array, mount,
ancillary structure or support equipment that would protrude from the edge of
the existing structure or facility more than twenty (20) feet or more than
the width of the tower structure at the level of the antenna, antenna array,
mount, ancillary structure or support equipment, whichever is greater.



   c.   The modification involves installing more than the standard
number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, and would add
greater than four (4) equipment cabinets.



   d.   The modification would defeat the existing concealment elements.



   e.   The modification would result in the excavation or deployment
outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property and into any
access, utility easements or required setbacks.



   f.   The modification would not comply with other conditions imposed
upon the existing structure or facility unless non-compliance is due to an
increase in height, increase in width, addition of equipment cabinets, or new
excavation or deployment that does not exceed the substantial change
thresholds of this subsection.



   3.   All modifications remain subject to building codes and other
non-discretionary structural and safety codes.



   J.   Other Requirements for all Wireless Telecommunication
Facilities.



   1.   Any attached wireless telecommunication facility or wireless
telecommunication facility on or adjacent to a historic building or site
shall be designed to ensure consistency with the National Historic
Preservation Act or 1966, and shall be referred to the city's historic
preservation advisory committee for review and approval pursuant to Chapter
17.56.



   2.   There shall be a seven (7) foot high screen fence or solid wall
or approved architecturally-designed solid fence installed surrounding the
equipment cabinet. Slatted chain-link fencing will only be considered when
the equipment cabinet is substantially masked from public view or the
wireless telecommunication facility is located in an industrial zone or
public park.



   3.   New wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be
permitted within one hundred (100) yards of an existing structures and
facilities unless the applicant can demonstrate with substantial evidence
that there are no other location alternatives to providing service to the
area.



   4.   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be permitted in
locations where they will interfere with the operation of the Visalia
Municipal Airport. Wireless telecommunication facilities proposed for
location within the airport planning area shall be referred to the airport
manager or the airport land use commission for a determination of consistency
with airport area standards.



   5.   All wireless telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any other agency of the
state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless
telecommunication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed,
the owners of the wireless telecommunication facilities governed by this
section shall bring such wireless telecommunication facilities into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of
the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency.



   6.   All appropriate building permits are required. Compliance with
applicable federal, state, and local laws, codes, and regulations are
required, and are continuing obligations on applicants and permit holders
hereunder.



   7.   A wireless telecommunication facility shall be maintained in
good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to maintaining
the structural and aesthetic integrity of the wireless telecommunication
facility, including painting and upkeep of structures used to conceal
wireless telecommunication facilities, and irrigation and upkeep of buffer
areas and landscaping. If maintenance of will result in a substantial change
as described in Section 17.32.163.H, the requirements of that subsection
shall apply.



   8.   Drawings and Photos Required. A plan or drawing depicting the
size and configuration of the property where the wireless facility is
proposed, and the size and location of existing improvements or features
(buildings, driveways, sidewalks) depicting what currently exists and what
physical changes are proposed. Elevation drawings shall depict all mast
dimensions, placement and design features, and provide dimension to the apex
of the pole from the finish grade. Accurate and reliable photos of the
project site prior to the project installation or modification, and accurate
and reliable photo simulations of all elements of proposed wireless
telecommunication facility installation shall be provided.



   K.   Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use.



   1.   At such time that a wireless telecommunication facility owner
or wireless provider plans to abandon or discontinue operation of that
facility, said owner shall notify the community development department
director by certified U.S. Mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations.



   2.   In the event all legally approved use of any wireless
telecommunication facility has been discontinued for a period of six (6)
months (one hundred eighty (180) days) and the owner or wireless provider has
not notified the community development department director, the facility
shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment
shall be made by the community development department director who shall have
the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the facility owner
regarding the issue of usage, including evidence that use of the wireless
telecommunication facility is imminent.



   3.   At such time as the community development department director
determines that a wireless telecommunication facility is abandoned, the
community development department director shall provide written notice of an
abandonment determination by certified mail addressed to all applicants at
the addresses on file with the city and to the owner of the property at the
address on file with the city, the property address, if applicable, and at
the address to which tax notices are sent. Failure or refusal by the facility
owner or any other co-applicant to respond to such notice within sixty (60)
days of the receipt of the certified letter, shall constitute prima facie
evidence that the wireless telecommunication facility has been abandoned.



   4.   If the owner of a wireless telecommunication facility fails to
respond or fails to demonstrate that the facility is not abandoned, the
wireless telecommunication facility shall be considered abandoned and the
owner of the facility shall apply for a new permits consistent with the
requirements of this section or dismantle and physically remove the entire
wireless telecommunication facility. "Physically remove" shall include
restoration of the location of the wireless telecommunication facility to its
natural condition, where applicable, except that any landscaping and grading
shall remain in post-development condition.



   5.   Upon a determination of abandonment by the community
development department director pursuant to this section, and the failure of
the wireless telecommunication facility owner or other co-applicant to remove
the facility in accordance with this section, the wireless telecommunication
facility shall be deemed unfit for use and in violation of the permit
requirements so as to be deemed a danger to public health and a public and
private nuisance. Failure of the wireless telecommunication facility owner or
other co-applicant to dismantle and physically remove the facility and
related structures in accordance with the terms of this section shall result
in the city taking all actions consistent with Chapter 8.40 and Chapter 1.13.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2015-01 § 5, 2015)



Article 2. Density Bonuses, Concessions and Other Incentives for
Lower and Very Low-Income Households and for Senior Housing.



17.32.170   Purpose and intent.



   The California Legislature has determined that the provision of housing
for lower and very low income individuals and senior citizens is of primary
importance in the state and must be encouraged at the local level. The
purpose of this article is to comply with the provisions of California
Government Code Section 65915 requiring the city to provide incentives to
developers of housing for lower and very low income individuals, senior
citizens, and special needs groups. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02,
2012: prior code § 7493.1)



17.32.180   Applicability.



   This article shall apply to all housing developments consisting of five
or more units. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code §
7493.2)



17.32.190   Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:



   "Affordable housing unit" shall mean units for which households do not
pay more than thirty (30) percent of combined gross income for payment of
rent (including monthly allowance for utilities) or monthly mortgage and
related expenses.



   "Density bonus" means a density increase of at least twenty-five (25)
percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the
applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan as of
the date the preliminary proposal is received pursuant to Section 17.32.210.
For purposes of complying with Section 17.32.200(A)(1), the density bonus
shall not be included when determining the number of housing units that is
equal to ten (10) or twenty (20) percent of the total. In housing projects
designed for individual ownership, the minimum lot size shall not be less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet and the granting of this reduction in
lot size shall be considered a method of providing the density bonus and
shall not be considered as a granting of an additional concession or
incentive.



   "Developer" means the legal or equitable owner, or his/her authorized
representative, of any property within the city who intends to develop such
property in compliance with the provisions of this article.



   "Development concession or incentive" means one of the following: (1) a
reduction in site development standards, a modification of zoning code
requirements, such as a reduction in setbacks, square footage requirements,
or parking requirements; (2) approval of mixed-use zoning including but not
limited to commercial, office, and/or industrial land uses, if the other land
uses will reduce the cost of the housing project and if such non-residential
uses are compatible with the project; or (3) other regulatory incentive or
concession proposed by the developer to the city that results in identifiable
cost reductions.



   "Extremely low-income household" means a persons or families whose
combined household income is less than thirty (30) percent of the median
income (AMI) as established by HUD for the Visalia-Porterville Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA).



   "Housing development" means one or more groups of projects totaling
five or more residential units, such as a specific plan area, planned unit
development or comprehensive master plan.  For purposes of calculating a
density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based on an individual
subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in
geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the
units for the lower income households are located.



   "Large household" means a household with five or more members.



   "Low-income household" means persons and families whose combined income
is between fifty-one (51) and eighty (80) percent of the area median income
(AMI) as established by HUD for the Visalia-Porterville Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) does not exceed the qualifying limits in Section
50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code (eighty (80) percent of the
area median income).



   "Moderate-income household" shall mean persons and families whose
combined income is between eighty-one (81) and one hundred twenty (120)
percent of the area median income (AMI) as established by HUD for the
Visalia-Porterville Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).



   "Qualifying resident" means either: (1) a person sixty-two (62) years
of age or older, or (2) fifty-five (55) years of age or older in a senior
citizen housing development as defined in Section 51.3 of the California
Civil Code.



   "Special needs group" means those segments of the population that have
a more difficult time finding decent affordable housing due to special
circumstances. Under California Housing Element Statutes, these special needs
groups consist of the elderly, handicapped, large families, female-headed
households farm workers, and the homeless.



   "Very low-income households" means persons or families whose combined
income is between thirty-one (31) and fifty (50) percent of the area median
income (AMI) as established by HUD for the Visalia-Porterville Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA does not exceed the qualifying limit in Section 50105
of the California Health and Safety Code (fifty (50) percent of the area
median income). (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code §
7493.3)



17.32.200   Grant of density bonus development incentive.



   A.   A developer shall be entitled to a density bonus as defined in
Section 17.32.190, if the developer enters into either a development
agreement pursuant to California Government Code Section 65865 et. seq. or
another recorded contractual agreement satisfactory to the city with respect
to the housing development in which the developer covenants to all of the
following: that the affordable and/or special needs units included in the
density bonus shall remain affordable units and/or special needs units as
specified in Section 17.32.200B.



   1.   Density bonuses shall be granted as follows: To construct the
housing development with at least one of the following:



   a.   Twenty (20) percent when at least ten (10) percent of the
otherwise allowable maximum housing units of the housing development is
reserved for low-income households, and incrementally up to a maximum of
thirty-five (35) percent when at least twenty (20) percent of the otherwise
allowable maximum housing of the housing development is reserved for
low-income households; or twenty (20) percent of the otherwise allowable
maximum housing of the housing development reserved for lower income
households; or



   b.   At least ten (10) percent of the otherwise allowable maximum
housing of the housing development reserved for very low income households
twenty (20) percent when at least five (5) percent of the otherwise allowable
maximum housing units of the housing development is reserved for very
low-income



households, and incrementally up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent
when at least eleven (11) percent of the otherwise allowable maximum housing
of the housing development is reserved for very low-income households; or



   c.   Twenty (20) percent when at least twenty (20) percent of the
otherwise allowable maximum housing units of the housing development are
reserved for senior housing or special needs groups housing. At least fifty
(50) percent of the otherwise allowable maximum housing units of the housing
development reserved for qualifying residents.



   d.   Five (5) percent when at least ten (10) percent of the
otherwise allowable maximum housing units of the housing development is
reserved for moderate-income households, and incrementally up to a maximum of
thirty-five (35) percent of the allowable maximum housing units of the
housing development is reserved for moderate-income households.



   2.   The agreement shall ensure continued affordability of all
designated units for lower income households or very low income households or
qualifying residents for the time period established in subsection (B) of
this section. Continued affordability shall be ensured as follows:



   a.   Units targeted for lower income households shall be affordable
at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of sixty (60) percent of
the area median income as determined pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the
California Health and Safety Code.



   b.   Units targeted for very low income households shall be
affordable at a rent that does not exceed thirty (30) percent of fifty (50)
percent of the area median income, as determined pursuant to Section 50105 of
the California Health and Safety Code.



   c.   Units targeted for sale to lower and very low income households
are to be at a sales price that provides these households the ability to
qualify for long-term financing, based on gross salary income as identified
by income eligibility standards.



   B.   The time period to ensure continued affordability shall be at
least thirty (30) years. A longer period of time shall be required if the
construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance
program or rental subsidy program for the housing development, requires a
longer period.  Notwithstanding the above, this thirty (30)-year period
shall be reduced to ten (10) years if the city does not grant at least one
additional concession or incentive described in Section 17.32.220(B). The
method of providing for continued affordability shall be determined as the
city deems appropriate for each specific project and shall be set forth in
the development agreement or other recorded contractual agreement. Continued
affordability shall be interpreted as providing for occupancy of the dwelling
unit by a household with a targeted household income as provided in Section
17.32.200 for the entire period as required hereinabove, even when such unit
changes ownership. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code
§ 7493.4)



17.32.210   Preliminary proposal.



   A.   A developer may shall submit a written preliminary proposal for
development to determine the means for complying with this article. The
preliminary proposal shall be submitted in writing to the city. A preliminary
proposal may be submitted prior to any formal requests for general plan
amendments, zoning amendments or subdivision map approvals.



   B.   Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete written
preliminary proposal, the city shall notify the developer in writing of the
procedures that it will use to comply with this article.  (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code § 7493.5)



17.32.220   Development incentives and concessions.



   A.   When required by this article to grant a development incentive,
the city shall do one of the following:



   1.   Grant a density bonus and at least one other concession or
incentives set forth in subsection (B) of this section; or



   2.   Provide other incentives or concessions of equivalent financial
value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit.



   3.   For purposes of approving incentives or concessions identified
in Section 17.32.220(B), an exception or concession may be granted in
accordance with the process and provisions of Chapter 17.42.



   4.   The density bonus identified in Section 17.32.220(A)(1) may be
used to provide single or multi-family housing subject to approval of the
density bonus plan of Section 17.32.230.



   5.   The waiver of the requirement for a Conditional Use Permit
(CUP) for an affordable housing project in the downtown area where a CUP is
otherwise required pursuant to this chapter.



   6.   The reduction of parking requirements for affordable housing
projects in the downtown area with less than 80 units from 1.5 parking spaces
required per unit to 1 parking space required per unit.



   B.   For purpose of this section, "concessions or incentives" means
any of the following:



   1.   A reduction in site development standards or a modification of
zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the



minimum building standards approved by the State Building Standards
Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of
Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not
limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements or in the
ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required;



   2.   Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing
development if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are
compatible with the housing development and the existing or site plan review
in the area where the proposed housing development will be located;



   3.   Other regulatory incentives or concessions that result in
identifiable cost reductions.



   4.   This subsection (B) shall not require the city to provide
direct financial incentives or publicly owned land for the housing
development, or to waive fees or dedication requirements. The city shall
determine which of the incentives will be provided.



   C.   The city shall not be required to grant concessions or
incentives as defined in subsection (B) of this section if the city council
makes a written finding that such concessions or incentives are not required
in order to provide affordable housing costs as defined in Section 50052.5 of
the California Health and Safety Code or for rents for the targeted units to
be set as specified in Section 17.32.200 (A)(2).  The city shall grant the
requested incentive or concession unless the city makes written findings,
based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:



   1.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide
for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and
Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in
Section 17.32.200(B);



   2.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact,
as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5, upon the public health and
safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in
the State or Local Registry of Historical Buildings or Districts, and for
which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to
low- and moderate- income households.



   3.  The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal
law.



   D.  Incentives and concessions shall be allowed as follows:



   1.  One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten
(10) percent of the total units for low-income households, at least five (5)
percent for very low-income households, or at least ten (10) percent for
persons or families of moderate-income in a common interest development.



   2.  Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least
twenty (20) percent of the total units for low-income households, or at least
ten (10) percent for very low-income households, or at least twenty (20)
percent for moderate-income households in a common interest development.



   3.  Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least
thirty (30) percent of the total units for low-income households, or at least
fifteen (15) percent for very low-income households, or at least thirty (30)
percent for moderate-income in a common interest development.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012:
prior code § 7493.6)



17.32.230   Density bonus plan.



   A.   Prior to approval of a tentative subdivision map or parcel map
for a housing development for which a density bonus has been requested, or
the issuance of a building permit for a housing development not requiring a
tentative subdivision or parcel map, the developer shall submit to the city
for approval a plan showing the developer's intended integration of the
density bonus within the housing development. The city shall review the plan
for compliance with the terms of this article and may approve or reject the
plan; provided, that the plan shall not be rejected solely on the basis that
the plan would allow use of the density bonus in geographic areas of the
housing development other than the areas in which units for the lower income
households or the very low income households are located.



   B.   In the event that the geography, topography or configuration of
the site is such that the strict application of the city's development and
zoning standards would inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on the
site, the planning commission and/or city council may waive or modify the
development and zoning standards as applied to the housing development as
provided in Section 17.32.220(A)(1). No waiver shall be granted under this
subsection unless the developer has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
city that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units
economically feasible.



   C.   The city council may, by resolution, adopt development criteria
or standards for housing projects or developments approved through this
density bonus program. These criteria would be intended to address
streetscape, building materials, project design and any other factors deemed
necessary to assure project compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods and
project design. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code §
7493.7)



17.32.240   Multiple density bonuses.



   A developer who agrees to construct both twenty (20) percent of the
total units within a housing development for lower income households and ten
(10) percent of the total units for very low income households shall be
entitled to only one density bonus and at least one additional concession or
incentive identified in Section 17.32.220(B). (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2012-02, 2012: prior code § 7493.8)



Article 3. Keeping of Racing, Homing, and Sporting Pigeons as Household Pets



17.32.250   Purpose and intent.



   Pigeons that have been selectively bred for specific racing, homing, or
sporting purposes, for the company and pleasure provided to the occupants,
shall be considered to be household pets subject to the limitations of this
article. (Ord. 2017-01: prior code § 7494.1)



17.32.260   Applicability.



   The provisions of this article shall apply only to parcels ten thousand
(10,000) square feet in area or larger that are located within the R-1-5,
R-1-12.5, and R-1-20 zones, or as determined by City Planner subject to
criteria set forth in Section 17.02.170.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7494.2)



17.32.270   Limitations.



   A.   Leg Banding. All racing, homing or sporting pigeons shall be
banded with a leg band. The leg band is defined as a seamless band, made of a
durable material, which designates the national organization with which the
bird is registered, and indicates the year of birth of the bird.  Birds that
are not banded shall not be considered to be racing, homing or sporting
pigeons.



   B.   Number Limit. The number of racing, homing or sporting pigeons
shall not cumulatively exceed one hundred (100) per parcel.



   C.   Loft Setbacks. The structure ("loft") housing the racing,
homing or sporting pigeons shall comply with setback, height, and lot
coverage limitations in the underlying zone. The loft shall be setback a
minimum distance of ten feet from residential structures on the site, to
provide adequate distance for clean and sanitary loft maintenance, and a
minimum distance of twenty- five (25) feet from the buildable area of any
adjacent parcel. The buildable area shall be defined as that portion of the
parcel that excludes the front, rear, and side yard setback areas.



   D.   Loft Maintenance. Any loft used for housing the racing, homing
or sporting pigeons shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.



   E.   Release and Feeding of Pigeons. All racing, homing or sporting
pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods necessary
for exercise, training and competition. At no time shall pigeons be allowed
to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others. Objects shall not
be thrown at the birds during their training or exercise.  All birds shall
be fed within the confines of the loft.



   F.   Racing Pigeon Association Membership. Owners of racing, homing,
or sporting pigeons kept as household pets are required to be members of a
nationally recognized racing, homing, or sporting pigeon association. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7494.3)



17.32.280   Additional limitations.



   The limitations set forth in Section 17.32.270 shall be deemed minimum
limitations required for the keeping of pigeons as provided for herein. The
city may, as a condition to issuance of the permit required in Section
17.32.290, set forth additional requirements in said permit as may be
necessary to maintain the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7494.4)



17.32.290   Permit requirements.



   A.   The keeping of racing, homing or sporting pigeons, in
accordance with the limitations specified in Section 17.32.270, may be
permitted upon issuance of a permit by the planning and building division. A
permit for keeping pigeons may be processed as an administrative matter by
the planning and building division and no public hearing shall be required.
The permit application shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning and
building division, and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the
city council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application.



   B.   The applicant shall provide documentation of membership in a
nationally recognized racing, homing or sporting pigeon association with the
permit application. The permit may be granted for a maximum period of three
years. The permit may be renewed upon reapplication and a site inspection to
verify compliance with the requirements of this article.



   C.   The city shall have the right to enter the property for
verification of permit compliance, consistent with the provisions and
limitations of Section 17.46.030.



   D.   The permit shall be revoked by the planning and building
division upon violation of any condition, regulation or limitation of the
permit issued, unless such violation is corrected within ten days of notice
of such violation. Any permit may be revoked for any violation. In the event
of permit revocation, or objections to limitations placed thereon, an appeal
may be made in writing to the planning commission. The planning commission
shall review the appeal consistent with the provisions of Section 17.38.110.
The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council
consistent with the provisions of Section 17.38.120. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7494.5)



Article 4. Indirect Source Review



17.32.300   Adoption of indirect source review (ISR) regulations.



   In compliance with the California Health and Safety Code Sections 40910
et seq., the City adopts Rule 9510 of the San Joaquin Valley Unified Air
Pollution Control District, as administered by, and as amended from time to
time by said district, as the indirect source review regulation within the
City.



(Ord. 2018-18 § 1 (part), 2018)



Chapter 17.34
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES



Sections:



17.34.010   Purpose.



17.34.020   Schedule of off-street parking space requirements.



17.34.030   Standards for off-street parking facilities.



17.34.040   Landscape requirement.



17.34.050   Shared parking.



17.34.060   Location of off-street parking facilities.



17.34.070   Off-street loading facilities required.



17.34.080   Standards for off-street loading facilities.



17.34.090   Existing uses.



17.34.100   Reduction of off-street parking and loading facilities.



17.34.110   Off-street parking and loading facilities to serve one use.



17.34.010   Purpose.



   A.   In order to prevent traffic congestion and shortage of curb
spaces, off-street parking facilities shall be provided incidental to any new
building or structure and major alterations and enlargements of existing
uses. Off-street parking spaces or areas required by this chapter shall be in
proportion to the need for such facilities created by the particular type of
land use. Off-street parking facilities shall also be laid out in such a
manner that the facilities will protect the public safety and insulate
surrounding land uses from their impact.



   B.   For the purposes of tabulating the number of off-street parking
spaces, the term "floor area" means the gross floor area of a building and
its accessory buildings on the same site measured from the outside wall. All
applications shall be accompanied by a detailed tabulation of the gross floor
area as herein defined and a calculation of the required number of off-street
spaces as specified in Section 17.34.020. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7495)



17.34.020   Schedule of off-street parking space requirements.



   A.   Residential.



   1.   Single-family dwelling: two parking spaces (one covered) per
unit;



   2.   Multi-family dwelling: 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit for
all multi-family developments with the following exceptions:



   a.   One parking space per dwelling unit for senior citizen housing
developments. Senior citizen means a person of fifty-five (55) years of age
or older. Senior citizen housing development shall be defined as a
multi-family project wherein the units are made available solely to senior
citizens,



   b.   Planning Commission shall have the authority to require an
additional .25 parking spaces per dwelling unit for guest parking spaces
under the following circumstances:



   I.   Should on-street parking not be available to provide a minimum
of .25 spaces per unit;



   ii.   Within developments that include more than fifty (50) percent
of the units as three or four bedroom units.



   c.   In cases where multi-family developments do not require
planning commission review, the site plan review committee shall have similar
authority as described above.



   3.   Boarding houses, private clubs providing sleeping
accommodations: one covered parking space for each bedroom or one parking
space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sleeping area,
whichever is greater.



   4.   Motels, hotels. One parking space for each guest room.



   5.   Single-room occupancy (SRO) housing: One space for each
employee onsite on the highest shift.



   Further, there shall be one parking space for each two employees per
shift regularly employed by the motel, or any independent business located
within the motel structure. If the motel provides an area for the consumption
of food or beverages or provides meeting or assembly halls the following
requirements must be met.



 


Number of Motel Rooms

 

Parking Requirements



3-10
 
One parking space for each 100 square feet of area used for the consumption
of food or beverages and one parking space for each 35 square feet of meeting
or assembly hall space.


11-40
 
One parking space for every 200 square feet of area used for the consumption
of food or beverages and one parking space for each 70 square feet of meeting
hall or assembly hall space.


41-75
 
One parking space for each 300 square feet of area designated for the
consumption of food or beverages and one parking space for each 150 square
feet of meeting or assembly hall space.


76 or more
 
One parking space for each 400 square feet of area set aside for the
consumption of food or beverages and one parking space for each 300 square
feet of meeting or assembly hall area.



 



   5.   Planned unit developments, condominiums: one covered parking
space plus one uncovered guest parking space for each dwelling unit.



   B.   Medical Offices, Clinics, Hospitals and Other Facilities.



   1.   Dental and medical clinics and offices: one parking space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of building area, or four parking spaces
for each doctor, whichever is greater.



   2.   Major medical facilities, hospitals: one parking space for each
two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area.



   3.   Sanitariums and charitable and religious institutions providing
sleeping accommodations: one parking space for each three beds.



   4.   Group care facilities: one parking space for each three beds.



   C.   Educational Facilities.



   1.   Kindergarten and nursery schools: one parking space for each
employee plus one parking space for each ten children.



   2.   Elementary and junior high schools: two parking spaces for each
classroom.



   3.   High schools: one parking space for each employee plus seven
parking spaces for each classroom.



   4.   Colleges; business and professional schools and colleges; trade
schools: one parking space for each employee plus ten parking spaces for each
classroom.



   D.   Places of Public Assembly.



   1.   For auditoriums, community centers, theaters, churches,
libraries, museums, stadiums, clubs and funeral chapels: one parking space
for every four permanent seats in the principal assembly area or room, or one
parking space for every thirty (30) square feet of building area, whichever
is greater.



   E.   Recreational Facilities.



   1.   Bowling alleys: four parking spaces for each alley.



   2.   Billiard and/or pool parlors: two parking spaces for each table.



   3.   Skating rinks: one parking space for each employee, plus one
parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of building area.



   4.   Dance halls: one parking space for each thirty-five (35) square
feet of dance floor area, plus one parking space for each five fixed seats or
for each thirty-five (35) square feet of seating area where there are no
fixed seats.



   5.   Gymnasiums: one parking space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of building area.



   F.   Commercial Facilities.



   1.   Banks: one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of building area plus five tandem lane spaces for each outdoor
teller or teller station.



   2.   Savings and loan and other financial institutions: One parking
space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of building area.



   3.   General retail stores, except as otherwise specified: one
parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of building area.



   4.   Offices, including all public and professional offices, except
as otherwise specified: one parking space for each two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of building area, with a minimum of four parking spaces.



   5.   Commercial service establishments, repair shops, wholesale
establishments and retail stores that handle only bulky merchandise such as
furniture, household appliances, motor vehicles, farm implements and
machinery: one parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of
building area.



   6.   Automobile dealerships: one parking space for each two
employees during the time of maximum employment, plus one parking space for
each two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot and building area used for the
display or storage of automobiles.



   7.   Self-service laundries and dry cleaners: one parking space for
each three washing machines.



   8.   Automobile repair shops: one parking space for four hundred
(400) square feet of building area.



   9.   Barber shops, beauty salons: two parking spaces for each barber
or beautician, with a minimum of four spaces.



   10.   Restaurants, cafes, soda fountains and similar establishments:
one parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of building
area.



   11.   Manufacturing plants and other industrial uses: one parking
space for each employee during the shift of maximum employment, plus one
parking space for each vehicle used in conjunction with the use.



   12.   Retail food market: one parking space for each five hundred
(500) square feet of building area.



   13.   Nurseries, retail: one parking space for each one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet of site area, plus one loading space for
each acre of site area.



   14.   Shopping centers (major): one parking space for each two
hundred twenty-five (225) square feet of building area.



   15.   Open uses, commercial and industrial uses conducted primarily
outside of buildings: one parking space for each employee on the maximum
shift plus additional parking spaces prescribed by the planning department.



   16.   Transportation terminal facilities: one parking space for each
two employees plus additional parking spaces prescribed by the city planner.



   17.   Storage and warehouses: one parking space for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of building area.



   G.   For a use not specified in this section, the same number of
off-street parking spaces shall be provided as are required for the most
similar specified use. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2012-02, 2012: Ord.
2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7496)



17.34.030   Standards for off-street parking facilities.



   All off-street parking facilities shall conform with the following
standards:



   A.   All parking areas shall have adequate ingress and egress to a
street or alley.



   B.   Entrances and exits to parking lots and other parking
facilities shall be provided at locations approved by the site plan review
committee.



   C.   The parking area, aisles and access drives shall be surfaced
with an asphalt concrete surfacing of two-inch minimum thickness on a
four-inch untreated rock base. The subgrade shall be compacted to a minimum
relative compaction of ninety (90) percent. The minimum slope of asphalt
paved surface in the direction of drainage shall be twelve (12) inches per
one hundred (100) feet and the minimum slope of concrete gutters shall be
three inches per one hundred (100) feet.



   D.   The four-inch untreated rock base may be modified on basis of
an "R" value test of the existing soil. The test to be made with a traffic
index of 5.0.



   E.   On major developments service roads shall be designed to carry
the traffic loads anticipated.



   F.   No parking areas shall be located within a required front
setback or within a street side setback of a corner lot.



   G.   Each parking space shall conform to standards as specified by
the city traffic engineer. Open spaces shall be plainly marked by striping.



   H.   Parking spaces for the physically handicapped person shall be
provided per the latest adopted version of the California Building Code.



   I.   Parking spaces for "compact automobile" will be permitted
providing that each parking space is not less than fifteen (15) feet in
length and seven and one-half feet in width, exclusive of aisles and access
drives. Number of compact parking spaces shall not exceed thirty (30) percent
of the total required parking spaces of an establishment. There shall be no
more than four contiguous compact stalls within a parking lot. Any compact
parking shall be approved by the site plan review committee.



   J.   If the parking area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected
away from abutting residential sites so as to cause no annoying glare.



   K.   In all C-N, C-R, C-S, C-MU, D-MU, O-PA, O-C, and BRP zone
districts where a site adjoins or is directly across the street from an R-1
or R-M zone, a concrete block or masonry wall not less than six feet in
height shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard,
in which case the wall shall be three feet, and suitably maintained.



   L.   No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on a
parking area.



   M.   New parking facilities shall promote the use of time and/or
motion sensitive parking lot and security lights, where feasible, as
determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.



   N.   New parking facilities shall promote and be evaluated as part
of an overall program to implement low impact development features on-site
that reduce impermeable surfaces and increase infiltration.  The
implementation and design of low impact development features for the site
will be determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.



17.34.030



   O.   Vacant or unimproved lots shall not be used as vehicle parking
facilities and/or outdoor storage of commercial equipment, construction
equipment, and similar uses unless screened appropriately, as determined by
Site Plan Review Committee.



   P.   For Residential zones, all parking shall be permitted on
impervious surfaces such as pavement or concrete when in the front yard
setback area.



   Q.   For Residential zones, all driveways shall be paved. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7497)



17.34.040   Landscape requirement.



   The submission of any plan for off-street parking facilities shall be
accompanied by a detailed landscape plan for approval by the site plan review
committee. All off-street parking facilities shall conform with the following
standards, but not limited to:



   A.   A plot plan indicating the location of all landscaping shall be
submitted for approval;



   B.   Not less than six percent of a parking lot comprising up to
twenty (20) parking spaces shall be landscaped and continuously maintained;



   C.   Not less than ten percent of a parking lot comprising more than
twenty (20) parking spaces shall be landscaped and continuously maintained;



   D.   Not more than ten consecutive parking stalls shall be allowed
without an approved landscaped tree well of eighty (80) square feet or more;



   E.   A minimum five-foot landscape strip shall be provided outside
the public right-of-way along the street frontage perimeter of all proposed
parking facilities.



   F.   A planting list shall be shown on the required plot plan to
obtain a grading permit, or building permit, for the buildings for which the
parking lot is provided, which planting list shall give the botanical and
common names of the plants to be used, the sizes to be planted, the quantity
of each, and the spacing to insure balance and design. The plants shall be
listed alphabetically and assigned key numbers to be used in locating the
plants on the plan;



   G.   The site plan review committee shall approve all landscaping
plans within a parking area and shall have the right to require additional
landscaping if the committee deems it necessary to improve the aesthetic
character of the project. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7498)



17.34.050   Shared parking.



   The site plan review committee may grant an exception to the total
number of spaces required when the joint users of a parking facility have
divergent needs with respect to daytime versus nighttime use, or weekdays
versus Saturdays or Sundays. Conditions for allowing shared parking are:



   A.   The buildings and uses shall be within three hundred (300) feet
of the nearest point by walking distance within a parking facility to said
building or use;



   B.   The applicant shall show there is no conflict in the principal
operating hours of the buildings or uses;



   C.   A shared parking agreement between the principal parties and
the city shall be entered into that restrict the shared parking area to a
parking use only. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7499)



17.34.060   Location of off-street parking facilities.



   A.   In all zones districts except the D-MU zone, off-street parking
facilities prescribed in Section 17.34.020 shall be located on the same site
as the use for which the spaces are required or on an adjoining site (if an
exception is approved) or a site separated only by an alley from the use for
which the spaces are required.



   B.   In the D-MU zone district, off-street parking facilities
prescribed in Section 17.34.020 shall be located within three hundred feet of
the use for which the spaces are required, measured by the shortest route of
pedestrian access. Such spaces shall be deemed to provide parking for one use
only unless approved subject to Section 17.34.050. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7500)



17.34.070   Off-street loading facilities required.



   A.   In all commercial and industrial zones and in  the O-PA, O-C,
and BRP zones, if required by the commission, there shall be located on the
site of each building or structure, off-street loading facilities for
vehicles. Where, in the opinion of the site plan review committee, a
practical difficulty is involved relating to site size, existing development
or access, the planning commission may grant an exception to any portion of
the requirements necessary to achieve the intent of this section. For all
commercial and industrial buildings, one off-street loading berth shall be
provided if the gross floor area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet,
and one additional berth shall be provided for each additional ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.



   No off-street loading berths shall be required for buildings of less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area.



   B.   The location of off-street loading facilities shall be approved
by the site plan review committee. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7501)



17.34.080   Standards for off-street loading facilities.



   Off-street loading facilities provided in compliance with Section
17.34.070 shall conform to the following standards:



   A.   The loading area, aisles and access drives shall be fully hard
surfaced with asphaltic concrete of minimum thickness of two inches, over
four inches of untreated rock base;



   B.   If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected
away from abutting residential sites to prevent annoying glare;



   C.   No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in a
loading area. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7502)



17.34.090   Existing uses.



   No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be a
non-conforming use solely because of the lack of off-street parking
facilities or used for off-street parking and off-street loading at the time
of the adoption of this chapter shall not be reduced in a capacity to less
than the number of spaces or berths prescribed in this chapter or reduced in
area to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter. Where an
existing use is expanded, the parking requirements of this chapter shall
apply only to the addition.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7503)



17.34.100   Reduction of off-street parking and loading facilities.



   No off-street parking facility or off-street loading facility providing
for a use of land or structure in compliance with Section 17.34.020 or
17.34.070 shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient
additional capacity or additional area being provided to comply with the
regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7504)



17.34.110   Off-street parking and loading facilities to serve one use.



   No off-street parking space or off-street loading berth provided for a
use of land or structure in compliance with the requirements of this chapter
shall be deemed to provide an off-street parking space or an off-street
loading berth for a use or a structure on another site, except as otherwise
provided in Sections 17.34.020 and 17.34.070. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7505)



Chapter 17.36
FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES



Sections:



17.36.010   Purpose.



17.36.015   Fence, wall or hedge height measurement.



17.36.020   [Reserved].



17.36.030   Single-family residential zones.



17.36.040   Multiple-family residential zones.



17.36.050   Commercial and mixed use zones.



17.36.060   Office zones (O-PA, O-C, BRP).



17.36.070   Industrial zones.



17.36.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to control location and height of fences
as may be required by city laws, rules and regulations to safeguard life or
limb, property and public welfare. Fences may be constructed of any generally
acceptable material except that barbed wire and electric charged fences are
specifically prohibited in any R-1 or R-M zone. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7512)



17.36.015   Fence, wall or hedge height measurement.



   The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the adjacent
finished grade, excluding raised planters or berms, to the top of the fence,
wall or hedge. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2002-06 § 3 (part), 2002)



17.36.020   [Reserved].



17.36.030   Single-family residential zones.



   The following standards shall apply to sites within an R-1 zone:



   A.   Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding seven feet in height
shall be permitted, except that in a required front yard or within five feet
of a street side property line on a corner or side on cul-de-sac lot, a
fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed three feet in height. A fence or wall
may be allowed to a height of four feet provided that the additional one-foot
height at least fifty (50) percent open.



   B.   Required block walls for residential developments along
arterial or collector roadways shall be designed to provide pedestrian access
between the arterial or collector to the residential development.  A
Pedestrian access shall always be required as part of the block wall design
abutting an arterial or collector roadway when a transit stop is located
within one-quarter mile of the residential development.



   C.   Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Chapter 17.42.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2002-06 § 3 (part), 2002: prior code §
7514)



17.36.040   Multiple-family residential zones.



   The following standards shall apply to sites within an R-M zone:



   A.   Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding seven feet in height
shall be permitted except that in a required front yard, or a required side
yard on a corner or side on cul-de-sac lot, a fence, wall or hedge shall not
exceed three feet in height.  A fence or wall may be allowed to a height of
four feet provided that the additional one-foot height is at least fifty (50)
percent open.



   B.   Wrought Iron Fences. A decorative open metal fence of wrought
iron or tubular steel (not chain link) not exceeding seven feet in height
shall be permitted along the front and street side property lines or within
the front yard and street side yard setback areas of multi-family uses. This
subsection does not authorize solid walls or fences composed of woven wire
(chain link), wood, or other materials other than open metal wrought iron or
tubular steel. A post or pilaster consisting of masonry, brick, or other
solid material not exceeding 18 inches square and seven feet tall may be used
to support a wrought iron or tubular steel fence at a minimum distance of six
feet between the posts or pilasters.



   C.   Required block walls , fences, wrought iron fences for
multi-family developments along arterial or collector roadways shall be
designed to provide pedestrian access between the arterial or collector to
the multi-family residential development.  A Pedestrian access shall always
be required as part of the block wall, fences or wrought iron fence design
abutting an arterial or collector roadway when a transit stop is located
within one-quarter mile of the multi-family residential development.



   D.   Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Chapter 17.42.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2002-06 § 3 (part), 2002: prior code §
7515)



17.36.050   Commercial and mixed use zones.



   The following standards shall apply to sites within a C-N, C-R, C-S,
C-MU, or D-MU zone:



   A.   Where a site in the C-N, C-R, C-S, C-MU, or D-MU zone adjoins
an R-1 or R-M zone, either a concrete block masonry wall not less than seven
feet in height shall be located on the property line except in a required
front yard and suitably maintained or a landscaped buffer be provided as
approved by the planning commission.



   B.   A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
structure, on a site across a street or alley from an R-1 or R-M zone shall
be screened by a concrete block or masonry wall not less than six feet in
height, if the city planning commission finds said use to be unsightly. A
landscaped buffer can be approved by the planning commission in place of a
required wall as an exception.



   C.   Open storage of materials and equipment, except commercial
vehicles and used car sales lots, shall be permitted only within an area
surrounded and screened by a concrete block or masonry wall not less than six
feet in height; provided, that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a
height greater than that of the wall or fence.



   D.   No fence or wall shall exceed seven feet in height if located
in a required side or rear yard or three feet in height if located in a
required front yard.  A fence or wall may be allowed in a required front
yard to a height of four feet provided that the additional one-foot height is
not of a solid material, upon approval of the city planner.



   E.   Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Chapter 17.42.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7516)



17.36.060   Office zones (O-PA, O-C, BRP).



   The following standards shall apply to sites within a O-PA, O-C, or BRP
zone:



   A.   Where a site in the OPA, O-C, or BRP zone adjoins an R-A, R-1
or R-M zone a concrete or masonry wall not less than seven feet in height
shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard, and
suitably maintained. A landscaped buffer can be approved by the planning
commission in place of the wall as an exception.



   B.   No fence or wall in the OPA, O-C, or BRP zone shall exceed
seven feet in height if located in a required side or rear yard or three feet
in height if located in a required front yard.  A fence or wall may be
allowed in a required front yard to a height of four feet provided that the
additional one-foot height is not of a solid material, upon approval of the
city planner.



   C.   Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Chapter 17.42.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7517)



17.36.070   Industrial zones.



   The following standards shall apply to sites within an I-L or I zone:



   A.   Where a site within an I-L or I zone adjoins an R-A, R-1 or R-M
zone a concrete block or masonry wall not less than seven feet in height
shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard and
suitably maintained.



   B.   A use not conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, on a
site across a street or alley from an R-A, R-1 or R-M zone shall be screened
by a concrete block or masonry wall not less than seven feet in height, if
the site plan review committee finds said use to be unsightly.



   C.   Open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only
within an area screened by a concrete block or masonry wall not less than six
feet in height, which is adjacent to a public street or a residence provided
that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that
of the wall or fence.



   D.   No fence or wall shall exceed seven feet in height if located
in a required side or rear yard or three feet in height if located in a
required front yard. A fence or wall may be allowed to a height of four feet;
provided, that the additional one-foot height is not of a solid material.



   E.   Exceptions may be granted in accordance with Chapter 17.42.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7518)



Chapter 17.38
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



Sections:



17.38.010   Purposes and powers.



17.38.020   Application procedures.



17.38.030   Lapse of conditional use permit.



17.38.040   Revocation.



17.38.050   New application.



17.38.060   Conditional use permit to run with the land.



17.38.065   Abandonment of conditional use permit.



17.38.070   Temporary uses or structures.



17.38.080   Public hearing—Notice.



17.38.090   Investigation and report.



17.38.100   Public hearing—Procedure.



17.38.110   Action by planning commission.



17.38.120   Appeal to city council.



17.38.130   Effective date of conditional use permit.



17.38.010   Purposes and powers.



   In certain zones conditional uses are permitted subject to the granting
of a conditional use permit. Because of their unusual characteristics,
conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located
properly with respect to the objectives of the zoning ordinance and with
respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve these
purposes and thus give the zone use regulations the flexibility necessary to
achieve the objectives of this title, the planning commission is empowered to
grant or deny applications for conditional use permits and to impose
reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permits. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7525)



17.38.020   Application procedures.



   A.   Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the
planning commission on a form prescribed by the commission which shall
include the following data:



   1.   Name and address of the applicant;



   2.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is
the authorized agent of the owner;



   3.   Address and legal description of the property;



   4.   The application shall be accompanied by such sketches or
drawings as may be necessary by the planning division to clearly show the
applicant's proposal;



   5.   The purposes of the conditional use permit and the general
description of the use proposed;



   6.   Additional information as required by the historic preservation
advisory committee.



   7.   Additional technical studies or reports, as required by the
Site Plan Review Committee.



   8.   A traffic study or analysis prepared by a certified traffic
engineer, as required by the Site Plan Review Committee or Traffic Engineer,
that identifies traffic service levels of surrounding arterials, collectors,
access roads, and regionally significant roadways impacted by the project and
any required improvements to be included as a condition or mitigation measure
of the project in order to maintain the required services levels identified
in the General Plan Circulation Element.



   B.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution
of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7526)



17.38.030   Lapse of conditional use permit.



   A conditional use permit shall lapse and shall become void twenty-four
(24) months after the date on which it became effective, unless the
conditions of the permit allowed a shorter or greater time limit, or unless
prior to the expiration of twenty-four (24) months a building permit is
issued by the city and construction is commenced and diligently pursued
toward completion on the site that was the subject of the permit. A permit
may be renewed for an additional period of one year; provided, that prior to
the expiration of twenty-four (24) months from the date the permit originally
became effective, an application for renewal is filed with the planning
commission. The commission may grant or deny an application for renewal of a
conditional use permit. In the case of a planned residential development, the
recording of a final map and improvements thereto shall be deemed the same as
a building permit in relation to this section.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7527)



17.38.040   Revocation.



   Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title, or, if
granted subject to a condition or conditions, upon failure to comply with the
condition or conditions, a conditional use permit shall be suspended
automatically. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within
sixty (60) days, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Section
17.38.080, and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or
condition is being complied with, may revoke the permit or take such action
as may be necessary to insure compliance with the regulation, general
provision or condition.  Appeals of the decision of the planning commission
may be made to the city council as provided in Section 17.38.120. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7528)



17.38.050   New application.



   Following the denial of a conditional use permit application or the
revocation of a conditional use permit, no application for a conditional use
permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or
substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of
denial or revocation of the permit unless such denial was a denial without
prejudice by the planning commission or city council.



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7530)



17.38.060   Conditional use permit to run with the land.



   A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change
of ownership of the site or structure that was the subject of the permit
application subject to the provisions of Section 17.38.065. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7531)



17.38.065   Abandonment of conditional use permit.



   If the use for which a conditional use permit was approved is
discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days, the use shall be
considered abandoned and any future use of the site as a conditional use will
require the approval of a new conditional use permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.38.070   Temporary uses or structures.



   A.   Conditional use permits for temporary uses or structures may be
processed as administrative matters by the city planner and/or planning
division staff. However, the city planner may, at his/her discretion, refer
such application to the planning commission for consideration.



   B.   The city planner and/or planning division staff is authorized
to review applications and to issue such temporary permits, subject to the
following conditions:



   1.   Conditional use permits granted pursuant to this section shall
be for a fixed period not to exceed thirty (30) days for each temporary use
not occupying a structure, including promotional enterprises, or six months
for all other uses or structures.



   2.   Ingress and egress shall be limited to that designated by the
planning division. Appropriate directional signing, barricades, fences or
landscaping shall be provided where required. A security officer may be
required for promotional events.



   3.   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the site of
each temporary use as prescribed in Section 17.34.020.



   4.   Upon termination of the temporary permit, or abandonment of the
site, the applicant shall remove all materials and equipment and restore the
premises to their original condition.



   5.   Opening and closing times for promotional enterprises shall
coincide with the hours of operation of the sponsoring commercial
establishment. Reasonable time limits for other uses may be set by the city
planner and planning division staff.



   6.   Applicants for a temporary conditional use permit shall have
all applicable licenses and permits prior to issuance of a conditional use
permit.



   7.   Signing for temporary uses shall be subject to the approval of
the city planner.



   8.   Notwithstanding underlying zoning, temporary conditional use
permits may be granted for fruit and vegetable stands on properties primarily
within undeveloped agricultural areas. In reviewing applications for such
stands, issues of traffic safety and land use compatibility shall be
evaluated and mitigation measures and conditions may be imposed to ensure
that the stands are built and are operated consistent with appropriate
construction standards, vehicular access and off-street parking. All fruits
and vegetables sold at such stands shall be grown by the owner/operator or
purchased by said party directly from a grower/farmer.



   9.   Fruit/Vegetable stands shall be subject to site plan review.



   C.    The City Planner shall deny a temporary use permit if findings
cannot be made, or conditions exist that would be injurious to existing site,
improvements, land uses, surrounding development or would be detrimental to
the surrounding area.



   D.   The applicant or any interested person may appeal a decision of
temporary use permit to the planning commission, setting forth the reason for
such appeal to the commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the city
planner in writing with applicable fees, within ten (10) days after
notification of such decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of
the commission's next regular meeting. If the appeal is filed within five (5)
days of the next regular meeting of the commission, the appeal shall be
placed on the agenda of the commission's second regular meeting following the
filing of the appeal. The commission shall review the temporary use permit
and shall uphold or revise the decision of the temporary use permit, based on
the findings set forth in Section 17.38.110. The decision of the commission
shall be final unless appealed to the council pursuant to Section 17.02.145.



   E.   A privately owned parcel may be granted up to six (6) temporary
use permits per calendar year. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30
(part), 1996: prior code § 7532)



17.38.080   Public hearing—Notice.



   A.   The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing
on each application for a conditional use permit.



   B.   Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten
days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by
mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to property owners
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area occupied or to
be occupied by the use that is the subject of the hearing, and by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7533)



17.38.090   Investigation and report.



   The planning staff shall make an investigation of the application and
shall prepare a report thereon that shall be submitted to the planning
commission. The report can recommend modifications to the application as a
condition of approval. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7534)



17.38.100   Public hearing—Procedure.



   At the public hearing the planning commission shall review the
application and the statement and drawing submitted therewith and shall
receive pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed
conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with
respect to the findings prescribed in Section 17.38.110. The planning
commission may continue a public hearing from time to time as it deems
necessary. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7535)



17.38.110   Action by planning commission.



   A.   The planning commission may grant an application for a
conditional use permit as requested or in modified form, if, on the basis of
the application and the evidence submitted, the commission makes the
following findings:



   1.   That the proposed location of the conditional use is in
accordance with the objectives of the zoning ordinance and the purposes of
the zone in which the site is located;



   2.   That the proposed location of the conditional use and the
conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious
to properties or improvements in the vicinity.



   B.   A conditional use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a
limited time period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the
commission may prescribe. The commission may grant conditional approval for a
permit subject to the effective date of a change of zone or other ordinance
amendment.



   C.   The commission may deny an application for a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7536)



17.38.120   Appeal to city council.



   The decision of the City planning commission on a conditional use
permit shall be subject to the appeal provisions of Section 17.02.145. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-18 § 6, 2007: prior code § 7537)



17.38.130   Effective date of conditional use permit.



   A conditional use permit shall become effective immediately when
granted or affirmed by the council, or ten days following the granting of the
conditional use permit by the planning commission if no appeal has been
filed. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7539)



Chapter 17.40
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



Sections:



17.40.010   Purpose.



17.40.020   Definitions.



17.40.030   Existing uses.



17.40.040   Nonconforming structures.



17.40.050   Appeal process.



17.40.060   Nonconforming uses.



17.40.070   Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures.



17.40.080   Structure permits or certificates of occupancy prohibited.



17.40.090   Removal of illegal nonconforming structures and uses.



17.40.100   Elimination of nonconforming uses.



17.40.010   Purpose.



   A.   These provisions are intended to provide for the orderly
termination of nonconforming structures and uses to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare, and to bring these structures and uses
into conformity with the goals and policies of the general plan. This chapter
is intended to prevent the expansion of nonconforming structures and uses to
the maximum extent feasible, to establish the criteria under which they may
be continued or possibly expanded, and to provide for the correction or
removal of these land use nonconformities in an equitable, reasonable and
timely manner.



   B.   It is declared that nonconforming structures and uses within
the city are detrimental to orderly development and the general welfare of
citizens and property. It is further declared that nonconforming structures
and uses shall be eliminated as rapidly as possible without infringing upon
the constitutional rights of property owners. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: 
prior code § 7540)



17.40.020   Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:



   "Nonconforming structure" means a structure that was lawfully erected
prior to the adoption of this title, but which, under this title, or due to
changes in the City of Visalia municipal code or the lawful taking of private
property by or under threat of eminent domain, does not conform with the
standards of coverage, yard spaces, height of structures or distances between
existing structures prescribed in the regulations for the zone or development
standards in which the structure is located.



   "Nonconforming use" means one that lawfully existed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, but which is no longer permitted in the zone
in which it is located. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7541)



17.40.030   Existing uses.



   An existing use of land or structure shall not be deemed to be a
nonconforming use solely because of the lack of off-street parking
facilities; however, property on the site used for off-street parking and
off-street loading at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall not be
reduced in a capacity to less than the number of spaces or berths prescribed
in Chapter 17.34 or reduced in area to less than the minimum standards
prescribed in Chapter 17.34. Where an existing use is expanded, the parking
requirements of Chapter 17.34 shall apply only to the addition. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7542)



17.40.040   Nonconforming structures.



   A structure that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this
chapter is a legal nonconforming structure, and may continue even though the
structure fails to conform to the present requirements of the zone or
development standards in which it is located. A legal nonconforming structure
may be maintained as follows:



   A.   A legal nonconforming structure that is damaged to an extent of
one-half or more of its replacement cost immediately prior to such damage may
be restored only if made to conform to all provisions of this chapter.



   B.   Reasonable repairs and alterations may be made to legal
nonconforming commercial, institutional or industrial structures; provided,
that no structural alterations shall be made which would prolong the life of
the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams
or girders. Structural elements may be modified or repaired only if the chief
building official determines that such modification or repair is immediately
necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or occupants of the
nonconforming structure or adjacent property and the cost does not exceed
one-half of the replacement cost of the legal nonconforming structure.
However, improvements required to reinforce nonreinforced masonry structures
shall be permitted without replacement cost limitations; provided, that such
retrofitting is strictly limited to compliance with earthquake safety
standards.



   C.   Changes to interior partitions or other nonstructural
improvements and repairs may be made to a legal nonconforming commercial,
institutional or industrial structure; provided, that the cost of the desired
improvement or repair shall not exceed one-half of the replacement cost of
the nonconforming structure over any consecutive five-year period.



   D.   The replacement cost shall be determined by the city planner.



   E.   Necessary repairs and desired alterations including expansions
may be made to a legal nonconforming residential structure(s), including
multi-family, located in a residential land use district.  Expansions shall
not increase the number of dwelling units on the site nor increase
discrepancy of nonconformance with physical development standards (height,
yard area, etc.).



   F.   Any additional development of a parcel with a legal
nonconforming structure will require that all new structures be in
conformance with this chapter.



   G.   If the occupancy of a nonconforming structure/site is
discontinued for a period of six or more consecutive months, the structure
and site shall be made to conform to the provisions of the ordinance to the
extent possible upon re-occupation of the structure/site by a "permitted use"
in the zone classification. The occupancy of a legal nonconforming
structure/site shall be considered discontinued when any of the following
apply:



   1.   The intent of the owner to discontinue use of the nonconforming
structure is apparent, as determined by the city planner;



   2.   Where characteristic furnishings and equipment associated with
the use have been removed and not replaced with equivalent furnishings and
equipment during this time, and where normal occupancy and/or use has been
discontinued for a period of six or more consecutive calendar months;



   3.   Where there are no business receipts available for the
six-month period;



   4.   The extent of required improvements shall be determined through
application for site plan review permit by the site plan review committee. 
Additional parking shall not be required except where a use is expanded in
area or intensity, in which case the parking requirements shall apply only to
the addition. Appeals of findings of the site plan review committee may be
made to the planning commission as provided in Section 17.28.050.



   H.   No nonconforming structure shall be moved, altered, enlarged or
reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions
and the standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of
structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for
the zone in which the structure is located.



   I.   When a legally existing residential unit is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) or more consecutive months, the residential structure
and site shall be made to conform to all current residential standards prior
to re-occupancy as a residence.  A nonconforming residential structure
within a commercial, office or industrial zoning district that is ordered to
be repaired by the City Building Official shall do so in compliance with the
minimum requirements of the California Building Code. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7543)



17.40.050   Appeal process.



   Appeals to findings made pursuant to Section 17.40.040A, B, C, and D,
may be made by the applicant/property owner. Appeals shall be made in
writing, setting forth the reason(s) for said appeal.  Such appeal shall be
filed with the city planner, whereupon it will be placed on the agenda of the
city planning commission's regular meeting. The commission shall review said
appeal and set forth recommendations to the city council regarding the
disposition of the appeal. The city council shall consider the contents of
the appeal and recommendations of the planning commission and either approve,
modify, approve with conditions or deny said appeal. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior
code § 7544)



17.40.060   Nonconforming uses.



   A nonconforming use is one that lawfully existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, but that is no longer permitted in the zone or
development standards in which it is located. The continuance of a legal
nonconforming use is subject to the following:



   A.   Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of a nonconforming
use shall not affect its legal nonconforming status; provided, that the use
and intensity of use does not change.



   B.   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a continuous period
of one hundred eighty (180) days, it shall lose its legal nonconforming
status, and the continued use of the property shall be required to conform
with the provisions of the chapter.



   C.   A nonconforming use of a permanent structure may be continued;
provided, there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume
occupied by such a nonconforming use, except as provided in Section
17.40.070. In the event no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming
use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more
restrictive nature, provided that this change occurs within the one hundred
eighty (180) day period as indicated in Section 17.40.060(B).



   D.   Additional development of any property on which a legal
nonconforming use exists shall require that all new uses conform to the
provision of this chapter.



   E.   If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, no
nonconforming use may be resumed. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 §
4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7545)



17.40.070   Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures.



   An existing legal nonconforming use or legal nonconforming structure
may be minimally expanded or changed subject to the granting of a conditional
use permit after a noticed public hearing as specified in Chapter 17.38, and
if all of the following findings are made:



   A.   That such expansion or change is minimal.  An expansion or
change is considered to be minimal if the expansion comprises generally
twenty (20) percent or less additional square footage of structure or site
area or twenty (20) percent increase or less in intensity as measured by
additional vehicle trips, parking need generation, etc., over what was
existing at the time of adoption of an ordinance making the use or structure
nonconforming;



   B.   That such expansion or change will not adversely affect or be
materially detrimental to adjoining properties;



   C.   That there is a need for relief of overcrowded conditions or
for modernization in order to properly operate the use;



   D.   That the use and/or structure is existing and has not been
discontinued for a one hundred eighty (180) day continuous period;



   E.   That the expansion shall not increase the discrepancy between
existing conditions and the standards of coverage, front yards, side yards,
rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in
the regulations for the zone in which the structure is located. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7546)



17.40.080   Structure permits or certificates of occupancy prohibited.



   When any nonconforming structure or use is no longer permitted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, no permit for a structure shall thereafter
be issued for further continuance, alteration, or expansion, except as
provided in this chapter. Any permit issued in error shall not be construed
as allowing the continuation of the nonconforming structure or use. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7547)



17.40.090   Removal of illegal nonconforming structures and uses.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or implied so as
to allow for the continuation of illegal nonconforming structures and uses.
Said structures and uses shall be removed immediately subject to the
provisions of Title 15 and 17 of the Visalia Municipal code and state law.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7548)



17.40.100   Elimination of nonconforming uses.



   A.   A nonconforming use that does not occupy a structure shall be
discontinued and removed from the site within three years from the effective
date of this chapter.



   B.   A nonconforming use that involves aboveground bulk storage of
Class I liquids and is hazardous as determined by the fire department
according to the following codes in force in the city:



   1.   Fire Prevention Code;



   2.   National Electrical Code;



   3.   Uniform Building Code;



   4.   Uniform Plumbing Code; shall be discontinued, removed, or made
to conform within thirty (30) years from the date of installation or five
years from the date of the adopting ordinance, whichever is longer. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7549)



Chapter 17.42
VARIANCES



Sections:



17.42.010   Variance purposes.



17.42.020   [Reserved].



17.42.030   Variance powers of city planning commission.



17.42.040   [Reserved].



17.42.050   Application procedures.



17.42.060   Hearing and notice.



17.42.070   Investigation and report.



17.42.080   Public hearing procedure.



17.42.090   Variance action of the city planning commission.



17.42.100   [Reserved].



17.42.110   Appeal to city council.



17.42.120   Lapse of variance.



17.42.130   Revocation.



17.42.140   New application.



17.42.010   Variance purposes.



   The city planning commission may grant variances in order to prevent
unnecessary hardships that would result from a strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of certain regulations prescribed by this
title. A practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship may result from the
size, shape or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures
thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the
site or in the immediate vicinity, or from population densities, street
locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity. The power to grant
variances does not extend to use regulations, because the flexibility
necessary to avoid results inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning
ordinance is provided by the conditional use provisions of this title. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7555)



17.42.020   [Reserved].



17.42.030   Variance powers of city planning commission.



   The city planning commission may grant variances to the regulations
prescribed by this title with respect to fences and walls, site area, width,
frontage coverage, front yard, rear yard, side yards, height of structures,
distance between structures, off-street parking facilities, accessory
dwelling unit standards pursuant to Sections 17.12.140 through 17.12.200, and
downtown building design criteria pursuant to Sections 17.58.082 through
17.58.088; in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7557)



17.42.040   [Reserved].



17.42.050   Application procedures.



   A.   Application for a variance or exception shall be made to the
city planning commission on a form prescribed by the commission and shall
include the following data:



   1.   Name and address of the applicant;



   2.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property, is
the authorized agent of the owners, or is or will be the plaintiff in an
action in eminent domain to acquire the property involved;



   3.   Address and legal description of the property;



   4.   Statement of the precise nature of the variance or exception
requested and the hardship or practical difficulty that would result from the
strict interpretation and enforcement of this title;



   5.   The application shall be accompanied by such sketches or
drawings that may be necessary to clearly show applicant's proposal;



   6.   Additional information as required by the historic preservation
advisory board;



   7.   When reviewing requests for an exception associated with a
request for density bonus as provided in Chapter 17.32, Article 2, the
applicant shall submit copies of the comprehensive development plan, sketches
and plans indicating the nature of the request and written justification that
the requested modifications result in identifiable cost reductions required
for project to reach target affordability.



   B.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution
of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application.



   C.   No variance shall be required for structures or devices that
are necessary to facilitate reasonable access to a building or accommodation
for persons with physical or non-physical disabilities.



(Ord. 2017-13 (part), 2017: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7559)



17.42.060   Hearing and notice.



   A.   The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing on an
application for a variance.



   B.   Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten
days or more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by
mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to property owners
within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area occupied or to
be occupied by the use that is the subject of the hearing. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7560)



17.42.070   Investigation and report.



   The city planning staff shall make an investigation of the application
and shall prepare a report thereon that shall be submitted to the city
planning commission.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7561)



17.42.080   Public hearing procedure.



   At a public hearing the city planning commission shall review the
application and the statements and drawings submitted therewith and shall
receive pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect
to the findings prescribed in Section 17.42.090. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7562)



17.42.090   Variance action of the city planning commission.



   A.   The city planning commission may grant a variance to a
regulation prescribed by this title with respect to fences and walls, site
area, width, frontage, coverage, front yard, rear yard, side yards, height of
structures, distances between structures or landscaped areas or in modified
form if, on the basis of the application, the report of the city planning
staff or the evidence submitted, the commission makes the following findings:



   1.   That strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance;



   2.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the
property which do not apply generally to other properties classified in the
same zone;



   3.   That strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the
owners of other properties classified in the same zone;



   4.   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant
of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties
classified in the same zone;



   5.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties
or improvements in the vicinity.



   B.   The city planning commission may grant a variance to a
regulation prescribed by this title with respect to off-street parking
facilities, if, on the basis of the application, the report of the city
planner or the evidence submitted the commission makes the findings
prescribed in subsection (A)(1) of this section and that the granting of the
variance will not result in the parking of vehicles on public streets in such
a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets.



   C.   A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time
period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the commission may
prescribe.



   D.   The city planning commission may deny a variance application.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7563)



17.42.100   [Reserved].



17.42.110   Appeal to city council.



   The decision of the city planning commission on a variance or exception
application shall be subject to the appeal provisions of Section 17.02.145.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-18 § 7, 2007: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: prior code § 7565)



17.42.120   Lapse of variance.



   A variance shall lapse and become void one year following the date on
which the variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one
year, a building permit is issued by the building official and construction
is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site that was
the subject of the variance application, or a certificate of occupancy is
issued by the building official for the site or structure that was the
subject of the variance application. A variance may be renewed for an
additional period of one year; provided, that prior to the expiration of one
year from the date when the variance became effective, an application for
renewal of the variance is made to the commission. The commission may grant
or deny an application for renewal of a variance. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2006-18 § 7, 2007: prior code § 7567)



17.42.130   Revocation.



   A variance granted subject to a condition or conditions shall be
revoked by the city planning commission if the condition or conditions are
not complied with. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-18 § 7, 2007: prior
code § 7568)



17.42.140   New application.



   Following the denial of a variance application or the revocation of a
variance, no application for the same or substantially the same variance on
the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year of the
date of denial of the variance application or revocation of the variance.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2006-18 § 7, 2007: prior code § 7569)



Chapter 17.44
ZONING AMENDMENTS



Sections:



17.44.010   Purpose.



17.44.020   Initiation.



17.44.030   Application procedures.



17.44.040   Public hearing—Notice.



17.44.050   Investigation and report.



17.44.060   Hearing.



17.44.070   Action of city planning commission.



17.44.080   [Reserved].



17.44.090   Action of city council.



17.44.100   Change of zoning map.



17.44.110   New application.



17.44.120   Report by city planner.



17.44.010   Purpose.



   As a general plan for Visalia is put into effect, there will be a need
for changes in zoning boundaries and other regulations of this title. As the
general plan is reviewed and revised periodically, other changes in the
regulations of this title may be warranted. Such amendments shall be made in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7580)



17.44.020   Initiation.



   A.   A change in the boundaries of any zone may be initiated by the
owner of the property within the area for which a change of zone is proposed
or by his authorized agent. If the area for which a change of zone is
proposed is in more than one ownership, all of the property owners or their
authorized agents shall join in filing the application, unless included by
planning commission resolution of intention.



   B.   A change in boundaries of any zone, or a change in a zone
regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirements, general
provision, exception or other provision may be initiated by the city planning
commission or the city council in the form of a request to the commission
that it consider a proposed change; provided, that in either case the
procedure prescribed in Sections 17.44.040 and 17.44.090 shall be followed.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7581)



17.44.030   Application procedures.



   A.   A property owner or his authorized agent may file an
application with the city planning commission for a change in zoning
boundaries on a form prescribed by the commission and that said application
shall include the following data:



   1.   Name and address of the applicant;



   2.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property for
which the change in zoning boundaries is proposed, the authorized agent of
the owner, or is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to
acquire the property involved;



   3.   Address and legal description of the property;



   4.   The application shall be accompanied by such sketches or
drawings as may be necessary to clearly show the applicant's proposal;



   5.   Additional information as required by the historic preservation
advisory board.



   B.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution
of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of processing the
application. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7582)



17.44.040   Public hearing—Notice.



   The city planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on
each application for a change in zone boundaries and on each proposal for a
change in zone boundaries or of a zone regulation, off-street parking or
loading facilities requirements, general provisions, exception or other
provision of this title initiated by the commission or the city council.
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten days or more
than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, and by mailing notice of
the time and place of the hearing to property owners within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundaries of the area occupied or to be occupied by the
use that is the subject of the hearing. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior
code § 7583)



17.44.050   Investigation and report.



   The city planning staff shall make an investigation of the application
or the proposal and shall prepare a report thereon that shall be submitted to
the city planning commission. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7584)



17.44.060   Hearing.



   A.   At the public hearing, the city planning commission shall
review the application or the proposal and may receive pertinent evidence as
to why or how the proposed change is necessary to achieve the objectives of
the zoning ordinance prescribed in Section 17.02.020.



   B.   If the commission's recommendation is to change property from
one zone designation to another, the commission may recommend that conditions
be imposed so as not to create problems adverse to the public health, safety
and general welfare of the city and its residents. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7585)



17.44.070   Action of city planning commission.



   The city planning commission shall make a specific finding as to
whether the change is required to achieve the objectives of the zoning
ordinance prescribed in Section 17.02.020. The commission shall transmit a
report to the city council recommending that the application be granted,
conditionally approved, or denied or that the proposal be adopted or
rejected, together with one copy of the application, resolution of the
commission or request of the Council, the sketches or drawings submitted and
all other data filed therewith, the report of the city engineer and the
findings of the commission. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: prior code § 7586)



17.44.080   [Reserved].



17.44.090   Action of city council.



   A.   Upon receipt of the resolution or report of the city planning
commission, the city council shall review the application or the proposal and
shall consider the resolution or report of the commission and the report of
the city planning staff.



   B.   The city council shall make a specific finding as to whether
the change is required to achieve the objectives of the zoning ordinance
prescribed in Section 17.02.020. If the council finds that the change is
required, it shall enact an ordinance amending the zoning map or an ordinance
amending the regulations of this title, whichever is appropriate. The city
council may impose conditions on the change of zone for the property where it
finds that said conditions must be imposed so as not to create problems
inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare of the city and its
residents. If conditions are imposed on a change of zone, said conditions
shall run with the land and shall not automatically be removed by a
subsequent reclassification or change in ownership of the property. Said
conditions may be removed only by the city council after recommendation by
the planning commission. If the council finds that the change is not
required, it shall deny the application or reject the proposal. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7587)



17.44.100   Change of zoning map.



   A change in zone boundary shall be indicated on the zoning map. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7589)



17.44.110   New application.



   Following the denial of an application for a change in a zone boundary,
no application for the same or substantially the same change shall be filed
within one year of the date of denial of the application. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7590)



17.44.120   Report by city planner.



   On any amendment to the zoning code changing property from one zone
classification to another, the city planner shall inform the planning
commission and the city council of any conditions attached to previous zone
changes as a result of action taken pursuant to Sections 17.44.060, 17.44.070
and 17.44.090. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996:
prior code § 7591)



Chapter 17.46
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



Sections:



17.46.010   Administration.



17.46.020   Code enforcement.



17.46.030   Right of entry.



17.46.040   Violation—Declared public nuisances and actions.



17.46.050   Violation—Procedure.



17.46.060   Infraction and penalty.



17.46.010   Administration.



   All department heads, officials or other employees of the city vested
with the duty or authority to issue any permit, license or certificate shall
conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, license or
certificate for uses, buildings, or structures or purposes in conflict with
provisions contained in this title. Any such permit, license or certificate
issued in conflict with this title, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null
and void. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7600)



17.46.020   Code enforcement.



   The city planner and zoning compliance inspector, or other person
authorized by the city manager, shall be authorized to enforce provisions of
this title and to issue citations and make arrests pursuant to Section 836.5
of the California Penal Code and Sections 1.08.010, 1.08.020, 1.08.030,
1.12.010, and Chapter 1.13 of the Visalia Municipal Code. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7601)



17.46.030   Right of entry.



   In the discharge of enforcement duties authorized persons shall have
the right to enter any site or to enter any structure for the purpose of
investigation and inspection. Such right of entry shall be exercised only at
reasonable hours and only with the consent of the owner or tenant unless a
written order of a court of competent jurisdiction has been issued. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7602)



17.46.040   Violation—Declared public nuisances and actions.



   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
title and any use of land, building, or premises established, conducted,
operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and
the same are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The zoning
compliance inspector shall immediately initiate all necessary legal
proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner
provided by law and shall take such other steps as may be necessary to
accomplish these ends, and may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to
grant such relief as will remove and abate the structure or use and restrain
or enjoin the person, firm or corporation, or an organization from erecting,
moving, altering or enlarging the structure or using the site contrary to the
provisions of the ordinance. The remedies prescribed by this section are
cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7603)



17.46.050   Violation—Procedure.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or organization found in violation of
any provisions of this title shall be notified and cited in accordance with
policies established by the planning department and approved by the city
council. Such policies shall be available for inspection by any person upon
request to the planning department. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7604)



17.46.060   Infraction and penalty.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of this
title is unlawful and constitutes an infraction pursuant to Section 19(c) of
the California Penal Code. Any person convicted of an infraction under this
code shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00)
for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for the second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine
not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional
violation of the same ordinance within one year. The phrase "violation of the
same ordinance" as used in this section means and refers to a violation of
the same numbered section of the Visalia Municipal Code. In addition, each
day such violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7605)



Chapter 17.48
SIGNS



Sections:



17.48.010   Purpose.



17.48.020   Applicability and Severability.



17.48.030   Exempt Signs.



17.48.040   Prohibited Signs.



17.48.050   Permits Required.



17.48.060   Sign Design Principles.



17.48.070   Rules for Sign Measurement.



17.48.080   General Sign Standards.



17.48.090   Sign Standards for Agricultural and Residential Zones.



17.48.100   Sign Standards for Other Zones.



17.48.110   Standards for Specific Sign Types.



17.48.120   Downtown Retail Overlay District Sign Standards.



17.48.130   Temporary Signs.



17.48.140   Master Sign Program.



17.48.150   Variances and Exceptions.



17.48.160   Nonconforming Signs.



17.48.170   Maintenance, Abandonment, and Enforcement.



17.48.180   Definitions.



17.48.010   Purpose.



   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate signs as an information
system that preserves and enhances the aesthetic character and environmental
values of Visalia, its residential neighborhoods, its Downtown, and
commercial/industrial areas, while also providing an effective means for
members of the public to express themselves through the display of signs.
These regulations recognize the importance of business activity to the
economic vitality of the City as well as the need to protect the visual
environment. Specifically, these regulations are intended to implement the
General Plan and:



   A.   Provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property,
public welfare, and traffic safety by controlling the design, quality of
materials, construction, illumination, size, location and maintenance of
signs and sign structures;



   B.   Preserve and enhance the visual attractiveness of the City for
residents, businesses, and visitors;



   C.   Protect and enhance property values and community appearance by
encouraging signs that are compatible with the architectural style,
character, and scale of the building to which they relate and with adjacent
buildings and businesses;



   D.   Restrict signs that may create visual clutter or a nuisance to
nearby properties, violate privacy, create hazards or unreasonable
distractions for pedestrians and drivers;



   E.   Provide adequate opportunity for the exercise of the free
speech by display of a message or image on a sign, while balancing that
opportunity with other community and public interests;



   F.   Ensure that commercial signs are accessory or auxiliary to a
principal business or establishment on the same premises, rather than
functioning as general advertising for hire; and



   G.   Prohibit signs that may cause traffic or pedestrian safety
hazards or interfere with ingress and egress. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.020   Applicability and Severability.



   This Chapter regulates signs that are located or mounted on private
property within the jurisdictional boundaries of Visalia. The provisions in
this Chapter apply in all Zoning Districts within the City.  No sign within
the regulatory scope of this Chapter shall be erected or maintained anywhere
in the City except in conformity with this Chapter.  If any part, section,
subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause term or word in
this Chapter is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of the Chapter. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.030   Exempt Signs.



   The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this
Chapter and do not count toward the total sign area limit for a site,
provided that they conform to applicable standards:



   A.   Address Signs. One nameplate, not exceeding two square feet in
area, identifying the address of the property.



   B.   Barber Poles.  Barber poles, not exceeding 18 inches in
height, located on a non-residential zoned property and containing no
lettering.



   C.   Commercial Displays On Vehicles. Signs on vehicles may be
displayed, provided that:



   1.   The message pertains to the establishment of which the vehicle
is an instrument or tool; and



   2.   The message does not utilize changeable copy or special
illumination.



   D.   Decorations. Holiday and cultural observance decorations on
private property. Decorations cannot include commercial advertising. This
exemption includes strings of lights associated with a holiday decoration.



   E.   Flags. Flags may be erected and located in accordance with the
following standards:



   1.   Location. Flagpoles must not be located within any required
side yard setbacks.



   2.   Maximum Flagpole Height. If a flag is on a flag pole, the pole
height must not exceed 30 feet or the distance from the base of the pole to
the closest lot line plus two feet, whichever is less.



   3.   Maximum Size. The maximum individual flag area on a lot is 48
square feet in all zoning districts. Pennants, banners, feather banners,
strings of ornamental fringes and streamers are not included in this
exemption and are regulated under Section 17.48.130, Temporary Signs.



   F.   Government Signs. Official notices issued by a court, public
body or office and posted in the performance of a public duty; notices posted
by a utility or other quasi-public agency; signs erected by a governmental
body to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; noncommercial bus
stop signs erected by a public transit agency, or other signs required or
authorized by law. This exemption also covers signs and banners for special
civic events sponsored by the City, which may be displayed in public rights
of way.



   G.   Interior Signs.  Signs that are located entirely within a
building or enclosed structure and not visible from the public right of way.



   H.   Mobile Vendor Signs.  Signs and menu display boards fixed to
mobile vending carts or food trucks that identify or advertise the name,
product, or service provided by the vendor. Each mobile vending cart or food
truck is limited to a maximum of eight square feet of sign area, plus a menu
display board.



   Figure 17.48.030(H): Mobile Vendor Signs







 



   I.   Newspaper Stands.  Signs that are part of newspaper stands
provided the sign area does not exceed four square feet.



   J.   Temporary Signs. Signs that conform to the standards of
Sections 17.48.090(C), 17.48.090(D), 17.48.110(B), 17.48.120(G) or 17.48.130.



   K.   Public Carrier Graphics. Graphic images mounted on carrier
vehicles such as buses, taxicabs, and limousines that legally pass through
the City.



   L.   Window Signs. Permanent Window Signs that conform to the
standards of Section 17.48.110(I). (Ord.  2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11
§ 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.040   Prohibited Signs.



   Unless expressly allowed by another Section of this Chapter or other
applicable law, the following signs, locations, and materials are prohibited:



   A.   Animated or Moving Signs.  Animated, flashing, blinking,
reflecting, revolving, or other similar sign with visibly moving or rotating
parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind, unless expressly permitted
under this Chapter. This prohibition does not apply to signs using digital
display technology, such as LED (light emitting diodes) or functionally
equivalent display methods, which are permitted, subject to the regulations
of this Chapter.



   B.   Air Activated Graphics and Other Attention-Getting Devices.
Balloons, blimps and air activated graphics which serve as attention-getting
devises, made of light-weight fabric or similar material, designed to rotate
or move with the wind or activated by forced air, that direct, promote, or
that are otherwise designed to attract attention for outdoor advertising
purposes are prohibited in all zoning districts. Stationary, inflatable signs
displayed and secured at ground level are allowed as temporary portable signs.



   C.   General Advertising (for Hire). Except as otherwise
specifically provided in this Chapter, temporary signs that publicize or
promote other businesses or causes using methods of advertising (in contrast
to self-promotion, on-site sales, or on-site advertising). General
advertising is also known as advertising for hire.



   D.   Mobile Billboards.  The City prohibits any person to conduct,
or cause to be conducted, any mobile billboard advertising upon any street,
or other public place within the City in which the public has the right of
travel. The purpose of this prohibition is to eliminate mobile billboard
advertising within the City in order to reduce traffic congestion, promote
the safe movement of vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and to
improve the aesthetic appearance of the City. This prohibition does not apply
to signage on a licensed commercial vehicle that is related to the goods or
services provided by the vehicle owner or operator and to public
transit/public carrier graphics on properly licensed buses and taxicabs.



Figure 17.48.040(D): Mobile Billboards







 



   E.   Murals.  Murals which contain advertising copy or function as
advertising.  Murals without advertising copy must be approved by the City
Council under the provisions of the City's adopted mural policy.



   F.   Outdoor Advertising Displays ("Billboards"). Permanent signs
that display outdoor advertising for hire are prohibited in all zones.



   G.   Roof Signs. Roof signs, including signs mounted or painted on
roofs, except those painted on a flat roof and not visible from the public
right of way.



   Figure 17.48.040(G): Roof Signs







 



   H.   Search Lights and Klieg Lights. Search and Klieg lights when
used as attention attracting devises for commercial uses. They may be allowed
with a temporary conditional use permit for special events.



   I.   Signs in the Public Right-of-Way without an Encroachment
Permit.  Other than government signage, and except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter, no sign can be placed in the public right-of-way in median
strips or islands, sidewalks, on street trees or retaining walls, on bridges,
public benches, traffic signals, public fences, street poles, utility poles
and equipment, street lighting, traffic signs, or within a railroad
right-of-way, unless it has been authorized by an encroachment permit issued
by the City.



   J.   Signs on Doors, Windows, or Fire Escapes. Signs shall not be
located or installed on any door, window, or fire escape that will prevent
free ingress or egress.  No sign shall be attached to any standpipe or fire
escape, except those required by other codes.



   K.   Signs that Create a Traffic Hazard or Affect Pedestrian
Safety.  Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a safety hazard or
to impede the public use of the public right of way.  These signs include
but are not limited to:



   1.   Signs located in such a manner as to constitute a traffic
hazard or obstruct the view of traffic or any authorized traffic sign or
signal device.



   2.   Signs that may create confusion with any authorized traffic
sign, signal, or traffic control device because their color, design,
illumination, location or wording, or use of any phrase, symbol, or character
which interferes with, misleads, or confuses vehicular drivers in their use
of roads or conflicts with any traffic control sign or device.



   3.   Signs within five feet of a fire hydrant, street sign, or
traffic signal.



   4.   Signs erected at or near the intersections of public and/or
private rights-of-way in such a manner as to create a safety hazard by
obstructing clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   L.   Signs that Produce Noise or Emissions.  Signs that produce
visible smoke, vapor, particles, odor, noise, or sounds that can be heard at
the property line, excluding voice units at menu boards and devices for
servicing customers from their vehicles, such as drive up windows at banks or
pharmacies, provided these latter units comply with the standards of the
City's Noise Ordinance.



   M.   Commercial Mascot Signage.  A person or animal, whether or not
costumed or decorated, that actively holds, displays or attends to a
commercial sign, are prohibited in all zones.  Includes "sign twirlers",
"sign clowns", "human sandwich boards", and persons or animals holding or
supporting any sign or advertising device displaying commercial speech or
conveying a commercial message. This prohibition also applies to robotic
devices intended to simulate a live person or animal.



   N.   Snipe Signs. Signs tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or
otherwise attached to trees, utility poles, government signs, fences,
trailers, temporary construction barriers or other supporting structures.
(Ord. 2017 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.050   Permits Required.



   A.   Sign Permit Required.  No sign shall be erected, altered,
reconstructed or relocated without a sign permit. A permit is not required
for ordinary maintenance and repairs to signs and for temporary signs on
private property that conform to the standards of this Chapter. The Planning
Department will review all applications for sign permits for consistency with
this Chapter.



   B.   Encroachment Permit. Signs that project over or extend into a
public street or sidewalk shall be subject to Encroachment Permit approval by
the Community Development Department pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12
of the Municipal Code.



   C.   Conditional Use Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit,
issued pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of the Visalia Municipal Code, is required
for Master Sign Programs (see paragraph E below) and electronic signs,
excluding interior electronic signs and digital displays that are regulated
as window signs and are exempt from permit requirements.



   D.   Owner's Consent Required.  Consent of the property owner or
business owner is required before any sign may be displayed on any real or
personal property in the City.



   E.   Master Sign Program.  A Master Sign Program, prepared pursuant
to Section 17.48.130, is required for the following projects:



   1.   New or remodeled non-residential or mixed used projects on a
site of five or more acres; and



   2.   Any development in the BRP zone. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.060   Sign Design Principles.



   The following sign design principles should be used as criteria for
review and approval of sign permits and Master Sign Programs.



   A.   Architectural Compatibility. A sign, including its supporting
structure, if any, should be designed as an integral design element of a
building's architecture and be architecturally compatible, including color
and scale, with any building to which the sign is to be attached and with
surrounding structures.  A sign that covers a window or that spills over
"natural" boundaries or architectural features and obliterates parts of upper
floors of buildings is detrimental to visual order and will not be permitted.
Common indicators of compatibility include:



   1.   Quality sign design and construction;



   2.   Proportional size and scale; and



   3.   Use of materials, shapes and colors that complement the
building's architectural style and the surrounding environment.



   B.   Legibility. The size and proportion of the elements of the
sign's message, including logos, letters, icons and other graphic images,
should be selected based on the average distance and average travel speed of
the viewer. Sign messages oriented towards pedestrians may be smaller than
those oriented towards automobile drivers. Colors chosen for the sign text
and/or graphics should have sufficient contrast with the sign background in
order to be easily read during both day and night. Symbols and logos can be
used in place of words. Substantial contrast should be provided between the
color and materials of the background and the letters or symbols to make the
sign easier to read in both day and night.



   C.   Readability. A sign message should be easily recognized and
designed in a clear, unambiguous and concise manner, so that a viewer can
understand or make sense of what appears on the sign.



   D.   Visibility. A sign should be conspicuous and readily
distinguishable from its surroundings so a viewer can easily see the
information it communicates.



   E.   Placement. Often, a building's architectural details create
logical places for signage. Signs should not cover or interrupt architectural
details or ornaments of a building's façade. On buildings with a monolithic
or plain façade, signs can establish or continue appropriate design rhythm,
scale and proportion. Well-designed and well-located retail signs create
visual interest and continuity with other storefronts on the same or adjacent
buildings. Signs should not obstruct windows or doors. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.070   Rules for Sign Measurement.



   A.   Calculation of Sign Area. The area of an individual sign must
be calculated as follows:



   1.   Single-Faced Signs. Sign area includes the entire area within a
single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose
the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign
structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and
color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included
in sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for
addresses or required tags. The calculation of sign area for various types of
single-faced signs is illustrated in Figure 17.48.070(A)(2).



   2.   Double-Faced Signs. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are
located two feet or less from one another at all points, or located at an
interior angle of 45 degrees or less from one another, the sign area must be
computed as the area of one face. Where the two faces are not equal in size,
the larger sign face will be used. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are
located more than two feet or 45 degrees from one another, both sign faces
will be counted toward sign area. See Figure 17.48.070(A)(3).



Figure 17.48.070(A)(2): Measurement of Sign Area







 



   3.   Multi-Faced Signs. On a three-faced sign, where at least one
interior angle is 45 degrees or less, the area of two faces (the largest and
smallest face) must be summed to determine sign area. In all other situations
involving a sign with three or more sides, sign area will be calculated as
the sum of all faces.



Figure 17.48.070(A)(3): Measurement of Multi-Faced Signs







 



   4.   Three-Dimensional Signs. Signs that consist of, or have
attached to them, one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes,
clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), may have a sign
area that is the sum of two adjacent sides of the smallest cube that will
encompass the sign. See Figure 17.48.070(A)(4).



Figure 17.48.070(A)(4): Measurement of 3-Dimensional Signs







 



   B.   Calculation of Lot Frontage. If a lot fronts on two streets,
both frontages may be used for calculating the allowable sign area. On lots
with three or more frontages on a public street, the length of only two
contiguous sides shall be added together to determine allowable sign area.



   C.   Measuring Sign Height. The height of a sign is the vertical
distance measured from the ground level directly beneath the sign to the
highest point at the top of the sign, including any structural or
architectural components of the sign. The ground level shall be either the
natural grade or finished grade, whichever is lowest.



   1.   Height of Freestanding Signs. The height of freestanding signs
shall be measured as the vertical distance from grade at the edge of the
right-of-way along which a sign is placed to the highest point of the sign,
including any structural or architectural components of the sign. When the
grade at the edge of the right-of-way is higher than the site on which the
sign is placed, that portion of the sign below the grade at the edge of the
right-of-way shall not be included in determining the sign's overall height.
Signs oriented towards a freeway shall be measured from the project site
grade or pad, whichever is lower.



   D.   Measuring Sign Clearance. Sign clearance shall be measured as
the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of
the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.



   E.   Building Frontage. Building frontage is the building facade
that directly abuts a public street, private street, parking lot driveway, or
parking spaces in which main customer access is provided to the business. A
building's frontage is considered continuous if projections or recesses in a
building wall do not exceed 10 feet in any direction. For buildings with two
or more frontages, the length of the wall and allowable sign area shall be
calculated separately for each building frontage. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.080   General Sign Standards.



   A.   Message Neutrality. It is the City's policy to regulate signs
in a constitutional manner that is content neutral as to noncommercial
messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution.



   B.   Maximum Sign Area. The maximum allowable, permittable sign area
for permanent signs, exclusive of area of exempt signs, is based on the
Zoning District in which the sign is located and the type of sign to be
installed. These standards are established in subsequent Sections of this
Chapter.



   C.   Message Substitution.  A noncommercial message of any type may
be substituted, in whole or in part, for any duly permitted commercial
message, and any noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in
part, for any other noncommercial message.



   1.   No Additional Approval.  Such substitution of message may be
made without any additional approvals.  The purpose of this Section is to
prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other
noncommercial message.



   2.   Limitations. This message substitution provision does not: 1)
create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or
land use; 2) affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device
be properly permitted; 3) allow a change in the physical structure of a sign
or its mounting device; or 4) authorize the substitution of an off-site
commercial message in place of an on-site commercial message or in place of a
noncommercial message.



   D.   Changeable Copy. Non-electronic changeable copy shall represent
no more than 20 percent of the total allowable sign area.  Copy shall not be
changed more than once every 24 hours.



   E.   Electronic Copy. 



   1.   Location. Electronic copy is allowed as a display medium
wherever monument signs are allowed. A Conditional Use Permit, issued
pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of the Visalia Municipal Code, is required for the
installation of any electronic sign except an interior electronic sign or
digital display, which are regulated as permanent window signs.



   2.   Physical Standards.



   a.   The sign display face must be directed in a manner that is not
visible from the front or side yards of residential properties located in a
residential zone district.



   b.   Electronic display faces must be an integral part of the
remainder of the sign area.



   3.   Operational Standards.



   a.   Electronic display shall be limited to no more than 30 lumens
output, measured at 10 feet from the sign face.



   b.   No portion of the electronic display (either sign copy or
pictures) shall change more frequently than once every six seconds.



   c.   No audible output from any portion of the sign shall be
permitted.



   d.   Electronic signs shall be operative only during the hours of
operation of the associated business.



   e.   Sign copy or electronic picture displays shall be limited to
advertising related to the use(s) on the property for which the monument sign
is located, except for message substitution, as allowed in Section 17.48.080D.



   f.   No change of lighting intensity may occur during a display or
between displays except to respond to a change in ambient lighting conditions.



   g.   No display shall create a potential distraction to drivers by
virtue of the frequency of changes of images (i.e. the time between images
expressed in seconds), and the Planning Commission may impose limitations on
the number of images that can be displayed over a specified time period for
reasons of traffic safety.



   F.   Illumination. The illumination of signs, from either an
internal or external source, must be designed to avoid negative impacts on
surrounding rights-of-way and properties. The following standards apply to
all illuminated signs:



   1.   Light Intensity. Sign lighting must not be of an intensity or
brightness that will create a nuisance for residential buildings in a direct
line of sight to the sign.



   2.   Shielding Required. External light sources must be directed,
shielded, and filtered to limit direct illumination of any object other than
the sign, according to Table 17.48.080(F)(2) below.



 

Table 17.48.080(F)(2): Requirements for Shielding and Filtering




Fixture Lamp Type
 
Shielding Required
 
Filtering Required


Low Pressure Sodium1
 
None
 
None


High Pressure Sodium
 
Fully
 
None


Metal Halide
 
Fully
 
Yes4


Fluorescent
 
Fully5
 
Yes2


Quartz3
 
Fully
 
None


Incandescent Greater than 100W
 
Fully
 
None


Incandescent 100W or less
 
None
 
None


LED
 
Fully
 
None


Mercury Vapor
 
Not permitted.
 


Fossil Fuel
 
None
 
None


Glass Tubes filled with neon, argon, or krypton
 
None
 
None


Other Sources
 
As approved by the Director.


1.   This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into
the night sky affecting astronomical observations.

2.   Warm white natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental
effects.

3.   For the purposes of this article, quartz lamps are not considered an
incandescent light source.

4.   Most glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter
requirements.

5.   Outdoor signs constructed of translucent materials and wholly
illuminated from within do not require shielding.




 



   3.   Energy Conservation. Light sources shall be hard-wired
fluorescent or compact florescent lamps, or other lighting technology that is
of equal or greater energy efficiency.  Incandescent lamps are prohibited,
except when used in signs of historic character as part of the architectural
design.



   4.   Light Sources Adjacent to Residential Areas.  Illuminated
signs located adjacent to any residential area shall be controlled by a
rheostat or other acceptable method to reduce glare that will create a
nuisance for residential buildings in a direct line of sight to the sign.



   G.   Materials. Signs shall be made of sturdy, durable materials. 
Paper, cardboard, or other material subject to rapid deterioration can only
be used for signs that comply with applicable requirements for Temporary
Signs in Section 17.48.130.  Fabric signs are restricted to Awnings,
Canopies, Flags, and Temporary Signs.



   H.   Mounting Required.  All permanent signs shall be firmly
anchored and comply with all requirements for public safety and codes.



   I.   Minimum Clearance from Utilities.  Signs and their supporting
structures shall maintain clearance from and not interfere with electrical
conductors, communications equipment, or lines, underground facilities and
conduits.



   J.   Concealed Electrical Systems.  External conduits, boxes, and
other connections related to the function of a sign and associated lighting
shall not be exposed.  A switch disconnecting each circuit shall be placed
in plain sight and near the inspection opening. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.090   Sign Standards for Agricultural and Residential Zones.



   A.   Purpose and Applicability. This Section establishes standards
for signs associated with specific types of land uses in Agricultural and
Residential zones. Unless otherwise specified below, each sign type also is
subject to the standards established in Section 17.48.110, Standards for
Specific Sign Types.



   B.   Permanent Commercial Signs Prohibited for Residential Zones.
Unless otherwise allowed or exempted by this Chapter, permanent signs
displaying a commercial message are prohibited in Residential Zones.



   C.   Permanent Noncommercial Signs Allowed on Residential
Properties. The aggregate sign area allowance for all permanent noncommercial
signs on a developed lot or site in Residential Zones, excluding exempt signs
or signs otherwise allowed by this Chapter, is 8 square feet.



   D.   Temporary Signs Allowed on Residential Properties. The
aggregate sign area allowance for all temporary signs on a developed lot or
site, or on the common area of a fully developed residential subdivision with
5 or more parcels, or on the common area of fully developed multi-family
apartment or condominium complexes with 5 or more units, excluding exempt
signs or signs otherwise allowed by this Chapter, is 24 square feet, 4 square
feet of which may be used as general advertising for hire.  For an
undeveloped lot or site not subject to regulation pursuant to subsection E,
the basic sign area allowance for all temporary signs is 16 square feet, all
of which may be used as general advertising for hire.



   1.   Sign Types, Materials and Maintenance. Allowable temporary
signs include portable signs, window signs, or banners.  Portable signs
shall be constructed of materials and maintained as set forth in Section
17.48.130.B.4 below, temporary window signs shall be constructed of materials
and maintained as set forth in Section 17.48.130.C.5 below, and banners shall
be constructed of materials and maintained as set forth in Section
17.48.130.D.2 below.  All temporary signs shall also be maintained in
accordance with Section 17.48.170.



   2.   Location. Signs may be posted or displayed from the yard,
window, door, balcony, or outside wall of a building.



   3.   Maximum Height. Six feet for freestanding signs. Banner and
window signs must not be more than 12 feet above grade.



   4.   Maximum Size.  The maximum sign area for any individual sign
shall be 16 square feet.



   E.   Temporary Signs on Developing Residential Properties.



   1.   The aggregate sign area allowance for all temporary signs on
residential zoned property for which a building permit has been issued for
purposes of constructing a single-family home or multi-family apartment
complex, excluding exempt signs or signs otherwise allowed by this Chapter,
is 32 square feet.



   a.   Duration.  Temporary signs shall be allowed on a developing
residential lot or site after the building permit has been issued and shall
be removed upon its expiration, cancellation or termination.



   b.   Sign Types.  Signs may be portable signs, window signs, or
banners.



   c.   Maximum Height.  Eight feet for freestanding signs. Banners
and window signs must not be more than 12 feet above grade.



   2.   Temporary signs on a developing residential subdivision for
which at least one final subdivision map has been issued pursuant to Chapter
16.24 are allowed as follows:



   a.   Duration.  Temporary signs shall be allowed on a developing
residential subdivision site after the first final subdivision map of an
approved tentative subdivision map is recorded and shall be removed when all
of the lots shown on the approved tentative subdivision map are sold. 
However, once individual lots or sites are developed and sold, Section
17.48.090.D above shall apply to those developed and sold lots or sites.



   b.   External Temporary Signage.  Temporary signs located and
intended to be viewed from the public streets surrounding a developing
residential subdivision may be erected and maintained within the boundaries
of the subdivision in accordance with the sign area allowance above.  The
basic sign area allowance for external temporary signage is the greater of 64
square feet, or 32 square feet for every 300 lineal feet that the subdivision
site fronts upon a public street.  External temporary signage shall be
non-illuminated, shall not be made or constructed from cloth, bunting,
plastic, paper or similar material, and shall be maintained in accordance
with the requirements of Section 17.48.170.  Dimensions for temporary
external signage shall not exceed four feet by eight feet per sign and 32
square feet per sign face, or a height of eight feet, or if located behind an
exterior wall of a residential subdivision, at a height not to exceed 12
feet. The signs shall be no closer than 300 feet from each other.



   c.   Internal Temporary Signage. Additional portable signs, banners
and flags may be maintained within the boundaries of a residential
subdivision, provided that they are predominantly not viewable from the
exterior of the developing residential subdivision, and do not create a
safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic within the developing residential subdivision. Inflatable portable
signs may only be displayed on Saturdays and Sundays. Portable signs shall be
constructed of materials and maintained as set forth in Section 17.48.130.B.4
below and banners shall be constructed of materials and maintained as set
forth in Section 17.48.130.D.2 below.  All internal temporary signs shall
also be maintained in accordance with Section 17.48.170.



   d.   Wall Mounted Banners.  Banners or wall mounted temporary signs
not exceeding 80 square feet in the aggregate are allowed on an exterior wall
of a residential subdivision.



   F.   Agricultural Zones. Permanent commercial signs incidental to
agricultural operations conducted in Agricultural Zones may be erected
subject to the following standards:



   1.   Maximum Number of Signs.  One sign per street frontage, which
may be either a freestanding sign or a wall sign.



   2.   Location. Signs shall be setback a minimum of five feet from
the public right-of-way.



   3.   Maximum Sign Area per Sign. 32 square feet.



   4.   Maximum Height.  Six feet.



   G.   Public and Quasi-Public Uses. Signs for Public and Quasi-Public
uses located in Agricultural and Residential Zones may be erected subject to
the following standards.  Public and Quasi-Public uses are those identified
as permitted or conditionally permitted pursuant to Chapter 17.52.



   1.   Maximum Number of Signs:  One freestanding sign and one wall
sign.



   2.   Maximum Sign Area per Sign:  Freestanding signs shall not be
more than 35 square feet in area.  Wall signs shall not be more than 36
square feet in area.



   3.   Maximum Sign Height.  Freestanding signs shall not be more
than 6 feet in height above grade. Wall mounted signs shall not be more than
12 feet in height above grade.



   4.   Setback, Freestanding Signs:  Freestanding signs shall be
setback a minimum of 10 feet from the public right-of-way.



   5.   Illumination: Signs may be internally illuminated.



Figure 17.48.090(G): Public and Quasi-Public Uses







 



   H.   Entrance Signs. Entrance signs for residential subdivisions
with 5 or more than residential parcels, or multi-family apartment or
condominium complexes with 5 or more units, shall be permitted subject to the
following standards:



   1.   Maximum Number:  Two signs per entrance.



   2.   Maximum Sign Face per Sign:  20 square feet.



   3.   Maximum Height: Six feet.



   4.   Maximum Projection:  12 inches from sign surface.



   5.   Location:  Entrance signs may be attached to a wall, fence, or
project identification feature located at or within 100 feet of the entrance
to a development.



   6.   Illumination.  Entrance signs may be externally illuminated.



   Figure 17.48.090(H): Entrance Signs







 



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.100   Sign Standards for Other Zones.



   A.   Purpose and Applicability. This Section establishes sign area
allowances for specific Zones as well as dimensional standards for the type
of signs permitted.  Unless otherwise specified below, standards for each
sign type are in Section 17.48.110.



   B.   Aggregate Wall Sign Area. In all Zones other than Agricultural
and Residential Zones, the basic sign area allowance for all wall signs on a
lot or site, excluding signs for which no permit is required under Section
17.48.030 (Exempt Signs), is as follows:



 

Table 17.48.100(B): Maximum Area for Wall Signs by Zone


 
Commercial Zones
 
Office Zones
 
Industrial Zones
 
Quasi-Public Zones


Total Sign Area Allowed*
 
2 sq. ft. x ln. ft. of frontage

 

Maximum 150 sq. ft.
 
1 sq. ft. x 2 ln. ft. of frontage

 

Maximum 30 sq. ft.
 
1 sq. ft. x ln. ft. of frontage

 

Maximum 100 sq. ft.
 
0.5 sq. ft. x ln. ft. of frontage

 

Maximum 100 sq. ft.


* Total Sign Area is based on an allowance in square feet per lineal foot
(ln. ft.) of street frontage.

(1): Unless the standards in the specific Development Standards state
otherwise.



 



   1.   Sites with Multiple Frontages. On lots and sites with more than
one frontage on a public street (excluding alleys), the maximum permitted
wall sign area is calculated as follows:



   a.   Corner and Through Lots. Where a lot fronts on two streets (a
corner or "through lot"), either both the front and side, or front and rear
lot lines as related to



the applicable frontages may be used for calculating the allowable wall sign
area.



   b.   Three or More Frontages. Where a lot has three or more
frontages on a public street, the length of only two contiguous sides, one of
which must be the principal street frontage, are added together to determine
allowable wall sign area.



Figure 17.48.100(B)(1): Sites with Multiple Frontages







 



   2.   Multiple-Occupancy Commercial Sites with Limited Frontage.
Where a multiple-occupancy commercial site has public street frontage equal
to 20 percent or less of the perimeter measurement of the site, the maximum
allowable wall sign area for the site is calculated as follows (see Figure
17.48.100(B)(2)):



   a.   One square foot of sign area per one lineal foot of public
street frontage; plus



   b.   One lineal foot of exterior building walls fronting on
driveways and parking lots that are generally used for public access and are
located on the same site.



   c.   Pedestrian-only passageways that are lined on both sides by
building walls are considered interior spaces, and although signs may be
placed on such walls, the area of such walls is not included in the
calculation of the maximum allowable sign area for the site.



Figure 17.48.100(B)(2): Calculation of Aggregate Sign Area for
Multi-Occupancy Commercial Sites with Limited Frontage







 



   3.   Additional Allowance for Signs in Shopping Centers.  Shopping
centers may exceed the basic sign allowance by up to 25 percent through the
approval of a Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of the
Visalia Municipal Code.



   4.   Minimum Allowance in Multi-Tenant Projects. For multi-tenant
commercial projects, the aggregate sign area may be increased to the extent
that each tenant has a minimum of 0.5 square feet of sign area per lineal
foot of business frontage on a primary access way.



   C.   Dimensional Standards for Signs.  The Table below presents the
dimensional standards for signs in Zoning Districts other than Agricultural
and Residential Zones.  Detailed controls by sign type are located in
Section 17.48.110.



 


Table 17.48.100(C): Standards for Signs in Non-Residential Zoning Districts




Sign Type

 

Maximum Number Permitted

 

Maximum Area per Individual Sign

 

Maximum Height

 

Maximum Horizontal Projection from Wall

 

Additional Regulations



Awning or Canopy Sign
 
N/A
 
25% of exterior surface of awning or canopy
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
Minimum 8 ft. vertical clearance.


Freestanding Sign
 
1 per street frontage
 
35 sq. ft. per face; 70 sq. ft. total
 
12 ft. in Commercial Districts; 6 ft. in Office and Industrial Districts
 
N/A
 


Projecting Sign
 
1 per building frontage or tenant space
 
8 sq. ft. per face; 3 sq. ft. per face if under awning canopy
 
18 ft. but not above the ground floor of the frontage or tenant space
 
4 ft.
 


Wall Sign
 
N/A
 
See Table 17.48.100(B)
 
The height of the wall of the building
 
6 in.
 


Permanent Window Signs
 
N/A
 
100% of aggregate window area for permanent window signage
 
N/A
 
N/A
 



 



(Ord. 2017-01 (part, 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.110   Standards for Specific Sign Types.



   A.   Purpose.  This Section establishes location and other general
standards for specific sign types that apply to all areas where such signs
are permitted.  Additional standards applicable to these signs in specific
Zoning Districts are located in Sections 17.48.090 and 17.48.100.



   B.   Awning and Canopy Signs.  The installation of awnings and
canopies and signage located on awnings and canopies are subject to the
following standards:



   1.   Location.  Awning signs shall be located on the ground floor
of buildings and the maximum height above grade shall not exceed 14 feet.



   2.   Minimum Vertical Clearance.  Eight feet.



   3.   Width.  Awnings shall be designed to fit the width of the
storefront opening or individual window opening. Awnings shall not extend
more than six inches on either side of the storefront or window opening.



   4.   Materials.  Awning signs must be made of durable, long lasting
materials.



   5.   Type.  Awnings may have a flexible or fixed skirt, be open or
closed on the sides, and be fixed or retractable.



   6.   Signs on Awnings.  Sign copy may be located on permitted
awnings in lieu of other signage but may not exceed the total aggregate sign
area.  The area of the sign copy shall not exceed 25 percent of the exterior
surface of the awning or canopy.



Figure 17.48.110(B): Awning and Canopy Signs







 



   C.   Freestanding Signs.  Freestanding signs are subject to the
following standards:



   1.   Where Allowed. The base of the supporting structure must be
setback at least five feet from the street right-of-way.



   2.   Maximum Number.  One per street frontage or one per
occupancy/tenant.



   3.   Maximum Height.



   a.   Agricultural, Residential, and Quasi-Public Districts.  Six
feet.



   b.   Commercial Districts. 12 feet.



   c.   Office and Industrial Districts. Six feet.



   4.   Maximum Area.  The sign area must not exceed 35 square feet
per face, not to exceed 70 square feet in total.  The total aggregate
surface of the sign faces and sign structure shall not exceed 140 square feet.



   5.   Setback.  Freestanding signs may be located within the
required setback areas as long as they are a minimum of five feet from the
front property line, and 20 feet from any interior side property line.



   6.   Sign Base.  Freestanding signs of 10 feet or less shall be
mounted on a base, the width of which shall not be less than 50 percent of
the width of the widest part of the sign.



Figure 17.48.110(C): Freestanding Signs







 



   7.   Monument Base Exception. The City Planner, or their designee,
may approve a post or similar style sign structure instead of the required
monument base for properties which are residential conversions wherein all of
the following criteria are met:



   a.   The sign structure is designed to match the primary structure
on the site in architectural style and general appearance.



   b.   All other sign requirements are met.



   c.   The primary structure is a residential conversion which has
maintained a residential character/appearance.



   8.   Open Air Uses. For open air uses such as automobile
dealerships, the additional standards apply to freestanding signs:



   a.   Maximum Sign Area. 35 square feet per face, with the total sign
area not exceeding 70 square feet.



   b.   Setback.  20 feet from any interior side property line.



   D.   Projecting Signs. A sign may project horizontally from the
exterior wall of a building or beneath a canopy structure subject to the
following standards:



   1.   Maximum Number.  One per building or tenant space.



   2.   Maximum Size.



   a.   Projecting Signs.  Eight square feet.



   b.   Under Canopy of Awning Signs.  Three square feet.



   3.   Maximum Height. 18 feet; 12 feet in Commercial Districts.



   4.   Minimum Vertical Clearance.  Eight feet.



   5.   Projection Allowed.  A projecting sign cannot extend more than
four feet from the building to which it is attached and shall be designed and
located so as to cause no harm to street trees.



Figure 17.48.110(D): Projecting Signs







 



   E.   Wall Signs.  Wall signs are subject to the following standards:



   1.   Maximum Number.  No limit, provided that the total area of
wall signs does not exceed the limits in Table 17.48.100.B.



   2.   Maximum Height. No higher than the roof line or the parapet of
the wall of the building to which the sign is attached, whichever is lower.



   3.   Maximum Sign Area per Sign. See Table 17.48.100(B).



   4.   Projection Allowed.  Wall signs shall not extend more than six
inches beyond the face of the wall to which they are attached.



   5.   Placement.  No wall sign may cover, wholly or partially, any
required wall opening.



   6.   Orientation. Unless a different orientation is specifically
authorized, each wall-mounted sign shall be placed flat against the wall of
the building.



Figure 17.48.110(E): Wall Signs







 



   7.   Rear Facades. Where a property has two facades and both are
visible from the public right-of-way, a wall sign may be installed on the
rear (non-primary) façade if it meets the following:



   a.   Size. Maximum of 25 percent of the allowed sign area calculated
for the primary occupancy frontage.



   b.   Illumination.  Signs on rear facades may not be internally
illuminated.



   F.   Permanent Window Signs. Window signs capable of enduring
without fundamental change and affixed to either side of an exterior window
of a building, or erected or mounted in the interior of the building, and
intended to be viewed from the exterior of such building, are allowed subject
to the following standards:



   1.   Materials.  Permanent window signs shall be made from or
involve the use of materials intended for permanent, enduring display, such
as:



   a.   Etching, frosting, painting or similar chemical or physical
non-removable glass treatments.



   b.   Interior electronic signs or digital displays.



   c.   Window shades, blinds, draperies or similar window treatments
bearing a commercial message and utilized for the primary purpose of energy
efficiency and sun glare and UV ray reduction to the interior of a building
or structure.



   2.   Maintenance.  All permanent window signs shall be maintained
in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.48.170. The structural
integrity of signs shall be maintained at all times. Normal wear and tear of
aged signs shall be repaired when they detract from the visible quality of
the sign, based on the current condition of the sign compared to the
appearance of the sign when first installed. Exposed surfaces shall be
cleaned and painted and defective parts shall be replaced if necessary.



   3.   Sign Area.  Window sign area shall not be considered in
computing the maximum allowed building signage. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.120   Downtown Retail Overlay District Sign Standards.



   The standards in this section apply to all signage within the Downtown
Retail Overlay District, as defined in Chapter 17.58.



   A.   Size Standards.



   1.   Two square feet of sign area is permitted for each lineal foot
of occupancy frontage to a maximum of 50 square feet.



   2.   Users may choose any exterior side of the building as the
primary frontage for the purpose of calculating the permitted sign area. The
building sign so calculated must then be mounted on that side of the building.



   3.   A building sign may be affixed to or incorporated as a part of
the design of an awning; however, such sign area shall be deducted from that
calculated for the exterior building wall to which the awning is attached.
Numerals used for the purpose of identifying street addresses need not be
deducted from the calculated sign area.



   4.   Additional signs of a maximum 25 percent of the sign area
calculated for the primary occupancy frontage will be allowed for each
remaining exterior wall, provided that the sign for any given wall does not
exceed two square feet per linear foot of the wall length. This subsection
does not apply to alley frontages or buildings that have frontages on two
streets with no common visibility for vehicles or pedestrians. In these
latter two cases, the allowable signage is in additional to the amount
calculated above, and shall be calculated on the basis of two square feet of
sign area per lineal foot of public street or alley frontage.



   B.   Projecting Signs Beneath a Canopy/Awning Structure.



   1.   One double-faced sign not exceeding an area of three square
feet per face is permitted. Signs shall be a minimum of 7 feet above the
sidewalk and shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet.



   2.   A sign may also be affixed to or incorporated into the design
of the side valance of awnings which are perpendicular to the store frontage.
Both side valances of an awning may be so utilized, however, only one sign
face per awning side is allowed. Each sign face shall not exceed three square
feet for each individual shop or tenant.



   C.   Alley Signs. The maximum building sign area on an alley
frontage is calculated separately from that permitted for the primary
occupancy frontage, using the same allowance as for the primary occupancy
frontage (two square feet per linear foot of the wall length).



   D.   Reader Boards and Multi-Tenant Buildings.



   1.   Each building may display a reader board of a maximum area of
20 square feet indicating the name, address and type of business of the
businesses within the building. If the reader board is located on a part of
the building qualifying as an occupancy frontage for which sign area is
calculated, the sign area used for the reader board shall be deducted from
the total permitted for that building; otherwise it is considered exempt from
sign area limits. Reader boards shall be designed as one with each copy panel
consisting of similar materials and designs. Permits for reader boards shall
not be issued without the consent of the property owner.



   2.   Each commercial use which has direct pedestrian access through
an exterior building wall which is visible from a public right-of-way, shall
be allowed at least 10 square feet of building sign area, regardless of
building occupancy frontage. Commercial uses have a sole access from the
interior of any building or from an enclosed lobby or court shall not be
allowed the minimum building sign area referred to in this section.



   E.   Window Signage. See Sections 17.48.110(F) and 17.30.130(D).



   F.   Enclosed Bulletin Boards and Message Centers.  Enclosed
bulletin boards or message centers shall be allowed in the Downtown Retail
Overlay District, subject to the following requirements.



   1.   Locations Allowed. Unless located on private property, enclosed
bulletin boards and message centers shall require an encroachment permit.



   2.   Size.  Enclosed bulletin boards and message centers shall not
be greater than eight feet in height and 12 feet in width.



   3.    Materials and Maintenance.  Enclosed bulletin boards and
message centers shall be constructed of metal painted frames, shall have
lockable display cases with shatter resistant glass or similar materials, and



may only include internal illumination.  Enclosed bulletin boards and
message centers shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of
Section 17.48.170.



   4.   Prohibitions.  Enclosed bulletin boards and message centers
shall not include electronic message displays.



   G.   Temporary Signs. Banners shall be allowed in the Downtown
Retail Overlay District pursuant to the requirements of Section
17.48.130(C).  All portable signs covered in Section 17.48.130.B shall be
prohibited in the Downtown Retail Overlay District, except A-frame signs,
which shall be allowed subject to the following requirements.  A-Frames and
easels are generally allowed for the purpose of advertising the location,
goods or services offered on the premises, however, they may be used as
general advertising for hire subject to the limitations in this section.



   1.   Prohibitions. A-Frame signs are prohibited from any form of
broadcasting or audio presentation.



   2.   Materials and Maintenance.  A-frame signs must be made of a
durable, rigid material not subject to rapid deterioration, such as, without
limitation, wood, plastic or metal, and must be professional in appearance. 
A-frame signs must be maintained in accordance with the requirements of
Section 17.48.170.



   3.   Locations Allowed. A-Frame signs are allowed within a front or
corner side setback area and in the public right-of-way directly in front of
a business.



   4.   Maximum Height and Area. The A-Frame sign, when placed in an
open position must not exceed a height of four feet from ground level to the
top of the sign and be no more than 7.5 square feet per sign face.



   5.   Maximum Number: One A-Frame sign is allowed per business, which
does not count against maximum allowed permanent sign area. They must be
removed at the close of business.



   6.   Placement: A-Frame signs shall be placed so that a minimum of
four feet is left clear for pedestrian passage on all sidewalks and walkways.
They shall only be placed at grade level and shall not be placed in site
visibility triangles or on walls or boulders, within planters, flower beds or
tree wells, on vehicles, on other signs or on or affixed to any other type of
structure.



   7.   City's Right to Remove: If at any time any portion of the
public right-of-way occupied and used by the A-Frame sign may be needed or
required by the City, or the business fails to maintain the permitted sign in
accordance with the requirements of this subsection, it may be removed by the
City.



   H.   Projecting Signs Mounted to Building Face.



   1.   Projecting signs shall be located no higher than the cornice or
parapet line, whichever is lower, and must be located so as to not obscure
any architectural detail of the façade. A double face projecting sign shall
be considered one sign.



   2.   The maximum size of a projecting sign shall be 40 square feet
(20 square feet per side). Projecting signs shall not project more than five
feet horizontally. In no case may the sign come within 2.5 feet of the curb.



   3.   Projecting signs shall be clear of street trees, traffic
signals, street lighting and regulatory signs.



   4.   Projecting signs shall be counted against overall allowed
signage square footage per location. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11
§ 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.130   Temporary Signs.



   A.   General Requirements.



   1.   General. Each developed property or establishment, or property
for which a building permit has been issued, in non-residential zones, as
specified, shall be allowed sign copy area for the display of temporary
signs, in addition to allowed permanent signage as specified in this
Chapter.  No permit shall be required for temporary signage.



   2.   Limits. Temporary signage must comply with the sign area limits
and maximum number of allowed temporary signs, for each of the categories of
temporary signage specified in this section.  No other temporary signage
shall be allowed in non-residential zones.



   3.   Illumination. Temporary signs cannot be illuminated or
constructed with reflective materials.



   B.   Portable Signs. Portable signs are allowed subject to the
following standards.



   1.   Relation to Associated Business. Portable signs may be located
up to 300 feet away from the business so long as they remain within the
development site with which the business is associated and the business
obtains property owner authorization.



   2.   Maximum Sign Area per Parcel or Business Location. The total
aggregate sign area for all portable signs may not exceed 16 square feet for
each developed or developing parcel, or business location where more than one
business is located on a single parcel.  Where a parcel or business location
has a street frontage exceeding 75 lineal feet, the aggregate sign area for
all portable signs shall be 16 square feet for each 75-foot segment of street
frontage.  Each undeveloped parcel shall have a maximum aggregate portable
sign area of 16 square feet, all of which may be used as general advertising
for hire.



   3.   Maximum Size and Sign Area.  All portable signs, except
A-Frame signs and feather banners, shall not exceed 8 feet in height above
ground level, nor have a maximum sign area greater than 8 square feet.
A-Frames sign, when placed in an open position, must not exceed a height of
four feet above the ground level, to the top of the sign, nor have a maximum
sign area greater than 7.5 square feet.  Feather banners must not exceed a
height of ten feet above the ground level, nor have a maximum sign area
greater than 16 square feet.



   4.   Materials and Maintenance. Portable signs shall:



   a.   Be constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials not
subject to rapid deterioration or fading, and be professional in appearance.



   b.   Be maintained in accordance with the requirements of Section
17.48.170.



   c.   Portable signs shall be constructed of acceptable materials
such as corrugated extruded, twin wall plastic or acrylic sheets mounted to
stakes or polls, metal sign blanks, traditional painted wood or vinyl or
paper film attached to a plywood core, or similar materials.  Acceptable
materials for feather banners include vinyl, nylon reinforced vinyl,
polyethylene or polyester-like materials, durable fabric or similar materials.



   d.   Be affixed to supporting structures made of a durable, rigid
material such as, without limitation, wood, plastic or metal. Feather banners
must be secured and stabilized so as to withstand wind gusts, or be removed
during windy conditions.



   5.   Placement. The portable signs shall be placed on private
property on the same lot or development site as the establishment that
qualifies for such sign and, with an encroachment permit, may be placed in
the public right of way in front of the associated use or on the nearest
sidewalk provided a four-foot wide pedestrian clear zone is maintained. 
Portable signs must be a minimum of seven feet from the back of the curb, or
edge of pavement where no curb exists. Feather banners cannot interfere with
either pedestrian or vehicular sight distance, any view corridor or obstruct
views to any existing business or existing permanent sign.



   6.   Prohibited Locations. Portable signs shall not be located:



   a.   In any public right-of-way;



   b.   In parking lot driving lanes, aisles or stalls;



   c.   On multi-use trails or sidewalks if they would block a
four-foot wide pedestrian clear zone;



   d.   At any location where they would block pedestrian access;



   e.   Within 100 feet on either side, or in front of a monument sign;



   f.   Within 20 feet from any other portable sign; and



   g.   Within 30 feet from a shopping center access drive or street
intersection.



   7.   Hours for Display for A-frame Signs and Feather Banners.
A-frame signs and feather banners are permitted during the hours a business
is open for business and one-half hour before opening and one-half hour after
closing. They must be removed during hours when the establishment is not open
to the public.



   C.   Banners and Pennants. Banner signs and pennants, including
similar devices such as strings of ornamental fringes or streamers, are
allowed for establishments within commercial zones, subject to the following
standards:



   1.   Maximum Sign Area per Parcel or Business Location. The total
aggregate sign area for banners and pennants may not exceed 32 square feet
for each parcel, or business location where more than one business is located
on a single parcel. Where a parcel or business location has a street frontage
exceeding 75 lineal feet, the aggregate sign area for banners or pennants
shall be 32 square feet for each 75-foot segment of street frontage.



   2.   Maximum Size. The maximum size for any banner is 64 square
feet, provided that the parcel or business location has an aggregate sign
area allowance that allows for banners within this maximum size allowance.



   3.   Maximum Height. Banners and pennants shall not extend above the
roofline or the parapet of a wall.



     4.   Banners as Permanent Signs Prohibited.  Banners shall not
be used as permanent signs, and shall not otherwise replace the primary
permanent identification sign(s) for the business or establishment, and the
business or establishment utilizing a banner must have a permanent sign
application on file with the City.



   5.   Materials and Maintenance. Banners and pennants shall be
constructed of durable, weather-resistant materials not subject to rapid
deterioration or fading, and shall be professional in appearance. 
Acceptable materials include but are not limited to vinyl, nylon reinforced
vinyl, polyethylene or polyester-like materials, or durable fabric. Banners
and



pennants shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of Section
17.48.170.



   6.   Allowable Locations. Banners are only allowed on sites where
permanent signs are allowed.



   D.   Temporary Window Signs. Temporary window signs are allowed for
establishments within commercial zones, subject to the following standards:



   1.   Maximum Sign Area. The allowable sign area of temporary window
signs shall not exceed 40 percent of the total window area for each window or
transparent door in a building or structure.  For the purpose of defining
window area, multiple windows separated by mullions or frames of less than
four (4) inches are considered a single window.



   2.   Materials and Maintenance.  Temporary window sign shall be
constructed of suitable materials and be professional in appearance. 
Suitable materials include glossy paper, matte paper, card stock or
presentation bond paper, vinyl, polypropylene, or paint-on decals,
water-based or other easily removable paint or similar materials.  Temporary
window signs shall be maintained in accordance with requirements of Section
17.48.170.



   3.   Illumination.  Temporary window signs shall not be
illuminated. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.140   Master Sign Program.



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of a Master Sign Program is to provide a
method for an applicant to integrate the design and placement of signs within
a project with the overall design of the development to achieve a more
unified appearance.  Master Sign Programs may also be used for subdivision
projects with a phased development and/or sales plan.  Minor variations in
dimensional standards and other limitations of this Section may be approved,
provided they achieve a result that is superior to what would otherwise be
allowed. The Sign Program must demonstrate how it:



   1.   Improves the safety and welfare of the general public by
minimizing distractions, hazards, and obstructions from sign design or
placement;



   2.   Provides for sign design or placement appropriate for the area;



   3.   Incorporates sign design and placement related to architectural
and landscape features on site; and



   4.   Incorporates sign design, scale, and placement oriented to
pedestrian traffic.



   B.   Applicability and Approval Required.



   1.   Master Sign Program Required. A Master Sign Program approved by
the Planning Commission is required for:



   a.   New or remodeled non-residential or mixed used projects on
sites of five acres or more;



   b.   Multiple tenant commercial or mixed use buildings where the
entire façade is being remodeled; and



   c.   Any development in the BRP Zone.



   2.   Optional Sign Program. A Master Sign Program may be substituted
for specific sign designs and individual applications if requested by an
applicant and approved by the Planning Commission.



   C.   Required Submittals. Applications for a Master Sign Program
must include the following plans and text:



   1.   A site plan showing the location of buildings, parking lots,
driveways and landscaped areas;



   2.   Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area
for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding
signs allowed, if proposed;



   3.   An accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed
location of each proposed sign and existing sign which is to remain;



   4.   Color schemes, lettering and graphic style (if tenants are not
known, generic styles may be presented);



   5.   Lighting and sign construction materials; and



   6.   Sign dimensions (if tenants are not known, generic dimensions
may be presented); and



   7.   A written program of standards for all sign types to be
distributed to future tenants, including color, size, illumination,
construction details, and sign placement.



   D.   Findings. The Planning Commission will only approve a Master
Sign Program if the following findings are made:



   1.   That the proposed signs are in harmony and visually related to:



   a.   Other Signs Included in the Master Sign Program. This may be
accomplished by incorporating several common design elements such as
materials, letter style, colors, illumination, sign type or sign shape.



   b.   The Buildings They Identify. This may be accomplished by
utilizing materials, colors or design motifs included in the building being
identified.



   c.   The Surrounding Development. Approval of a planned sign program
must not adversely affect surrounding land uses or obscure adjacent
conforming signs.



   2.   That the proposed signs will comply with all the provision of
this Section, except with regard to:



   a.   Number of signs allowed; and



   b.   Location and height of signs.



   E.   Conditions. Reasonable conditions of approval may be imposed by
the Planning Commission to achieve the purposes of this Section and ensure
compatibility with adjacent land uses and signage.



   F.   Post-Approval Procedures. After approval of a Master Sign
Program, no signs shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in
conformance with such Program, and such Program may be enforced in the same
way as any provision in this Section.



   1.   Lease Agreements. The Master Sign Program and all conditions of
approval shall be attached to the lease agreements for all leasable space
within a project.



   2.   Individual Signs.  Any sign that conforms to an approved
Master Sign Program may be approved by the City Planner or designee; however,
approval of a Master Sign Program does not waive the permit requirements for
individual signs.



   3.   Amendments. The City Planner or designee may approve minor
amendments to a Master Sign Program that are in substantial conformance with
the original approval. All other amendments, including amendments to
conditions of approval shall be processed as a new application. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.150   Variances and Exceptions.



   A.   Purposes.



   1.   Variances. The Planning Commission may grant variances for
setbacks, locational and dimensional standards that apply to signs in order
to prevent unnecessary hardships that would result from a strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of certain regulations prescribed by this
chapter. A practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship may result from the
size, shape or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures
thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the
site or in the immediate vicinity, or from street locations or traffic
conditions in the immediate vicinity that would affect the signing of a site
or building.



   2.   Exception. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to
the physical design standards if it can be demonstrated that such an
exception is necessary to facilitate an improved aesthetic relationship
between a sign and the structures upon which it is mounted.



   B.   Application Procedures. Application for a sign variance or sign
exception shall be submitted to the City Planner on an approved form and
include the following:



   1.   Name and address of the applicant;



   2.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property, is
the authorized agent of the owner(s), or is or will be the plaintiff in an
action in eminent domain to acquire the property involved;



   3.   Address and legal description of the property;



   4.   Statement of the precise nature of the variance or exception
requested and the hardship or practical difficulty which would result from
the strict interpretation and enforcement of the standards in this Chapter;



   5.   The application shall be accompanied by such sketches or
drawings as may be necessary to clearly show applicant's proposal in
comparison with the standards that otherwise would apply; and



   6.   The required fee or deposit.



The application shall be reviewed by the City Planner, who shall determine
whether it is complete or, if not, what additional information is needed.
Once the application is determined to be complete, the City Planner shall
give notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be
considered by the Planning Commission. The City Planning also may give notice
of the time to any other interested party.



   C.   Public Notice and Hearing.



   1.   Notice of a public hearing on a sign variance or sign exception
shall be given not less than ten days nor more than 30 days prior to the date
of the hearing by mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to
property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the area
occupied or to be occupied by the use which is the subject of the hearing.



   2.   After the required notice has been provided, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a variance.



   D.   Staff Report. The City Planner shall prepare a staff report on
the application, including a recommendation, which shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission.



   E.   Public Hearing Procedure. At a public hearing the Planning
Commission shall review the application and the statements and drawings
submitted by the applicant and the staff report and the evidence presented in
that report with respect to the findings listed below, that are required to
approve a variance or exception.



   F.   Findings Required for a Variance.



   1.   The Planning Commission may grant a variance to a regulation or
standard prescribed by this Chapter, as applied for or as modified by the
Commission, provided that, on the basis of the application and staff report
and/or evidence submitted, the Commission determines:



   a.   That strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship inconsistent with the purposes of the sign regulations;



   b.   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property which do not apply generally to other
properties classified in the same zoning district;



   c.   That strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the
owners of other properties classified in the same zoning district;



   d.   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant
of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties
classified in the same zoning district; and



   e.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties
or improvements in the vicinity.



   2.   A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time
period, or may be granted subject to such reasonable conditions as the
Commission may prescribe.



   3.   The Planning Commission must deny a variance application if the
required findings cannot be made.



   G.   Findings Required for an Exception. The Planning Commission may
approve, conditionally approve or deny a request for an exception to the
physical design standards of this chapter. For the Planning Commission to
approve or conditionally approve an exception, the following findings must be
made:



   1.   That the granting of the exception is necessary to attain a
high aesthetic sign design which would be restricted if the provisions and
standards of this Chapter were strictly applied;



   2.   That the granting of an exception would not adversely affect
the visibility of signs on adjacent properties; and



   3.   That the granting of an exception would not constitute a
granting of a special privilege.



   H.   Appeal to City Council.  The decision of the Planning
Commission on a variance or exception application shall be subject to the
appeal provisions of the zoning ordinance.



   I.   Revocation. A variance or exception granted subject to a
condition or conditions shall be revoked by the Planning Commission if the
applicant fails to comply with any the condition of approval.



   J.   Time Limits for Filing a New Application. Following the denial
of a variance or exception application or the revocation of a variance or
exception, no application for the same or substantially the same sign shall
be filed within one year of the date of denial of the variance or exception
application or the date of revocation of the variance or exception. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.160   Nonconforming Signs.



   A.   Purpose.  A nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully
constructed and maintained prior to the adoption of the regulations codified
in this Chapter but which does not conform to the provisions of this Chapter.
The purpose of the regulations in this Section is to limit the number and
extent of nonconforming signage by prohibiting alteration or enlargement of
such signage so as to increase the discrepancy between their condition and
the standards and requirements of this Chapter.



   B.   Continuance and Maintenance.  Reasonable and routine
maintenance and repairs may be performed on signs that are nonconforming
provided there is no expansion of any nonconformity with the current
requirements of this Chapter.



   C.   Abandonment of Nonconforming Sign. Whenever a nonconforming
sign has been abandoned, or the use of the property has been discontinued for
a continuous period of 30 days, the nonconforming sign must be removed.



   D.   Restoration of a Damaged Sign. An on-premise sign may be
restored that meets any of the following criteria:



   1.   A sign with damage that does not exceed 50 percent of the total
sign area, including hardware and attachments, provided that the repairs
start within 30 days and diligently pursued to completion.



   2.   A sign that is a danger to the public or is unsafe as
determined by the Building Official.



   E.   Signs Rendered Nonconforming by Annexation. Any sign that
becomes non-conforming subsequent to the effective date of this Chapter by
reason of annexation to the City of the site upon which the sign is located
is subject to the provisions of this Section. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.170   Maintenance, Abandonment, and Enforcement.



   A.   Maintenance Required. All signs and associated supporting
structures shall be maintained in like-new condition, without rips, tears,
fading and similar damage that inevitably occurs as a result of normal wear
and aging.



   1.   Deteriorated Signs.  Any sign or sign structure that is
sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, ripped, torn, faded,
or other deteriorating or dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired,
to the satisfaction of the City, or removed.



   2.   Graffiti. Graffiti on a sign shall be removed within two days
of notice of its placement on such sign.



   3.   Maintenance Standards.  All parts, portions, units and
materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, surface,
support or enclosure shall be maintained in a like-new, safe condition,
painted, and adequately protected from weathering with all braces, bolts and
structural parts and supporting frames and fastenings reasonably free from
deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so that they do not create a hazard
to persons or property or constitute a nuisance.



   4.   Summary Removal of Hazards. Whenever any sign, by virtue of its
physical nature and condition, poses an immediate and serious threat to the
public safety, the same may be removed by City personnel, or its physical
deficiency cured, to the extent necessary to protect the public safety. The
cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed against the sign owner.



   B.   Abandoned or Obsolete Sign. An on-premise sign advertising an
activity, business, service or product must be removed within 30 days
following the actual discontinuance of the activity, business, service or
product. If the sign is not so removed, the City Planner or designee may have
the sign removed in accordance with the public nuisance abatement provisions
of this Code.



   C.   Illegal Signs. Any sign, banner, or sign structure not erected,
constructed or located in conformance with this Chapter and not classified as
a legal nonconforming sign is an illegal sign and is subject to abatement in
accordance with the public nuisance abatement procedures set forth elsewhere
in the Visalia Municipal Code.



   D.   Enforcement.  Signs which do not conform to the provisions of
this Chapter and are erected after its effective date and signs erected after
the effective date of this Chapter without obtaining the permit required
thereby are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All signs declared
to be unlawful by this Section and all persons erecting or maintaining them
shall be subject to the terms of Chapter 17.46, Administration and
Enforcement, specifically Sections 17.46.010 to 17.46.060, of this Code and
all amendments thereof, as well as Chapter 1.13, Administrative Code
Enforcement.  The City Planner or designee shall forthwith take all
necessary actions or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment
pursuant of said sections of the Visalia Municipal Code.  The remedies
provided for in this Section are cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



17.48.180   Definitions.



   The following definitions apply within this Chapter, regardless of how
the terms may be defined in the Municipal Code.



   A-Frame Sign. A portable upright, rigid, self-supporting frame sign in
the form of a triangle or letter "A".



   Abandoned Sign.  A sign remaining in place or not maintained for 30
days that does not provide direction for, advertise, or identify a legally
established business, product, or service available on the business premises
where the sign is located.



   Animated Sign. A sign with messages that visually change, or images
that move or appear to move, flash on or off, wink or blink with varying
light intensity, show motion or create the illusion of motion, or revolve to
create an illusion of being on or off. This definition does not include
traditional barber poles or scoreboards, nor does it include "commercial
mascots," "digital displays" and "electronic signs", which are defined
separately.



   Awning. Any structure made of flexible fabric or similar material
covering a metal frame attached to a building, whether or not the same is so
erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building
when not in use.



   Awning or Canopy Sign. Sign copy placed on an awning or any other
projecting structure made of flexible fabric or similar material covering a
metal frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.



   Banner Sign. Any sign of vinyl, nylon reinforced vinyl, polyethylene or
polyester-like materials, durable fabric or similar material that is mounted
to a structure or a building at one or more edges with no enclosing framework
on which a message or image is painted or otherwise affixed. Flags are not
within this definition.



   Billboard: See Outdoor Advertising Display.



   Changeable Copy Sign. A sign constructed or designed to allow for
periodic changes of copy, and for which the copy is changed not more than
once each 24-hour period.  Examples include signs for an auditorium,
theater, school, church, meeting hall, or similar uses characterized by
public assembly and changing programs or events, or gas station prices. This
definition does not include animated signs or electronic signs.



   Commercial Message. A message on a sign, or portion of a sign, that
promotes, informs, or proposes an economic transaction, primarily concerns
the economic interests of the sign sponsor and/or audience, or is intended to
further discussion in the marketplace of goods and services.



   Copy. Any letters, numerals, or symbols displayed on a sign face
conveying a message to the public.



   Digital Display.  A method of displaying a visual image that uses
liquid crystal cells or other types of light emitting diodes (LEDs) or their
functional equivalent allow for the message or image to be easily changed,
typically by remote control or computer programming. This definition applies
to signs displaying a series of still images.



   Electronic Sign. A sign that is capable of presenting variable message
displays by projecting an electronically controlled pattern and which can be
programmed to periodically change the message display.  See also Digital
Display.



   Exempt Sign. A sign which may be legally displayed, erected or
maintained, but is not subject to a sign permit requirement.



   Externally Illuminated Sign.  Any sign that is lit by a light source
that is external to the sign directed towards and shining on the face of the
sign.



   Face. That portion of a sign upon which the copy is mounted or
displayed.



   Feather Banner.  A portable sign consisting of a vertical banner made
of vinyl, nylon reinforced vinyl, polyethylene or polyester-like materials,
durable fabric or similar material, the longer dimension of which is
typically attached to a pole or rod that is driven into the ground, supported
by an individual stand or bracketed to a structure.  Also called a "blade
sign," "swooper," "flutter flag," "bow sign" or "teardrop banner."  This
definition includes functionally similar devices.



   Flag. Any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government,
company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning.



   Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign that is self-supporting in a fixed
location and not attached to a building. It includes monument signs, which
are connected or attached to a sign structure, fence, or wall that is not an
integral part of a building, and pole signs, which is mounted on a pole(s) or
other support(s) that is placed on and anchored in the ground or on a base
and that is independent from any building or other structure. Freestanding
signs are of two types: monument and pole. Flag poles are not within this
definition.



   Graffiti. Marks, such as inscriptions, drawings, or designs, which are
placed, scratched, etched, painted, or sprayed on public or private property
without the owner's consent.



   Illuminated Sign.  A sign with an artificial light source incorporated
internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. This
includes signs made from neon or other gas tube(s) that are bent to form
letters, symbols, or other shapes. Ambient lighting, by itself, does not make
a sign "illuminated."



   Master Sign Program.  A coordinated sign plan which includes details
of all signs (not including exempt or temporary signs) which are or will be
placed on a site, including master identification, individual business and
directory signs.



   Mobile Billboard.  Any vehicle, or wheeled conveyance which carries,
conveys, pulls, displays, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary
purpose of advertising a commercial or noncommercial message, or other
general advertising for hire.



   Monument Sign.  See Freestanding Sign.



   Moving Sign.  A sign or any portion thereof that rotates, moves, or
appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural, or other
means.



   Mural.  A work of graphic art on an exterior building wall that may or
may not contain a commercial logo or trademark but does not serve to
advertise or promote any business, product, activity, service, interest, or
entertainment.



   Name Plate.  A sign that identifies an occupant and/or address.



   Noncommercial Message.  A message or image on a sign, or portion of a
sign, which displays noncommercial speech, e.g., commentary or advocacy on
topics of public debate and concern. This definition shall be construed and
interpreted in light of relevant court decisions. Noncommercial messages do
not have a location factor, such as on-site or off-site.



   Non-Communicative Aspects.  Those aspects of a sign that are not
directly communicative, such as physical structure, mounting device, size and
height, setback, illumination, spacing, and scale relative to other
structures.



   Nonconforming Sign.  A sign lawfully erected and legally existing on
the effective date of this Section, or of amendments thereto, but which does
not conform to the provisions of this Chapter.



   On-Site or On-Premise Sign.  Any sign or portion thereof that
identifies, advertises, or attracts attention to a business, product,
service, event or activity sold, existing or offered upon the same property
or land use as the sign. The off-site/on-site distinction applies only to
commercial messages.



   Outdoor Advertising Display.  A sign that identifies, advertises or
attracts attention to a business, product, service, event or activity sold,
existing or offered at a different location or which identifies by brand name
a service or product which, although sold on the premises, does not
constitute the principal item for sale on the premises. The off-site/on-site
distinction applies only to commercial messages. This type of sign is also
known as a billboard.



   Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, attached to a rope, wire, or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind and attract attention.
Flags and banners are not within this definition.



   Pole Sign.  See Freestanding Sign.



   Portable Sign. A movable sign that has a transitory purpose or
functionality that is intended to be displayed for a time only. The
definition includes A-frame type signs, feather banners, stationary
inflatable signs displayed and secured at ground level, and other free
standing temporary signs made of materials not suitable for or intended for
permanent display, affixed to stakes or poles or similar supporting
structures that accommodate the ability to affix such free standing temporary
signs in multiple locations.



   Projecting Sign.  A single or double faced sign that is perpendicular
to the face of a building and projects more than 18 inches from the face.
This category includes awning and under canopy signs.



   Primary Building Face. The wall of a building which contains the
principal entrance(s) to the building.  If there are principal entrances in
more than one wall, the longest of the walls in which principal entrances are
located shall be the primary building face. "Primary building face" shall
include not only the wall itself but all doors, windows, or other openings
therein and projections therefrom.



   Readerboard. A sign structure or mounting device on which at least a
portion of the display face may be used for changeable copy that is either
non-commercial or commercial, electronic or manual.



   Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.



   Roof Sign.  Any sign located on a roof of a building or having its
major structural supports attached to a roof.



   Sign.  Any identification, description, illustration, or device
illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public from
any exterior public right-of-way, and directs attention to a product,
service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation,
including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or any emblem,
painting, banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or
convey information. A display, device, or thing need not contain lettering to
be a sign. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, the following are
not within this definition:



   A.   Architectural features. Decorative or architectural features of
buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), that do not
perform a communicative function;



   B.   Fireworks, etc. The legal use of fireworks, candles and
artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this Code;



   C.   Foundation stones, cornerstones;



   D.   Grave markers, grave stones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines,
and other markers of the deceased;



   E.   Personal Appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel,
decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, and
masks, but not including commercial mascots or hand-held signs; and



   F.   Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of noncommercial
organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or
political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of
a permanent building, including stained glass windows on churches, carved or
bas relief doors or walls, bells, and religious statuary.



   Sign Area. The area contained within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing all parts of such sign copy, excluding any structural elements
outside the limits of the sign required to support the sign.



   Sign Face. An exterior display surface of a sign, including
non-structural trim, exclusive of the supporting structure. It includes the
area of a sign which is available for mounting and public display of the
visually communicative image.



   Temporary Sign. A structure or device with a transitory purpose or
functionality and used for the public display of visual messages or images
intended to last for a time only.



   Vehicle Display Sign.  A sign mounted, attached, affixed, or painted
upon any surface of a motor vehicle, trailer, or similar conveyance parked on
public or private property for the purpose of general advertising for hire.



   Wall Sign. Any sign attached to, erected against or painted upon the
wall of a building or structure, the face of which is in a single plane
parallel to the plane of the wall. Wall signs also include signs on a false
or mansard roof.



   Window Sign.  Any structure, device or substance device used for the
public display of visual messages or images and affixed to either side of an
exterior window of a building, or in the interior of the building, within two
feet of a window, intended to be viewed from the exterior of such building,
which is not intended for or suitable for long term or permanent display. 
Window displays placed behind a window that are presentations of merchandise
provided by the establishment with associated artwork and features are not
considered signs. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-11 § 2 (part), 2016)



Chapter 17.50
AIRPORT ZONE



Sections:



17.50.010   Airport zone regulations.



17.50.015   Applicability.



17.50.020   Legislative authority.



17.50.030   Definitions.



17.50.040   Type of zones and heights limits.



17.50.050   Airport zoning map.



17.50.060   Airport land use zone.



17.50.070   Use restrictions.



17.50.080   Uses within nonaviation commercial areas.



17.50.090   Administration and enforcement.



17.50.100   Permits.



17.50.110   Violation.



17.50.010   Airport zone regulations.



   A.   All of the provisions of Chapter 3, Part 7 of the Ordinance
Code of Tulare County, as amended by Tulare County Ordinance No. 1233, are
referred to, adopted as a city ordinance and made a part of this code, and
all of the provisions thereof shall be applicable within the boundaries of
the city.



   B.   All references to the County of Tulare in said Ordinance No.
1233 of the County of Tulare shall refer to the city of Visalia. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7621)



17.50.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
AP zone district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.50.020   Legislative authority.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Airport Approaches Zoning Law
of the state of California (commencing at Section 50485 of the Government
Code of the state of California and the Planning and Zoning Law of the state
of California (commencing at Section 65000 of the Government Code of the
state of California). (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7622)



17.50.030   Definitions.



   Except where the context otherwise requires the following definitions
shall govern the construction of this chapter:



   "Airport" means any area of land or water designated and set aside for
the landing and taking off of aircraft, and utilized or to be utilized in the
interest of the public for such purposes, a map of which has been or is
hereafter included as part of the airport zoning map of the county of Tulare.



   "Airport elevation" means the elevation of the highest point on the
usable or designed runway as established by the county surveyor.



   "Airport hazard" means any structure, tree, or use of land that
obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or
taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking
off of aircraft.



   "Airport reference point" means the point established at the
approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated.



   "Height," used for the purpose of determining height limits in all
zones set forth in this chapter, means the vertical elevation in feet above
the established airport elevation unless otherwise stated.



   "Landing area" means the area of an airport used, or to be used, for
the landing, taking off or taxiing of aircraft.



   "Nonconforming use" means any structure, tree or use of land that does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter at the time this chapter is
made applicable to a particular airport.



   "Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation,
company, association, joint stock association, city, county or district, and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignees or other similar representative
thereof.



   "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the county of
Tulare.



   "Runway" means the paved surface of an airport landing area designated
for the landing or taking off of aircraft.



   "Structure" means any object constructed, installed or placed on real
property by man including, but not limited to, buildings, towers,
smokestacks, and overhead lines.



   "Tree" means any object of natural growth. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
prior code § 7623)



17.50.040   Type of zones and heights limits.



   Six types of zones, and the height limits for said zones, are
established for the purposes of airport zoning. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to
grow or maintained in any zone to a height in excess of the height limit
established for such zone. The datum plane for measurement of such height,
except as otherwise specified herein, shall be based on the airport
elevation, as defined by Section 17.50.030. Said zones are as follows:



   A.   Landing Zone ("L"). A surface, and the airspace above it,
rectangular in shape, longitudinally centered on the runway and extending in
length two hundred (200) feet beyond the ends of the runway. The landing zone
shall have an elevation, at any point along its longitudinal profile,
coincident with the runway centerline or centerline prolongations as
appropriate. The landing zone shall have the width specified on each map
adopted pursuant to Section 17.50.050.



   B.   Approach Zone ("AA"). A plane surface and the airspace above
it, trapezoidal in shape, longitudinally centered on the prolongation of the
runway centerline, beginning at each end of each landing zone, coinciding in
width with the landing zone where they join. The height and width of the
approach zone shall be as specified on each map adopted pursuant to Section
17.50.050.



   C.   Landing Transition Zone ("LT"). A plane surface, and the
airspace above it, rectangular in shape, lying adjacent and parallel to each
side of each landing zone, having a length equal to the landing zone and
extending outward and upward, at eight angles to the runway centerline, at a
slope of seven-to-one to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the
established airport elevation.



   D.   Approach Transition Zone ("AT"). A plane surface and the
airspace above it, triangular in shape, lying adjacent to each side of each
approach zone and at each end of each landing transition zone, coinciding in
height with the approach outward and upward, at right angles to the
prolongation of the runway centerline, at a slope of seven-to-one to a
maximum airport elevation or to the conical zone surface, whichever is higher.



   E.   Horizontal Zone ("H"). A horizontal circular plane surface, and
the airspace above it, one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established
airport elevation, its radius point being the airport reference point and
having the radius specified on each map adopted pursuant to Section
17.50.050. The horizontal zone does not include the landing zone or
transition zones.



   F.   Conical Zone ("C"). A conical surface of an inverted conical
fustrum, and the airspace above it, its minor base being coincidental with
the periphery of the horizontal zone and extending outward and upward,
radially to its axis, at a slope of twenty-to-one for the horizontal distance
specified on each map adopted pursuant to Section 17.50.050. The conical zone
does not include the approach zone at the approach transition zone. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7624)



17.50.050   Airport zoning map.



   A.   The several zones established by Section 17.50.040 shall be
shown and delineated on the airport zoning map of the county of Tulare, which
is adopted. Said zoning map, for convenience and identification, is divided
into parts corresponding to the operational areas of the respective airports
included with the provisions of this chapter. Additional parts of the airport
zoning map may be adopted from time to time by ordinance. Each part of the
airport zoning map of the county of Tulare adopted or hereafter adopted
identify the subject and the location and shall contain a map and diagrams
including a plot plan of the subject runways, the location and dimensions of
all zones described in accordance with the formulas established for the
regulation of any of the aforementioned zones need not be the same for
different airports. The following parts of the airport zoning map are hereby
adopted:



   1.   Part 1, Porterville Municipal Airport;



   2.   Part 2, Tulare Airpark;



   3.   Part 3, Visalia Municipal Airport.



   B.   The airport zoning map and amendments or additional parts
thereof adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall not be included in or made a
part of this code. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7626)



17.50.060   Airport land use zone.



   A.   This section establishes an "AP" (airport) zone that will be an
integral part of the Visalia zoning ordinance. The "AP" zone will allow only
airport related land uses as follows:



   1.   Signs, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.48;



   2.   Terminal area;



   3.   Noncommercial aviation;



   4.   Airport reserve;



   5.   Nonaviation (highway) commercial;



   6.   Airport services;



   7.   Aviation commercial;



   8.   Air cargo reserve;



   9.   Recreation;



   10.   Agriculture;



   11.   Safety (open space) area;



   12.   Runways and taxiways;



   13.   Airport service roads;



   14.   The keeping of household pets, subject to the definition of
household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030.



   B.   The uses shall be developed within the areas that are
specifically delineated within the Visalia "airport master plan."



   C.   Prior to issuance of any building permits, the airport
commission shall review the proposal and the Visalia planning commission
shall recommend its approval based upon the proposal's conformance with the
"airport master plan."



   D.   Any changes to the "airport master plan" shall require review
by the airport commission and a public hearing before the Visalia planning
commission and city council. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7626.1)



17.50.070   Use restrictions.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this chapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or
radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare to
the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of
the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing,
takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7626.2)



17.50.080   Uses within nonaviation commercial areas.



   It is the intent of this section to specify a list of permitted uses
within an area designated "nonaviation commercial" on the airport master
plan. Two use areas within this designation are area "A" and area "B" as
designated on approved development plans.



   A.   Area "A" Permitted Uses.



   1.   Animal shelters;



   2.   Banks;



   3.   Barber shops;



   4.   Beauty shops;



   5.   Blueprinting shops;



   6.   Broadcasting studios;



   7.   Communications equipment buildings;



   8.   Duplicating services;



   9.   Eating places, not including drive-in restaurants or places
that serve alcoholic beverages;



   10.   Limited office equipment sales;



   11.   Locksmiths;



   12.   Medical or dental laboratories;



   13.   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;



   14.   Offices;



   15.   Office and business machines sales and service;



   16.   Optician and optometrist shops;



   17.   Parking facilities;



   18.   Pharmacies;



   19.   Photograph studios;



   20.   Photography supply stores;



   21.   Scientific instrument stores;



   22.   Signs, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.48;



   23.   Travel bureaus.



   B.   Area "B" Permitted Uses.



   1.   All uses listed in Area "A";



   2.   Warehousing, wholesaling, and distribution uses limited to a
maximum area of four thousand (4,000) square feet in conjunction with an
office;



Assembly and repair service uses limited to a maximum area of four thousand
(4,000) square feet in conjunction with an office;



   3.   Business, trade, and professional schools.



   C.   All storage of materials and activities that occur with each
use shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure.



   D.   Uses may be added to the list of permitted uses as specified in
Section 17.50.060. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Res. 2000-51, 2001: prior code
§ 7626.3)



17.50.090   Administration and enforcement.



   A.   The planning commission is designated as the agency for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.



   B.   The city building inspector shall not issue building permits
for the construction, reconstruction or structural alteration of any
structure within any of the zones established by Section 17.50.040 if said
construction, reconstruction or structural alteration would result in
violation of the provisions of this subsection any building permits so issued
shall be null and void. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7627)



17.50.100   Permits.



   Before that portion of any nonconforming structure that exceeds the
height limitation established by the airport zoning map and Section 17.50.040
may be structurally altered and before any non-conforming structure or tree
may be replaced, reconstructed, allowed to grow higher or replanted, a permit
must be secured from the planning commission authorizing such structural
alteration, replacement, reconstruction or change. Those portions of an
existing nonconforming structure below the applicable height limitations may
be structurally altered, repaired and added to, and those portions of an
existing nonconforming structure above the applicable height limitation may
be repaired and minor replacements made therein, without securing such a
permit unless such structural alteration, repair, addition or enlarge that
portion of the structure that exceeds the applicable height limitation. No
such permit shall be granted that will allow the establishment or creation of
an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming structure or tree or
non-conforming use to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to
air navigation that it was on the date that this chapter was made applicable
to a particular airport or than it was when the application for a permit was
made, but all other application for such permits shall be granted. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7628)



17.50.110   Violation.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapter 3, Part 7 of the
Ordinance Code of Tulare County as amended by Tulare County Ordinance No.
1233, which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7629)



Chapter 17.52
QUASI-PUBLIC ZONE



Sections:



17.52.010   Purpose and intent.



17.52.015   Applicability.



17.52.020   Permitted uses.



17.52.030   Conditional uses.



17.52.010   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of the quasi-public zone is to provide a zone
that is intended to allow for the location of institutional, academic,
community service, governmental, and nonprofit uses. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: prior code § 7630)



17.52.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all property within the
QP zone district. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.52.020   Permitted uses.



   Permitted uses in the quasi-public zone include public uses of an
administrative, recreational, public service or cultural type including city,
county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries,
museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public building,
structures and facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers.
Permitted uses also include wireless telecommunication facilities on parcels
that are a minimum of five (5) acres, subject to the requirements of Section
17.32.163 (Regulation of Wireless Telecommunication Facilities) of the
Visalia Zoning Ordinance. The keeping of household pets, subject to the
definition of household pets set forth in Section 17.04.030. Other uses
similar in nature and intensity as determined by the city planner. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2015-01 § 3 (part), 2015: Ord. 9717 § 2 (part),
1997: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7631)



17.52.030   Conditional uses.



   Conditional uses in the quasi-public zone include:



   A.   Public and quasi-public uses of an education or religious type
including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high
schools and colleges; nursery schools, licensed day care facilities for more
than fourteen (14) children; churches, parsonages and other religious
institutions;



   B.   Public and private charitable institutions, general hospitals,
sanitariums, nursing and convalescent homes, senior care facilities, senior
housing; not including specialized hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing, rest
and convalescent homes including care for acute psychiatric, drug addiction
or alcoholism cases;



   C.   Ambulance service;



   D.   Electric distribution substations;



   E.   Gas regulator stations;



   F.   Public service pumping stations;



   G.   Communications equipment buildings;



   H.   Wireless telecommunication facilities on parcels that are a
less than five (5) acres subject to the Section 17.32.163 of the Visalia
Zoning Ordinance;



   I.   Residential development specifically designed for senior
housing;



   J.   Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the
city planner. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2015-01 § 3 (part), 2015:
Ord. 9717 § 2 (part), 1997: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7632)



Chapter 17.54
GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS



Sections:



17.54.010   Purpose.



17.54.020   Initiation.



17.54.030   Application procedures.



17.54.040   Public hearing—Notice.



17.54.050   Investigation and report.



17.54.060   Hearing.



17.54.070   Action of city planning commission.



17.54.080   Action of the city council.



17.54.010   Purpose.



   As the general plan for Visalia is implemented, there may be a need for
amendments to land use boundaries and policies of the general plan. Such
amendments shall be made in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this
chapter. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7650)



17.54.020   Initiation.



   A.   An amendment to the land use boundaries of the general plan may
be initiated by any interested person or the owners of the property within
the area for which the amendment is proposed. The area of a proposed land use
amendment and/or policy amendment may be expanded in scope by the planning
commission in the resolution of intention.



   B.   An amendment to land use boundaries and/or policies may be
initiated by the city planning commission or the city council by adoption of
a resolution of intention. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7651)



17.54.030   Application procedures.



   A.   An application for an amendment shall be filed by the applicant
with the city planning commission on a form prescribed by the commission. 
Said application shall include the following data:



   1.   Name and address of the applicant;



   2.   Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property for
which a land use boundary amendment is proposed or the authorized agent of
the owner. In the case of a policy amendment the statement shall indicate the
interest of the applicant;



   3.   Address and legal description of the subject property, if
applicable;



   4.   The application shall include material deemed necessary by the
city planner to clearly show the applicant's proposal.



   B.   The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution
of the city council to cover the cost of processing the application. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7652)



17.54.040   Public hearing—Notice.



   Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten days or
more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and by mailing notice of
the time and place of the hearing to property owners within three hundred
(300) feet of the boundaries of the area under consideration if an amendment
to the land use element is under consideration. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7653)



17.54.050   Investigation and report.



   The city planning staff shall make an investigation of the application
or the proposal and shall prepare a report thereon that shall be submitted to
the city planning commission. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7654)



17.54.060   Hearing.



   At the public hearing, the city planning commission shall review the
application or the proposal and may receive pertinent evidence regarding the
proposed amendment. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7655)



17.54.070   Action of city planning commission.



   Within forty-five (45) days following the public hearing, the city
planning commission shall make a specific recommendation and shall transmit a
report to the city council. The report shall include a resolution
recommending either approval or denial of the proposed amendment, together
with pertinent information and the report of the city planning staff. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7656)



17.54.080   Action of the city council.



   A.   Upon receipt of the resolution and report of the city planning
commission, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing with
public notice as prescribed in Section 17.54.040. Following the noticed
public hearing, the city council shall approve, deny or modify the city
planning commission recommendation.



   B.   If the element or amendment has been approved by the city
planning commission, the city council shall not modify the recommendation
until the proposed change or modification has been referred back to the city
planning commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with
the city council. Failure of the city planning commission to report within
forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be
designated by the city council shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed
change or modification. It shall not be necessary for the city planning
commission to hold a public hearing on such proposed change or modification.



   C.   The adoption of a general plan element, or amendment, shall be
by resolution of the city council.



(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7657)



Chapter 17.56
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT



Sections:



17.56.010   Purposes and intent.



17.56.020   Components of the chapter.



17.56.030   Definitions.



17.56.040   Regulation of structures.



17.56.050   Creation of historic preservation advisory committee.



17.56.060   Appeal.



17.56.070   Demolition or moving of historic structures.



17.56.080   Ordinary maintenance and repair.



17.56.090   Exceptions to Visalia Municipal Code requirements.



17.56.100   Building design compatibility criteria.



17.56.110   Local register structures.



17.56.120   Role of building official.



17.56.130   Separability.



17.56.010   Purposes and intent.



   A.   There is created a historic district, the boundaries of which
are shown on the two maps entitled, "Historic District Overlay," which
accompany the ordinance codified in this chapter and which are on file in the
office of the city clerk, on the 19th day of November, 1979 and dated 19th
day of November, 1979. Said maps are adopted and made a part of this chapter.



   B.   This chapter is enacted to preserve and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and to express the
commitment of the city to assure that the city's cultural heritage, as
reflected in its historic structures, sites, and features is not destroyed,
through:



   1.   The protection and preservation of historic structures;



   2.   The preservation and maintenance of historic residential areas
as cohesive neighborhood units;



   3.   The enhancement of property values in the older areas of the
city;



   4.   The assurance that the community's cultural heritage, as
reflected in the environment, is not lost;



   5.   The encouragement of the development of vacant and incompatibly
developed properties in accordance with the character of the historic
district;



   6.   The involvement of residents of the older areas in planning
their own neighborhoods. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4
(part), 2001: prior code § 7700)



17.56.020   Components of the chapter.



   This chapter shall include:



   1.   The ordinance, which specifies the historic district overlay
designation, design evaluation criteria, and the formation, powers and duties
of a historic preservation advisory committee;



   2.   Creation of a local register of historic structures, sites and
features that may be modified from time to time by resolution of the city
council.



   3.   Two maps that designate the historic district overlay. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7701)



17.56.030   Definitions.



   A.   All definitions, general and specific, set forth in Section
17.04.030 shall be applicable to this chapter.



   B.   Definitions.



   "Construction" means any building activity requiring the issuance of a
building permit, except for any activity that does not affect the exterior
appearance of the structure.



   "Enlargement" means construction that results in the expansion of the
gross floor area of a structure.



   "Historic structure" means a structure listed on the Local Register.



   "Local register" means the listing of local historic structures, sites
and features adopted by the city council and maintained by the historic
preservation advisory committee, and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7702)



17.56.040   Regulation of structures.



   No structure shall be constructed, altered or enlarged that is located
in the historic district or that is listed as an "exceptional" or "focus"
structure on the local register and is located outside the historic district,
unless such a permit is issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. No
structure listed on the local register shall be moved or demolished unless a
permit is issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7703)



17.56.050   Creation of historic preservation advisory committee.



   In order to execute the purposes declared in this chapter, there is
created a historic preservation advisory committee.



   A.   Committee Membership.



   1.   The historic preservation advisory committee shall consist of
seven members appointed by the city council to serve without compensation.
All committee members shall be residents of the city at the time of their
appointment and will lose their position if they move outside the city limits
during their term of office. Members shall be appointed on the basis of:



   a.   Relevant professional or business qualifications;



   b.   Ownership of property within the historic district;



   c.   Practical experience in restoration or preservation;



   d.   Exceptional civic interest.



   e.   Terms of office shall be for two years.



   2.   Vacancies that may occur on the committee shall be filled by
appointment of a new member of the city council for the duration of the
unexpired term of office. The Council has the option of appointing up to two
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee alternates. Should a mid-term
vacancy occur, an alternate may automatically fill the unexpired term. The
council shall also have the power to remove any member from the committee by
an affirmative vote of three council members.



   3.   Four members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.



   B.   Procedures for the Review of Applications. The operating
procedures of the historic preservation advisory committee shall be
prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council, for the
purpose of carrying into effect the standards and specifications of this
chapter. The committee may adopt, amend, and repeal rules and regulations
governing the conduct of its meetings, as long as said rules do not violate
the procedures established by the city council or the terms of this chapter.



   C.   Duties and Responsibilities. The historic preservation advisory
committee shall review applications only as specified in this chapter,
consistent with the rules and regulations adopted from time to time by
resolution of the city council (as referred to in Section 17.56.050(B)).
Applications shall be approved or disapproved based solely on the
considerations set forth in this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter
that the historic preservation advisory committee shall encourage applicants
to make alterations and repairs to structures in the spirit of the
architectural style of the structure. The duties and responsibilities of the
historic preservation advisory committee shall include the following:



   1.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to review all proposed zoning actions (zone changes, conditional
use permits, special zoning exceptions, planned unit developments and
variances) within the historic district. The committee may recommend
approval, conditional approval, modification or disapproval of an application
based upon the expected impact of the proposed zoning action on the historic
or architectural significance of the affected structure(s), neighborhood, or
the entire historic district. The committee's recommendation shall be
forwarded to the planning commission for its consideration.



   2.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to review all applications for site plan review permits within the
historic district for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Items
that shall be subject to review by the committee include but are not limited
to vehicular access, location and screening of parking, setbacks, location of
service use areas, walls and landscaping. The committee may recommend
approval, conditional approval, disapproval or resubmittal of the site plan
review permit application. The committee's recommendation shall be forwarded
to the site plan review committee for its consideration.



   3.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to review all applications for the construction or exterior
alteration or enlargement of structures within the historic district or for
structures located outside the historic district and listed as "exceptional"
or "focus" structures on the local register. The committee shall have the
power to approve, modify or disapprove such applications before a building
permit can be issued, subject to the provisions of Sections 17.56.100 and
17.56.110.



   4.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to review all applications for sign permits within the historic
district or for properties located outside the historic district and listed
as "exceptional" or "focus" on the local register. The committee may
recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the sign permit
application based upon the proposed design and/or materials, but not upon the
proposed size or location. The application shall then be presented to the
proper issuing authority for sign permits, pursuant to Chapter 17.48. Sign
permits shall be issued only in compliance with the recommendation of the
committee. Approval by the committee in no way implies approval by the
issuing authority for sign permits, whose approval must also be secured
pursuant to Chapter 17.48.



   5.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to review all applications for the moving or demolition of
structures listed on the local register. The committee shall have the power
to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such applications, subject
to the provisions of Section 17.56.130.



   6.   It shall be the duty of the historic preservation advisory
committee to compile and update the historic survey and inventory, and to
nominate properties to the local register and the National Register of
Historic Places. In selecting properties for nomination to the local
register, the board shall consider:



   a.   Architectural significance and style;



   b.   Historic significance, including age of structure, original
owners, and events related to the structure, site or original owners.



   The committee shall review the local register annually, make
recommendations for the addition or deletion of structures or sites, and
submit said recommendations to the planning commission and city council for
certification.



   7.   Permits may be issued for air conditioners, electrical work and
plumbing work that is visible from a public right-of-way when the chief
building official determines that the work insignificantly affects the
exterior of a structure, or that reasonable alternatives as to location or
screening have been employed. The building official may forward to the
historic preservation advisory committee applications for permits for this
type of work when it appears that the appearance of a structure may be
significantly altered. This subsection shall not apply to the following types
of permit applications:



   1.   Reroofing with like materials;



   2.   Residing with like materials;



   3.   Swimming pools;



   4.   Masonry repairs with like materials;



   5.   Chimney repair with like materials. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2008-11 § 1, 2008: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7704)



17.56.060   Appeal.



   Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of
the historic preservation advisory committee may make an appeal in writing
therefrom to the city council within ten days of said action. The city
council, after proceeding in the manner as provided therein and with the same
power and authority there invested in passing upon appeals before it under
the provisions of law and this chapter and in the exercise thereof, may
reverse, affirm or modify or affirm as modified the action of the historic
preservation advisory committee. Appeals of a decision of the site plan
review committee shall be filed with the planning commission in the manner
prescribed in Section 17.28.050. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 §
4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7705)



17.56.070   Demolition or moving of historic structures.



   A.   The demolition of structures listed on the local register, and
the moving of local register structures from their sites, shall be
discouraged. The historic preservation advisory committee shall review all
applications for demolition or moving permits for structures on the local
register and for any structures within the historic district boundaries.



   B.   After due consideration, the committee shall exercise one of
the options listed below:



   1.   The committee may approve the demolition permit if it finds
that the structure is a hazard to public health or safety, as determined by
the building official or his designee, in consultation with the historic
preservation advisory committee.



   2.   The committee may decide that up to a six-month moratorium be
placed upon the processing of the demolition or moving permit, in order to
allow time for the applicant and the committee to find alternative uses for
the structure and to seek alternative solutions to the demolition or moving
of the structure. If no alternatives are found, after the six-month
moratorium has expired, the committee must approve the application.



   3.   In the case of local register structures that have been
classified as "exceptional," the committee may deny an application for
demolition, after the six-month moratorium has expired. Denial of a
demolition permit by the committee is subject to appeal to the city council
pursuant to Section 17.56.060.



   4.   The committee may approve the application.



   C.   When an application is acted upon, the committee shall notify
the building official of the approval, conditional approval or denial. Upon
receipt of said notification, the building official shall process the
application accordingly. If, after six months from the date of filing of the
application, the building official has not received such notification, a
permit may be issued. Approval of a permit application by the committee in no
way implies approval by the building official, whose approval must also be
secured. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior
code § 7706)



17.56.080   Ordinary maintenance and repair.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of any structure within the historic district; provided
such work involves no change that requires issuance of a building permit.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any feature that, in the view of
the proper authority acting lawfully, is required for the public safety
because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7708)



17.56.090   Exceptions to Visalia Municipal Code requirements.



   Due to the peculiar conditions of design and construction in historic
neighborhoods where structures were sometimes built close to lot lines, and
where ownership patterns have changed over the years, it is sometimes in the
public interest to retain the historic appearance of a neighborhood by making
an exception to normal setback, parking, landscaping, fencing and screening
requirements of the Visalia Municipal Code, where such an exception does not
interfere with the public health or safety. Within the historic district,
where it is deemed that such an exception is warranted and will not adversely
affect neighboring properties, the historic preservation advisory committee
may initiate and/or recommend to the planning commission that such exception
to Visalia Municipal Code requirements be made. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7709)



17.56.100   Building design compatibility criteria.



   This section contains criteria for reviewing all applications for new
construction and sign permits within the historic district, and for any
rehabilitation, renovation, alteration, reconstruction, or enlargement
affecting the exterior appearance of any structure within the historic
district that is not listed on the local register, which requires the
issuance of a building permit. Each application shall be considered in terms
of its compatibility or complementariness with a majority of structures in
the immediately surrounding area. In reviewing an application, the historic
preservation advisory committee shall consider the following general design
standards and principles:



   A.   Height and Scale. New buildings should be constructed to a
height within a reasonable average height of existing adjacent buildings.



   B.   Spacing of Buildings on Street. A rhythm of recurrent building
masses to separations should be retained.



   C.   Relationship of Materials and Textures. Choice of building
materials and texture (smooth and rough) should enhance the desired
neighborhood qualities such as compatibility, similarity and continuity.



   D.   Relationship of Architectural Details and Roof Shapes. Choice
of architectural details and roof shape should insure compatible appearance
with surrounding structures.



   E.   Walls of Continuity. Physical ingredients such as brick walls,
wrought iron fences, and evergreen landscape masses should be used to form
continuous cohesive walls of enclosure along the street.



   F.   Landscaping. Landscaping should reflect the predominant quality
and quantity of landscaping within the surrounding area. The concern here is
more with mass and continuity.



   G.   Directional Expression of Front Elevations. Structural shape,
placement of openings, and architectural details should be used to give a
compatible appearance with adjacent structures that may be horizontal,
vertical or nondirectional in nature. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord.
2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7710)



17.56.110   Local register structures.



   This section contains criteria for reviewing all applications for
building permits for exterior rehabilitation, renovation, alteration,
reconstruction, or enlargement of any local register structure within the
historic district, or any "exceptional" or "focus" local register structure
outside the historic district, and for any interior modification that
requires the issuance of a building permit for a publicly owned and publicly
accessible local register structure. In reviewing an application, the
historic preservation advisory committee shall consider the following general
standards and principles:



   A.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible
use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building
structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.



   B.   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a
building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural
features should be avoided when possible.



   C.   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historic basis and that
seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.



   D.   Changes, which may have taken place in the course of time, are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, or site and
its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own
right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.



   E.   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship, which characterize a building, structure or site, shall be
treated with sensitivity.



   F.   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the
new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features,
substantiated by historical, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.



   G.   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken, without prior
approval of the historic preservation advisory committee.



   H.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any acquisition,
protection, stabilization, preservation, rehabilitation, restoration or
reconstruction project. (Ord. 2710 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part),
2001: prior code § 7711)



17.56.120   Role of building official.



   A.   The building official shall refuse to issue all building or
sign permits based upon an application disapproved by the historic
preservation advisory committee, unless such application is later approved by
the city council. The building official may approve any application approved
or conditionally approved by the committee at such time as any conditions
specified in such conditional approval are clearly indicated by the applicant
on the plans presented to the building official for approval. If an appeal to
the city council is filed within ten days from the date of committee approval
of an application, no permit shall be issued until the outcome of said appeal
is finally determined by the city council.



   B.   After a building permit has been issued, the building official
or his/her designee shall from time to time inspect the construction,
alteration or enlargement approved by the committee and shall take such
action as is necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part), 2001: prior code § 7712)



17.56.130   Separability.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not impair any of the
remaining provisions. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2001-13 § 4 (part),
2001: prior code § 7707)



Chapter 17.58
DOWNTOWN RETAIL OVERLAY DISTRICT



Sections:



17.58.010   Purposes and intent.



17.58.015   Applicability.



17.58.020   Components of the chapter.



17.58.030   Definitions.



17.58.040   Regulation of improvements.



17.58.050   Procedures for review of applications.



17.58.060   Appeal to the city council.



17.58.070   Ordinary maintenance and repair.



17.58.080   Standards applying to new buildings and alterations to
existing buildings.



17.58.082   Standards applying alterations to existing buildings.



17.58.084   Standards applying to new buildings.



17.58.086   Maintenance and repair required.



17.58.090   Exceptions.



17.58.100   Role of building official.



17.58.110   Separability.



17.58.010   Purposes and intent.



   A.   There is created a downtown retail overlay district, the
boundaries of which are shown on the map entitled, "Downtown Retail Overlay
District," which is delineated on the Zoning Map. Said map is adopted and
made a part of this ordinance.



   B.   This chapter is enacted to preserve and promote the public
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Visalia, and to express the
commitment of the city toward the continued vitality and stabilization of
regional retail commercial activity within the area traditionally known as
Downtown Visalia.  This commitment seeks to:



   1.   Protect and enhance existing buildings and improvements in the
downtown area.



   2.   Enhance the character and physical environment of the downtown
area by establishing specific design compatibility criteria for new and
remodeled buildings within the overlay district.



   3.   Ensure that new development is compatible with existing and
future plans for the area.



   4.   Involve both design professionals and area residents, property
owners and merchants, in the implementation of the Visalia Downtown Framework
Plan and the continued viability of the downtown retail economy. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7720)



17.58.015   Applicability.



   The requirements in this chapter shall apply to all structures and
properties within the downtown retail overlay district, as defined herein.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.58.020   Components of the chapter.



   This chapter shall include:



   A.   The ordinance text, which specifies the downtown retail
district overlay designation, design evaluation criteria, and the powers and
duties with regard to the overlay district;



   B.   A map designating the downtown retail district overlay, which
shall be depicted on the official zoning map of the city. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7721)



17.58.030   Definitions.



   A.   All definitions, general and specific, set forth in Section
17.04.030, shall be applicable to this chapter.



   B.   Word Usage.



   1.   The word "shall" is prescriptive in nature and indicates that
compliance is mandatory.



   2.   The words "may," "should" and "preferred" are permissive in
nature and indicate that compliance is discretionary on the part of the
applicant.



   C.   Definitions.



   "Construction" means any building activity requiring the issuance of a
building permit that affects the exterior appearance of a structure.



   "Enlargement" means construction that results in the expansion of the
gross floor area of a structure.



   "Exterior architectural feature" means the architectural elements
embodying the style, design, general arrangement, and components of all of
the outer surfaces of an improvement; the kind, color, and texture of the
building materials; and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights,
signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement.



   "Improvement" means any building, structure, place, parking facility,
fence, gate, wall, work of art, or other object constituting a physical
betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7722)



17.58.040   Regulation of improvements.



   No improvement or exterior architectural feature of any improvement
shall be constructed, altered or enlarged that is located in the downtown
retail overlay district unless a site plan review permit is issued pursuant
to the terms of this chapter and Chapter 17.28. Where this chapter may
conflict with Chapter 17.28, this chapter shall apply.  This section shall
not apply to any interior alteration that has no effect on the condition or
appearance of any exterior architectural feature of an improvement. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7723)



17.58.050   Procedures for review of applications.



   A.   The site plan review committee shall be the reviewing authority
for the downtown retail overlay district, with powers and duties as specified
in this chapter.



   B.   The site plan review committee shall review applications only
as specified in this chapter, consistent with the rules and regulations in
this chapter. Applications shall be approved or disapproved based solely on
those building design criteria in this chapter, for which compliance is
mandatory. The board may suggest that building design criteria that are
permissive be followed; however, applications shall not be approved or
disapproved on the basis of any such nonmandatory criteria. The duties and
responsibilities of the site plan review committee shall include the
following:



   C.   At the option of the planning commission, the site plan review
committee may review proposed zoning actions (zone changes, conditional use
permits, special zoning exceptions, planned unit developments and variances)
within the district. The site plan review committee may recommend approval,
conditional approval, modification or disapproval of an application based
upon the expected impact of the proposed zoning action on the character of
the affected improvement(s), neighboring properties, or the entire district.
The board's recommendation shall be forwarded to the planning commission for
its consideration.



   D.   It shall be the duty of the site plan review committee to
review all applications for the construction or exterior alteration or
enlargement of improvements within the overlay district. The site plan review
committee shall have the power to approve, modify or disapprove such
applications before a building permit can be issued.



   E.   It shall be the duty of the site plan review committee to
review all applications for sign permits within the district. Applications
for sign permits shall be obtained from and filed with city pursuant to
Chapter 17.48, and thereafter the application shall immediately be referred
to the site plan review committee for their review and recommendation. The
site plan review committee may recommend approval, conditional approval or
denial of the sign permit application. The application shall then be
presented to the proper issuing authority for sign permits, pursuant to
Chapter 17.48 of the Municipal Code. Sign permits shall be issued only in
compliance with the recommendation of the site plan review committee.
Approval by the site plan review committee in no way implies approval by the
issuing authority for sign permits, whose approval must also be secured
pursuant to Chapter 17.48.



   F.   It shall be the duty of the site plan review committee to
review all applications for the moving or demolition of structures within the
overlay district. The site plan review committee shall have the power to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such applications, subject to
the provisions of Section 17.58.060.



   G.   Permits may be issued for air conditioners, electrical work and
plumbing work that is visible from a public right-of-way when the chief
building official determines that the work insignificantly affects the
exterior of a structure, or that reasonable alternatives as to location or
screening have been employed. The building official may forward to the site
plan review committee applications for permits for this type of work when it
appears that the appearance of a structure may be significantly altered. 
This subsection shall not apply to the following types of permit applications:



   1.   Reroofing with like materials;



   2.   Residing with like materials;



   3.   Masonry repairs with like materials;



   4.   Chimney repair with like materials.  (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7724)



17.58.060   Appeal to the city council.



   Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of
the site plan review committee may make an appeal in writing therefrom to the
city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days
of said action. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the council's
next regular meeting after the appeal is filed. The council shall review the
decision of the board and may reverse, affirm, modify or affirm as modified
the action of the board. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7725)



17.58.070   Ordinary maintenance and repair.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of any structure within any district; provided, such
work involves no change in the exterior appearance of a structure. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or demolition of any feature that in the view of the proper
authority acting lawfully is required for the public safety because of an
unsafe or dangerous condition. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7727)



17.58.080   Standards applying to new buildings and alterations to
existing buildings.



   The following standards shall apply to new buildings and alterations to
existing building within the downtown retail overlay district:



   A.   Awnings attached above street level storefronts and/or
upper-story windows are encouraged.  Size and scale shall be appropriate to
the building, however, significant elements of the building's architecture
should not be obscured by upper-story awnings.  Ground floor awnings shall
project a minimum of five (5) feet over the sidewalk.  Awning materials
shall be cloth or canvas.  Awning colors shall be limited to a blue,
burgundy, tan or tones and/or prints of these.  White may be incorporated
into the design of awnings for contrast or valance signage, but shall not
compromise a majority of the color theme of any awning.



   B.   The following materials and building elements shall be
prohibited:



   1.   Use of wood siding, cladding or wood shingles, in excess of ten
(10) percent of the total area of any building façade.



   2.   Mansard form roof tiles.



   3.   Unbroken masses of split face, slump stone or concrete unit
masonry.



   4.   Use of reflective or mirrored surface cladding, in excess of
then (10) percent of the total area of any building façade.



   5.   Exposed utility conduit, junction boxes, meters, or fuse boxes
on the front façade of buildings. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.58.082   Standards applying to alterations to existing buildings.



   The following standards shall apply when undertaking the renovation of
existing buildings within the downtown retail overlay district:



   A.   Where originally constructed buildings facades remain, their
appearance shall not be altered.  Such facades shall be repaired and
preserved.  Where facades have been altered, as much original material and
detail shall be retained in the rehabilitation as possible.



   B.   Where most of the existing architectural design dated from an
interim remodeling and where such remodeling adds to the traditional
character of the district, rehabilitation shall conform to the period of such
remodeling and not to the original design.



   C.   Where the original design cannot be determined or where
financial considerations preclude full-scale rehabilitation of a façade
which has previously been altered, a design which is not a pure
rehabilitation but which is in keeping of the structure are prohibited.



   D.   Where originally constructed facades and/or architectural
details have been covered by an interior remodeling, the removal of coverings
is encouraged.  When original materials, facades and/or architectural
details are uncovered, these shall not be recovered.



   E.   Where windows and doors still exist, the original sills,
lintels, frames, sash, muntins and glass of windows and transoms shall be
preserved.  The original doorway elements, including sill, lintels, frames,
and the doors shall also be retained.  Where possible, replacements should
duplicate the originals in design and materials.  The blocking or covering
of any portion of an existing window or door opening with permanent materials
is prohibited.  When new window or door openings are created, the scale of
these should approximate that of the traditional architecture of the
district.  The base of new window opening shall be a maximum of thirty (30)
inches above ground level.  Whenever the size and/or scale of any existing
window openings are altered, the base of all the window openings in the
storefront shall be brought into conformance with the maximum 30-inch
standard.  This subsection shall not apply to ordinary repair or replacement
of window glass or frames where the size and/or scale of window openings are
not altered.



   F.   Brick is most dominant traditional building material within the
district and is preferred as a replacement material.  Brick shall not be
covered by wood shingles, wood, aluminum siding, or any other synthetic
materials.  Where brick has been painted, repainting in a color that matches
the natural color of the brick as closely as possible is preferred.  Where
brick remains unpainted, the use of paint in the exterior is prohibited,
since unpainted brick is a crucial element of the traditional character of
the district.



   G.   Stuccoed brick surfaces should be retained, unless held in
place with wire mash, in which case the stucco should be removed.  Where
retained, stucco should be repainted in a brick color. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017)



17.58.084   Standards applying to new buildings.



   The following standards shall apply to new buildings within the
downtown retail overlay district.  The objective of this section is to
ensure that contemporary design is compatible with the traditional theme and
character of the downtown retail overlay district.  The effect of the
proposed design of new construction on the overall character of the district
should be the first frame of reference for such compatibility.  The next
consideration should be the effect of the proposed design on the adjacent
buildings and streetscape.



   A.   New construction shall maintain the continuity of existing rows
of buildings; facades shall be constructed at the property line facing the
street, or at a setback even with that of adjacent buildings.



   B.   New buildings shall be constructed to within ten (10) percent
of the maximum height of adjacent buildings.  The scale of new architectural
elements should be consistent with that of adjacent structures.



   C.   Brick is the preferred exterior building material for new
construction.  The color texture should be similar to that of brick
traditionally used in the district.



   D.   The scale of window and door openings in new buildings should
approximate that of the traditional architecture of the district.  The base
of window openings shall be a maximum of thirty (30) inches above ground
level. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017)



17.58.086   Maintenance and repair required.



   A.   Neither the owner of nor the person(s) in actual charge of a
structure within the district shall permit such structure to fall into a
state of disrepair which may result in the deterioration of any exterior
appurtenance or architectural features so as to produce, or tend to produce,
in the judgment of the Building Official, a detrimental effect on the
character of the district as a whole or the life and character of the
structure in question, including, but not limited to:



   1.   The deterioration or decay of exterior walls or other vertical
supports;



   2.   The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;



   3.   The deterioration of exterior chimneys;



   4.   The extensive deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or
mortar;



   5.   The extensive peeling or chipping of exterior paint;



   6.   The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.



   B.   The city's zoning compliance officer, or other designated
enforcement official, shall serve written notice upon the owner of any
structure deemed to be in violation of this section or any applicable
municipal code.  Notice shall comply with Visalia Municipal Code Section
1.13.070 if the violation is pursued through administrative enforcement. 
Alternatively, the enforcement official may pursue the violation as a
criminal infraction.  Said written notice shall specify the nature of the
condition or conditions which are in violation of the maintenance and repair
requirement wand direct that said conditions be repaired or corrected within
an appropriately reasonable period of time.  If the condition or conditions
are not remedied within the stated period of time in the notice, then an
administrative penalty or fine as stated in Section 1.12.010 of the Visalia
Municipal Code shall be enforced and may be collected under the methods
stated in Section 1.13.110.  Said notice hall further advise the owner of
said structure of his/her right to request a hearing before the planning
commission to review the determination of the city's enforcement officer. 
The request for hearing shall be made within ten (10) days of the receipt of
notice by the owner, with applicable fees, as set forth in Chapter 1.13 of
the Municipal Code and the administrative hearing shall be conducted pursuant
to the requirements of Chapter 1.13.



   C.   After a hearing, the administrative hearing officer may
approve, modify, or reject the determination of the city's enforcement
officer at the conclusion of such hearing. Should an administrative hearing
officer determine at the conclusion of such a hearing that there is a
violation of this provision, the administrative hearing officer shall require
that the structure in question be brought into compliance within an
appropriately reasonable period of time and in addition order the collection
of any applicable fines. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7727)



17.58.090   Exceptions.



   Within the downtown retail overlay district, design and construction
conditions exist that are unique and are not generally found elsewhere in the
city. Structures were often constructed on or near lot lines and abut one
another in many cases. Storefronts and building facades have often been
redesigned, covered or otherwise subjected to major alterations over the
years. Due to these peculiar conditions, it is sometimes in the interest of
enhancing the character of the district to make an exception to the building
design criteria in this chapter  and/or signage, landscaping, setbacks,
fencing and screening requirements of the Visalia zoning ordinance. Where it
is deemed that the physical and economic well-being of the district would be
better served by such an exception rather than the strict application of the
above mentioned building design criteria and other ordinance requirements,
the site plan review committee may recommend to the planning commission that
such exception be made, pursuant to Section 17.42.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: prior code § 7729)



17.58.100   Role of building official.



   A.   The building official shall refuse to issue all building or
sign permits based upon an application disapproved by the site plan review
committee, unless such application is later approved by the city council. The
building official may approve any application approved or conditionally
approved by the site plan review committee at such time as any conditions
specified in such approval are clearly indicated by the applicant on the
plans presented to the building official for approval. If an appeal to the
city council is filed within ten days from the date of board approval of an
application, no permit shall be issued until the outcome of said appeal is
finally determined by the city council.



   B.   After a building permit has been issued, the building official
shall from time to time inspect the construction, alteration or enlargement
approved by the board and shall take such action as is necessary to assure
compliance with the approved plans. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code §
7730)



17.58.110   Separability.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not impair any of the
remaining provisions. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7726)



Chapter 17.60
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS



Sections:



17.60.010   Authority for adoption and applications.



17.60.020   Hearing and notice.



17.60.030   Action by planning commission.



17.60.040   Action by city council.



17.60.050   Amendment or cancellation of agreement by mutual consent.



17.60.060   Recordation.



17.60.070   Periodic review.



17.60.080   Modification or termination.



17.60.090   Moratorium on further development.



17.60.010   Authority for adoption and applications.



   These regulations are adopted under the authority of Government Code
Sections 65864--65869.5.



   A.   Applications.



   1.   The city planner shall prescribe the form for each application,
notice and documents provided for or required under these regulations for the
preparation and implementation of development agreements.



   2.   The city planner may require an applicant to submit such
information and supporting data as the city planner considers necessary to
process the application.



   B.   Fees. The city council shall by separate resolution fix the
schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each
application and document provided for or required under these regulations.



   C.   Qualification as an Applicant. Only a qualified applicant may
file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified
applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real
property that is the subject of the development agreement. Applicant includes
authorized agent. The city planner may require an applicant to submit proof
of his interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act
for the applicant. Before processing the application, the city planner may
obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the
applicant's interest in the real property to enter into the agreement.



   D.   Proposed Form of Agreement. Each application shall be
accompanied by the form of development agreement proposed by the applicant.
This requirement may be met by designating the city's standard form of
development agreement and including specific proposals for changes in or
additions to the language of the standard form.



   E.   Review of Application. The city planner shall endorse on the
application the date it is received. He shall review the application and may
reject it if it is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If he finds that
the application is complete, he shall accept it for filing. The city planner
shall review the application and determine the additional requirements
necessary to complete the agreement. After receiving the required
information, a staff report and recommendation shall be prepared, which shall
state whether or not the agreement as proposed or in an amended form would be
consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 § 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7740)



17.60.020   Hearing and notice.



   A.   The planning commission and city council shall each hold a
public hearing on each application for a development agreement. The city
planner shall give notice of intention to consider adoption of the
development agreement. Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less
than ten days nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing
by mailing a notice to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of
the property that is the subject of the proposed development agreement, and
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The
form of the notice of intention to consider adoption of the development
agreement shall contain:



   1.   The time and place of the hearing;



   2.   A general explanation of the matter to be considered including
a general description of the area affected;



   3.   Other information required by specific provision of these
regulations or which the city planner considers necessary or desirable.



   B.   The failure of any person entitled to notice required by law or
these regulations to actually receive such notice, does not affect the
authority of the city to enter into a development agreement. No action,
inaction or recommendation regarding the proposed development agreement shall
be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error,
irregularity, informality, neglect or omission ("error") as to any matter
pertaining to petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing,
report, recommendation, or any matters of procedure whatever unless after an
examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the
opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of
the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury,
and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not
occurred or existed. There is not presumption that error is prejudicial or
that injury was done if error is shown. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605
§ 30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7741)



17.60.030   Action by planning commission.



   A.   After the public hearing, the planning commission shall make
its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation shall
include the planning commission's determination whether or not the following
findings can be made:



   1.   That the proposed development agreement is consistent with the
objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general
plan, any applicable specific plan, and/or any proposed amendment to the
general plan or applicable specific plan submitted simultaneously and in
conjunction with the proposed development agreement;



   2.   That the proposed development agreement is compatible with the
uses authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district
in which the real property is located;



   3.   That the proposed development agreement is in conformity with
public convenience, general welfare and good land use practice;



   4.   That the proposed development agreement will not be detrimental
to the public health, safety and general welfare;



   5.   That the proposed development agreement will not adversely
affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property
values.



   B.   The recommendation shall include the reasons for the
recommendation. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7742)



17.60.040   Action by city council.



   A.   After the city council completes the public hearing, it may
accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission.
It may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the planning
commission during its hearing back to the planning commission for report and
recommendation.



   B.   The planning commission may, but need not, hold a public
hearing on matters referred back to it by the city council.



   C.   The city council may not approve the development agreement
unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the
general plan, and any applicable specific plan. Any proposed change in the
general plan or applicable specific plan must be approved prior to, but
simultaneously with, the approval of the development agreement.



   D.   If the city council approves the development agreement, it
shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance. Upon the ordinance approving the
development agreement taking effect, the city may enter into the agreement.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7743)



17.60.050   Amendment or cancellation of agreement by mutual consent.



   Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in
part of the development agreement previously entered into. The procedure for
such proposing and adoption of an amendment or cancellation is the same as
the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance, as
prescribed by Sections 17.60.010 through 17.60.040. However, where the city
initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of
the development agreement, it shall first give notice to the property owner
of its intention to initiate such proceedings at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the amendment or
cancellation required by this section. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code
§ 7744)



17.60.060   Recordation.



   Within ten days after the city enters into the development agreement,
the city clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder. If
the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel
the agreement as provided in Section 17.60.050, or if the city terminates or
modifies the agreement as provided in Section 17.60.050 for failure of the
applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the
agreement, the city clerk shall have notice of such action recorded with the
county recorder. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7745)



17.60.070   Periodic review.



   A.   Time for and Initiation of Review. The city planning staff
shall review the development agreement every twelve (12) months from the date
the agreement is entered into. The time for review may be modified either by
agreement between the parties or by initiation in one or more of the
following ways:



   1.   Recommendation of the planning staff;



   2.   Affirmative vote of at least three members of the planning
commission;



   3.   Affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council.



   B.   Notice of Periodic Review. The city planner shall begin the
review proceeding by giving notice to the property owner that the city
intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement.
Following the review of the development agreement, the city planner shall
make a determination that the property owner has made good faith performance
and compliance with the terms of the agreement. If such finding is made by
the city planner, no further action on the part of the city need be taken. If
the city planner finds reasonable cause or evidence that the property owner
has not demonstrated good faith performance and compliance with the terms of
the agreement, such finding constitutes grounds for referring the matter of
periodic review before the planning commission in public hearing. The city
planner shall give the notice at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
time at which the matter will be considered by the planning commission.



   C.   Public Hearing. The planning commission shall conduct a public
hearing at which the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance
with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon
the property owner.



   D.   Findings Upon Public Hearing. The planning commission shall
determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property
owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms
and conditions of the agreement.



   E.   Procedure Upon Findings.



   1.   If the planning commission finds and determines on the basis of
substantial evidence that the property owner has complied in good faith with
the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the
review for that period is concluded;



   2.   If the planning commission finds and determines on the basis of
substantial evidence that the property owner has not complied in good faith
with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under
review, the planning commission may recommend to the city council that the
agreement be modified or terminated. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9605 §
30 (part), 1996: prior code § 7746)



17.60.080   Modification or termination.



   A.   If, upon a finding under Section 17.60.070(E)(2), the planning
commission recommends the modification or termination of the agreement, the
city council shall give notice to the property owner of its intention to
consider such modification or termination. The notice shall contain:



   1.   The time and place of the council meeting at which the matter
is to be considered;



   2.   A statement as to whether the city proposes to terminate or to
modify the development agreement;



   3.   Other information that the city considers necessary to inform
the property owner of the nature of the proceeding.



   B.   Action by City Council. At the time and place set for the
consideration of modification or termination, the property owner shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. The city council may modify or terminate
the agreement. The council may, but need not, refer the matter back to the
planning commission for further proceedings. The council may impose those
conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the
interests of the city. The decision of the council is final. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: prior code § 7747)



17.60.090   Moratorium on further development.



   In the event that the applicant fails to complete the agreement as
specified under Section 17.60.060, or the agreement is terminated as
specified under Section 17.60.080, the city council shall enact an urgency
ordinance placing a moratorium on further development activities on the
property which is the subject of the agreement so terminated. The moratorium
shall continue until such time as a new development agreement is executed; or
until the property is rezoned or other regulations or controls on the
development of the property are enacted that the city considers sufficient to
protect its interests. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: prior code § 7748)



Chapter 17.62
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Sections:



17.62.010   Purpose and intent.



17.62.020   Definitions.



17.62.030   Minimum proximity requirements.



17.62.040   Amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented business uses.



17.62.050   Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use.



17.62.060   Permits required.



17.62.010   Purpose and intent.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses
in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect
of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.



   It is the intent of this chapter to prevent community wide adverse
economic impacts, increased crime, decreased property values, and the
deterioration of neighborhoods that can be brought about by the concentration
of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to
other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, day care facilities,
churches, parks, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council
finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the
concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number
of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the
effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move
elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses,
while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 3
(part), 1998)



17.62.020   Definitions.



   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this
chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the
context that another meaning is intended:



   "Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar
machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films,
computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions, thirty (30) percent or more of the number of
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   "Adult bookstore or adult video store" means an establishment that has
a regular and substantial portion of its business in stocking books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or of photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other form of
visual or audio representations, or of instruments, artificial devices or
paraphernalia, that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction, description, or use in connection with specified sexual
activities and/or specified anatomical areas.



   "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business
establishment that: (1) regularly features live performances that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) that regularly
features persons who appear seminude; and/or (3) shows films, computer
generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions, thirty (30) percent or more of the number of
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   "Adult hotel or motel" means a hotel or motel or similar business
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration
that: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions, thirty (30) percent or more of the
number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a
six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in
a twenty-four (24) hour period.



   "Adult motion picture theater" means a business establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
shown, and thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   "Adult-oriented business" means an adult theater, adult motion picture
theater, adult cabaret, adult hotel or motel, adult arcade, or any other
business or concern that regularly features or as a regular and substantial
portion of its business offers to its patrons products, merchandise,
services, or entertainment that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas but not including those uses or
activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. Adult-oriented
business shall also include modeling studios, body painting studios and
sexual encounter establishments.



   "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   "Body painting studio" means an establishment or business that provides
the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or
nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is nude or seminude.



   "Church or religious institution" means a structure that is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.



   "Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" means and refers
to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase.
For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are
those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of
the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of
Covina, 115 Cal.App.3 151 (1981).



   "Establish an adult-oriented business" means and includes the
following: (1) the opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as
a new business: (2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not an
adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein; (3)
the addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any
other existing adult-oriented business; or (4) the relocation of any such
adult-oriented business.



   "Modeling studio" means a business that provides, for pecuniary
compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models
who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified
anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or
otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. Modeling studio does
not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board
of Education. Modeling studio further does not include a studio or similar
facility owned, operated, or maintained by a facility owned, operated, or
maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and that does not
provide, permit, or make available specified sexual activities.



   "Nude, nudity or a state of nudity" means the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, with
less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernable turgid state.



   "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in
whatever form or character.



   "Regularly features or regular and substantial course of conduct" means
a business or concern, including an adult theater, adult cabaret, and adult
motion picture theater, which presents any type of entertainment
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified anatomical areas
or specified sexual activities, or performers, models or employees appearing
in public nude, seminude, or dressed only in lingerie, on any two or more
occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three or more occasions within a
sixty (60) day period; or four or more occasions within a one hundred eighty
(180) day period.



   "Regular and substantial portion of its business" means a business or
concern in that: (1) the area(s) devoted to the display of adult material
exceeds twenty (20) percent of the total display area of the business; or (2)
at least twenty (20) percent of the average annual gross receipts of the
business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of
services, products, adult material, or entertainment that are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis upon matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. If the
business is a new business, the gross receipts shall be calculated by
considering the applicants estimated annual gross receipts for the first year
of operation.



   "School" means and includes any licensed child or day care facility, as
well as any institutions of learning for minors, whether public or private,
offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California
Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of
Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten,
elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any
special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or
professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior
college, college, or university.



   "Seminude" means state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   "Sexual encounter establishment" means any business, other than a
hotel, motel or similar establishment, offering public accommodations that,
for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual
activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition
does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state of
California engages in sexual therapy.



   "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following:
(1) less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic
region, (ii) buttocks, or (iii) female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid-state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or (3) any device, costume or
covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subdivisions (1) or
(2) above.



   "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following,
whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts; (2) sex acts, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, or sodomy; (3)
masturbation, actual or simulated; (4) excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision (1)
through (3) of this subsection; (5) pedophilia or any other unlawful sex act;
(6) striptease, burlesque, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of
transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models dressed only in
lingerie, to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed, or to
the point of a state of nudity or seminudity. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017:
Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 3 (part), 1998)



17.62.030   Minimum proximity requirements.



   A.   Adult-oriented businesses shall not be established or located
in any zone in the city, other than the I (Industrial zone), I-L (Light
Industrial zone), C-S (Service Commercial zone), C-R (Regional Commercial
zone), or C-MU (Mixed Use Commercial zone) as they are identified on the
Zoning map. In addition, no adult-oriented business shall be located:



   1.   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any other
adult-oriented business located either inside or outside the city limits;



   2.   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any existing schools,
including licensed day care facilities, libraries, parks or other
recreational facilities where minors congregate, located either inside or
outside of the city limits;



   3.   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any existing or
planned for park or other recreational facility where minors congregate,
located either inside or outside of the city limits;



   4.   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any land that carries
a general plan land use designation that contains the words residence or
residential within its title.



   5.   Within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any existing church or
religious institution, located either inside or outside of the city limits.



   B.   As used in this section, "Existing" means existing at the time
the permit application is submitted. "Planned for" means property designated
on the general plan of the city for such use, or other official planning
documents of the city, or property owned or leased by the city for such use.



   C.   The distances set forth above shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures, as a radius from the primary
entrance of the adult-oriented business to the property line of the other
use. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 3
(part), 1998)



17.62.040   Amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented business uses.



   A.   Any use of real property existing on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter that does not conform to the provisions of
Section 17.62.030, but that was constructed, operated, and maintained in
compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a
nonconforming use that may be continued until one year after the effective
date of said ordinance. On or before such date, all such nonconforming uses
shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the city
council in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.62.050.



   B.   Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or
abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult-oriented business
shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use.



   C.   Amortization—Annexed Property. Any adult-oriented business
that was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and that is
located in the city, but that does not conform to the provisions of Section
17.62.030, shall be terminated within one year of the date of annexation
unless an extension of time has been approved by the city council in
accordance with the provisions of Section 17.62.050. (Ord. 2017-01 (part),
2017: Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999: Ord. 9811 § 3 (part), 1998)



17.62.050   Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use.



   A.   The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in
Section 17.62.040 may apply under the provisions of this section to the city
council for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming
use.



   B.   Time and Manner of Application. An application for an extension
of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions
of Section 17.62.040, may be filed by the owner of the real property upon
which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an
application must be filed with the city council at least ninety (90) days but
no more than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the time established in
Section 17.62.030 for termination of such use.



   C.   Content of Application—Fees. The application shall state the
grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such
application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the
schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city
council.



   D.   Hearing Procedure. The city council shall appoint a hearing
officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for
hearing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application. All
parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and
tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and
shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant
evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing
under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience
of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final
and subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure
section 1094.6.



   E.   Approval of Extension—Findings. An extension under the
provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time
commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the
hearing officer appointed by the city council makes all of the following
findings or such other findings as are required by law.



   1.   The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but
not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which
the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be
readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to the
effective date of this chapter;



   2.   The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of
the date established for termination of the use; and



   3.   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the
investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section
17.62.030. (Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999)



17.62.060   Permits required.



   A.   Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit. It is unlawful for
any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation
of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues
to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city as herein
required.



   B.   Adult-Oriented Business Performer Permit. It is unlawful for
any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting
specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an
adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full
force and effect a permit from the city as herein required. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 9913 § 4 (part), 1999)



Chapter 17.63
MICRO-BREWERY/MICRO-WINERY OVERLAY DISTRICT



Sections:



17.63.010   Purpose and intent.



17.63.020   Components of the Chapter.



17.63.030   Definitions.



17.63.040   Standard Operating Conditions.



17.63.010   Purpose and intent.



   A.   There is created a Micro-brewery/Micro-winery Overlay District,
the boundaries of which are shown on the map entitled,
"Micro-brewery/Micro-winery Overlay District", which is on file at city hall.
Said map is adopted and made a part of this ordinance.



   B.   This chapter is enacted to preserve and promote the public
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Visalia, and to facilitate
businesses that specialize in the small-scale production and sale of crafted
beverages. This chapter is also enacted to encourage the location of
micro-brewery and micro-winery businesses in the East Downtown area. This is
to:



   1.   Encourage, protect and enhance existing buildings, their
productive re-use, and improvements in the East Downtown area.



   2.   Promote the vibrancy and sense of destination and place of the
East Downtown area by establishing this area as the recognized center for
craft brewing establishments.



   3.   Ensure that these establishments are compatible with each other
and with existing and future uses within the East Downtown area. (Ord.
2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-22 (part), 2016)



17.63.020   Components of the Chapter.



   This chapter shall include:



   A.   The Ordinance text which specifies the
micro-brewery/micro-winery overlay district and establishes specific
standards pertaining to the district.



   B.   A map designating the micro-brewery/micro- winery overlay
district, which shall be depicted on the official zoning map of the city.
(Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-22 (part), 2016)



17.63.030   Definitions.



   "Micro-brewery" An establishment that produces the range of brewed
beer, ale, mead, hard cider and similar brewed beverages in quantities
totaling 15,000 barrels or less per year (all beverage types combined) that
are served on site and/or sold for off-site consumption.  Service and sale
of brewed beverages must be in conjunction with the regulations of the
Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(ATF). Service of brewed beverages may be conducted with or without the
service of food.  Taproom, Nano-brewery, Craft brewery, and Brewpub are
included in this definition.



   "Micro-winery" An establishment that produces fermented fruit wine in
quantities totaling 10,000 cases or less per year (all varieties and labels
combined) that are served on site and/or sold for off-site consumption.
Service and sale of wine must be in conjunction with the regulations of the
Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(ATF). Service of wine may be conducted with or without the service of
food.  Tasting room and Boutique winery are included in this definition.



   "Background entertainment" Non-amplified live music or performance
intended to complement the primary venue, and for which no alteration of the
physical or operational aspect of the primary use is made. (Ord. 2017-01
(part), 2017: Ord. 2016-22 (part), 2016)



17.63.040   Standard Operating Conditions.



   A.   Uses within the Overlay District.



   1.   All uses shall be subject to the Zoning Matrix use allowances,
except that micro-brewery/micro-winery locations that occur coincidentally
within the micro-brewery/micro- winery overlay district or within the C-R
(Regional Commercial) Zone District shall be permitted by right, provided
that such establishments limit their patronage to persons 21 years of age or
older.



   2.   Zoning regulations for micro- brewery/micro-winery locations
shall be those of their underlying Zone District; except as follows:



   a)   Alcoholic beverages sold on site shall be only that produced by
the operator.



   b)   Truck loading and unloading shall be limited to between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily.



   c)   Venting of brewing process shall be directed away from
sidewalks and residences.



   d)   Outdoor storage shall be limited to an area of no more than 5%
of the leasable floor area of the establishment.  Outdoor storage shall be
secured at all times and shall be fully screened from view.



   e)   Parking required for a micro-brewery/micro- winery use shall be
determined by the allocation of interior floor space of the establishment,
and at the prescribed ratios as contained in Chapter 17.34 (Off-street
parking and loading facilities). Portions of the floor area used for on-site
consumption of beverages and/or food shall be parked at the prescribed
restaurant ratio; brewing, bottling and warehousing of product produced or
sold on site shall be parked at the prescribed industrial ratio; and, retail
display of product for off-site sale shall be parked at the prescribed retail
ratio.



   3.   Micro-brewery/micro-winery establishments proposing to allow
underage patrons (under 21 years of age) shall require approval of a
Conditional Use Permit, subject to the standard operating procedures
contained in this Chapter, and as conditioned by the Planning Commission as
follows:



   a)   Underage patrons (under 21 years of age) shall not remain upon
the establishment premises after 10:00 p.m. nightly.



   b)   Minor patrons (under 18 years of age) shall be accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian at all times.



   c)   Underage patrons shall not sit at the bar or serving counter
areas of the establishment.



   d)   The establishment shall provide games, activities,
non-alcoholic beverages and snack foods suitable to all ages patrons. Games
and activities may include, but are not limited to table games, board games,
shuffleboard, corn-hole, drawing paper and crayons, puzzles, video and arcade
games.



   e)   The floor area devoted to games and activities shall be a
minimum of 20% of the public area of the establishment.



(Ord. 2018-13, 2019: Ord. 2017-01 (part), 2017: Ord. 2016-22 (part),
2016)   



Chapter 17.64
MOBILE FOOD VENDING



Sections:



17.64.010   Purpose and intent.



17.64.020   Components of the Chapter.



17.64.030   Definitions.



17.64.040   Mobile food vending program registration and performance
standards.



17.64.010   Purpose and intent.



   To provide food options in the Industrial Park where employees may have
short meal and break times and food options may be limited.  In addition, to
provide opportunities for the public to enjoy the variety of mobile food
vendor products in other designated areas such as east of the downtown.  To
provide a set of operational standards to protect brick and mortar
restaurants and promote an orderly mobile food vending experience. 



(Ord. 2018-11 (part), 2018)



17.64.020   Components of the Chapter.



   This chapter shall include:



   A.   Mobile food vending overlay districts by the maps titled
"Mobile Food Vending Overlay District Map", which are on file at city hall.
The Mobile Food Vending Districts are also referred to as "Target Areas"
within this chapter.  Said map is adopted and made part of this chapter.



   B.   Annual Mobile Food Vending Registration Program to assure that
mobile food vending operators have received the standards and provide an
annual certificate of registration and compliance with said standards.



   C.   Mobile Food Vending Standards guidelines for participating
mobile food vending operations that only apply within the Mobile Food Vending
Districts.



   D.   This chapter is enacted to preserve and promote the public
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Visalia, and to facilitate
businesses that specialize in mobile food vending. 



(Ord. 2018-11 (part), 2018)



17.64.030   Definitions. 



   "Mobile food vendor" means any vehicle or trailer certified for and
used for food vending.



   "Restaurant" means the portion of any building used for food service,
including but not limited to hot or cold sandwiches, pizza, ice cream, and
carry out food for consumption.



   "Commissary" means the location for servicing mobile food vendor
vehicles as allowed by the Zoning Ordinance and meeting Health Department
requirements. 



   "Active business" means legally existing business occupying a structure.



   "Improvements" include, but is not limited to street, curb, gutter,
sidewalk, landscaping, paved parking, and other related improvements commonly
found on developed sites within the City. 



(Ord. 2018-11 (part), 2018)



17.64.040   Mobile Food Vending Program Registration and Performance
Standards.



   A.   Program Registration. An annual registration permit required
for mobile food vendors operating in the overlay districts. As part of the
annual registration permit process, the mobile food vendor operator(s) shall
be required to provide proof that their mobile food vending vehicle has
approval and certification clearance from the Tulare County Environmental
Health Department, a valid City of Visalia Business Tax License, and is
current with vehicle registration with the state of California.



   The vendor and their agents/operators agree to abide by all the rules
or relinquish their right to vend under the mobile food vending ordinance.



   The mobile food vending program participants shall be restricted to the
mobile food vending districts also referred to as target areas or the overlay
districts.



   The annual registration requirement shall not be applicable to mobile
vendors operating inside or outside the overlay districts under the City of
Visalia Municipal Code Chapter 5.32, regulating peddlers and solicitors, or
mobile food vendors operating at a special event operating under a permit
issued by the City of Visalia under Municipal Code Chapter 12.48. Mobile food
vendors operating outside of the overlay districts are also permitted to
operate pursuant to a temporary conditional use permit issued under Municipal
Code section 17.38.070.



   B.   Annual Mobile Food Vending Permit.



      1.   Annual permits for temporary uses or structures may be
processed as administrative matters by the city planner and/or planning
division staff. However, the city planner may, at his/her discretion, refer
such application to the planning commission for consideration.



      2.   The city planner and/or planning division staff is
authorized to review applications and to issue such temporary permits,
subject to the following conditions:



      a.   Applicants shall go through the Site Plan Review process
for proposed vending locations.



      b.   Annual permits granted pursuant to this section shall be
for a fixed period not to exceed twelve months. The mobile food vending
permit must be renewed annually but there is no limitation on the number of
times a permit may be renewed. 



      c.   Applicants for an annual permit shall have all applicable
licenses and permits prior to issuance of a temporary conditional use permit.



   C.   Mobile Food Vending Performance Standards.



      1.   Private Property: Mobile food vendors in the Overlay
Districts shall be permitted to vend on private property subject to the
following:



      a.   Mobile food vending operations may only be established on
sites which have an active open business during the hours of the mobile food
vendors operations. (Mobile food vending shall be an ancillary use to the
primary business on-site.)



      b.   Sites for mobile food vending are required to have full
public improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalk, access drive, etc.)



      c.   A mobile food vendor shall locate on paved surfaces.
Unimproved surfaces, landscaping areas, and required setback areas are
prohibited.  No mobile food vending shall occur on dirt or gravel areas.



      d.   A mobile food vendor shall obtain written permission from
the private property owner(s), and upon demand shall provide it to authorized
representatives of the City of Visalia.



      e.   Only one mobile food vendor is allowed per site with the
exception of special events approved by the City of Visalia or as allowed
under a Temporary Conditional Use Permit.



      f.   The mobile food vendor shall only impact no more than two
parking stalls on private property. Food vending shall be permitted into the
adjacent stall occupied by the mobile food vending operator.  Any furniture
associated with the mobile food vendor shall be limited to the two parking
stall area.



      g.   Tables and chairs (furniture) shall be permitted and
shall be located on improved and/or paved surfaces.



      h.   Tables and chairs located in parking stalls, landscape
areas, or drive aisles shall be prohibited, excepting the two parking stall
area designated for vending.



      i.   Furniture shall not be retained on-site overnight.



      j.   ADA parking stalls and pedestrian paths of travel shall
not be permitted for food vending.



      k.   Drive aisles, sidewalks, access to trash enclosures and
similar areas may not be blocked by any vending activity.



      l.   A mobile food vendor is prohibited within one thousand
(1,000) feet of a public school property.



   D.   Minimum distance from restaurants and other identified uses. 
Mobile food vendors shall comply with the following distance requirements:



      1.   300 feet from the main customer entrance of any
restaurant.



      2.   There shall be no minimum distance between mobile food
vendors located on separate properties.



      3.   Distance from Residential - 300 feet from properties that
are planned/zoned residential or from sites with a residential use (includes
travel lodgings and commercial/residential mixed use developments).



   E.   Mobile Food Vending Hours.  Mobile food vending hours in the
Overlay Districts shall be limited to the following start and stop hours. 
Food vending would be prohibited outside of these times:



 

Breakfast
 

5:30 am

 

9:30 am



Lunch
 

10:30 am

 

2:00 pm



Dinner

East Main - east of Ben Maddox Way to Mineral King Avenue

East Downtown - west of Ben Maddox Way to Santa Fe Street

Industrial Area (Late Night)
 




3:30 pm






3:30 pm



3:30 pm

 




7:00 pm






10:00 pm



2:00 am




 



   F.   Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. Mobile food vendors shall be
prohibited from selling alcoholic beverages within the Overlay Districts.



   Exceptions to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Overlay Districts
may be considered if the request is associated with a bona fide special event
within the Overlay Districts subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.48
Special Events.



   G.   Amplified / Non-amplified Music or Audio. Mobile food vendors
shall be prohibited from providing amplified and non-amplified music or audio.



   H.   Mobile Food Vendor Lighting.  Lighting associated with the
mobile food vendor shall not be directed towards the public right-of-way,
adjacent properties or the night sky.



   I.   Mobile Food Vending Signage.  Signage on the mobile food truck
is permitted. A-frame signage and/or similar signs shall be prohibited.



   J.   Overnight Parking.  Prohibited - Mobile food vending units may
be left on a site overnight if the site is a commissary or is an approved
vehicle storage yard/location.



   K.   Site Cleanup. Mobile food vendors shall have adequate trash
receptacle available at all times and shall keep the sites that are occupied
for food vending free and clear of trash.



   L.   Enforcement/Revocation of Mobile Food Vendors Permit. Language
for the enforcement and revocation of program participants would be added as
a section in any code changes for mobile food vending.  The establishment of
regulations/standards in the Zoning Ordinance provides the basis for
revocation actions.



   M.   Special Events. Mobile food vendors permitted under this
chapter that are associated with a special event within the overlay districts
shall also be subject to the requirements of Chapter 12.48 Special Events of
the Visalia Municipal Code for the purposes of the special event. 



(Ord. 2018-11 (part), 2018)





